Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
November 12, 1982
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) November 12, 1982
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) M2 grew at about an 8 percent annual rate in October (and
M3 at a 9 percent rate), while M1 expanded at about a 20 percent annual
rate. Growth in M2, probably held down to a minor degree by shifts of
ASC funds to market instruments, ran increasingly above the path set con-
sistent with the Committee's 8½ to 9½ percent quarterly growth target as
the intermeeting period progressed. This path had called for relatively
slow growth in October and more rapid growth in subsequent months.
(2) The strength in M2 reflects greater growth in both its M1
and nontransactions components,relative to initial expectations, abstracting
from estimated ASC effects. It now appears that the effect on the monthly
average of M1 in October from the disposition of maturing ASC balances
was much larger than we had anticipated; more seems to have been initially
shifted and the funds have remained in transaction accounts longer. Never-
theless, growth in M1 in October abstracting from shifts was still probably
around 10 percent.1/
(3) Total reserves grew at a 9½ percent annual rate in October,
with most of the increase reflecting the rise in required reserves associated
with the strength in transactions accounts. Given a $475 million drop in
the average level of adjustment borrowing in October, nonborrowed reserves
expanded at about a 25 percent annual rate last month. The nonborrowed
path constructed following the October FOMC meeting implied borrowing of
1/ Estimates of the impact of maturing ASCs on M2 and its composition
are based on information obtained from banks through the Reserve Bank
contact group, cross-section econometric analysis of the experience of
individual banks, and examination of recent patterns of aggregates
deposit flows at all banks and thrifts.
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted, annual rates of growth)
1982 1981: Q4 to
1982: 1982
July Aug. Sept. Oct. Q3 Oct.
Money and Credit Aggregates
Reserve Measures! /
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
I/ Growth rates of reserve measures are adjusted to
discontinuities resulting from phased changes in
Monetary Control Act.
remove the effects of
reserve ratios under the
Nonborrowed reserves include special borrowing and other extended credit
from the Federal Reserve.
Measured from December--January average base.
Includes seasonal borrowing.
around $300 million. The implied level of borrowing rose during the inter-
meeting period, but not commensurately with the strengthening of M2, since
account was taken of the Committee's willingness to accommodate exceptional
liquidity demands and the fact that M2 growth in October, though substantially
faster than initial expectations for the intermeeting period, was not neces-
1/
sarily out of keeping with the quarterly target range.
(4) Reflecting limited pressure to borrow at the discount window
and a ½ percentage point cut in the discount rate soon after the October
FOMC meeting, the federal funds rate declined from somewhat above 10 percent
in September to the neighborhood of the 9½ percent discount rate throughout
the intermeeting period. Most other rates dropped by much more, in part
because of expectations that the Federal Reserve would promote a further
easing of money market conditions. Despite some rate increases in recent
days as a further discount rate cut has not been forthcoming, private short-
term rates have dropped about 1½ percentage points on balance since the
early October meeting, while yields on Treasury bills have fallen con-
siderably less as concerns about private credit risks apparently have
lessened. Corporate and Treasury bond rates have dropped about 1 to 1½
percentage points since early October. The average commitment rate on
conventional mortgages at S&Ls has dropped 1¼ percentage points and the
continuing easing in mortgage markets reportedly has led to a noticeable
pickup in institutional lending activity.
(5) Bank credit continued to grow moderately in October,
registering a 7 percent annual rate of increase. Loan growth remained
in general relatively weak, but banks stepped up their acquisitions of
Treasury securities. Business loan growth slowed to around a 7 percent
annual rate last month, even though it was still being boosted by the
1/ See Appendix I for intermeeting reserve path adjustments.
effects of merger-related financings arranged in September. Total short-term
borrowing by nonfinancial business weakened further, as commercial paper out-
standing contracted sharply again in October. This dropoff in short-term
borrowing reflected an increased issuance of long-term debt in response
to the continuing downtrend in bond yields.
(6) After dropping rather sharply immediately following the last
FOMC meeting, the dollar has appreciated further in recent weeks. On
balance, the dollar has advanced about 1 1/2 percent since the Committee
. The strength
in the dollar occurred in the face of news of a sharply larger third-quarter
trade deficit, and of greater declines in U.S. interest rates, on balance,
than in foreign interest rates over the period.
Alternative near-term targets
(7) The table below presents three alternative targets for M2
for the current quarter, along with associated federal funds rate ranges.
Alternatives B and C encompass growth rates of M2 (and also M3) for the
quarter consistent with the Committee's decision with respect to these
aggregates at the previous meeting, while alternative A looks to somewhat
higher growth rates. Rates of growth for M1 implied by these M2 paths
are shown in the second panel. More detailed data for the alternatives
are shown in the table and charts on the next few pages. The quarterly
interest rate path underlying the staff's GNP projection is contained in
Appendix II.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth in M2
Sept. to Dec. 10 9½ 9
Oct. to Dec. 11 10¼ 9½
Memo: Implicit
Ml Growth
Sept. to Dec. 12½ 11¼ 10
Oct. to Dec. 8¼ 6½ 5
Federal funds
rate range 6 to 9½ 7 to 10½ 8 to 11½
(8) As appears to have been the case thus far this year, the
public's liquidity demands are assumed to remain high over the balance
of the year, reflecting the impact of continuing economic uncertainties.
Both Ml and M2 this quarter are expected to expand considerably more
rapidly than nominal GNP under all three alternatives; and, as shown on
the charts and tables on the succeeding pages, the growth rates of the
monetary aggregates are expected for the year to be above the upper ends
of their respective longer-run ranges. The income velocities of both
Ml and M2 thus will decline by unusually large amounts over the QIV '81
to QIV '82 period--about 3¼ and 5 percent, respectively.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Ml M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
1982--August 455.2 455.2 455.2 1946.3 1946.3 1946.3 2355.7 2355.7 2355.7
September 460.5 460.5 460.5 1954.1 1954.1 1954.1 2362.3 2362.3 2362.3
October 468.3 468.3 468.3 1967.1 1967.1 1967.1 2379.8 2379.8 2379.8
November 471.9 471.6 471.3 1985.8 1985.3 1984.8 2401.0 2400.5 2400.0
December 474.8 473.4 472.1 2002.8 2000.4 1998.1 2422.0 2419.7 2417.4
Growth Rates
Monthly
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
Annual Growth Rates
Year average 1981
to
Actual and Targeted M2 and M3
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Class II - FOMC
Billions of dollars
- ACTUAL LEVEL
**SHORT-RUN ALTERNATIVES
I I
O N D J
I I I I I I I I I I I
F M A M J J A S O N D
ACTUAL LEVEL
* * SHORT-RUN ALTERNATIVES
O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D
1981 1982
:B-
;.'.' C 2000
- 1950
--- 1900
-- 1850
- 1800
(9) Under all three alternatives, M1 growth is expected to
decelerate--though still remaining strong--in the last two months of the
year, reflecting in part an unwinding of the demand and NOW balances
built up from some of the proceeds of the very large ASC deposits maturing
in October. On the other hand, the nontransactions component of M2 should
accelerate from its October pace, when it was held down by transfers of
ASC funds to transactions accounts and market instruments. It is expected
that the new DIDC money market account will reduce M1 balances and have
only a relatively small effect on M2 when it becomes available in mid-
December. However, there might be some effects, perhaps raising M1 or M2,
in the interim if and as the public lodges funds in deposits in anticipa-
1/
tion of the new account.-
(10) Alternative B, which calls for M2 growth this quarter at
the upper end of the 8½ to 9½ percent range adopted by the Committee at its
last meeting, would be associated with an increase in total reserves at
about a 6¾ percent annual rate over the last two months of the year. Given
continued strong liquidity demands, such an M2 target might involve a
federal funds rate over the intermeeting period fluctuating around the
present 9½ percent discount rate and borrowing at the discount window
ranging around $350 million. Nonborrowed reserves would expand in parallel
with total reserves over the last two months of the year.
(11) With many in the market currently expecting some decline
in the funds rate (and the discount rate) over the near-term, maintenance
1/ A more detailed assessment of the likely impact of the new instrument
will be presented in the blue book for the December meeting. Our
initial estimates are for a quite small effect on the aggregates for
December, given the late effective date of the instrument.
of these rates around recent levels would probably lead to some further
back-up in short- and longer-term market rates. A 3-month bill rate moving
up to around the 8½ percent area is not unlikely, and private short-term rates
might rise 25 to 50 basis points or so. Longer-term interest rates also
would tend to rise, but probably by less, given the favorable outlook for
curbing inflation and the evidence of weak economic activity. Mortgage
rates would probably not fall much further, as bond yields firm and short-
term financing costs of depository institutions tend to edge up.
(12) The growth of credit to all nonfinancial sectors appears
to be slowing a bit in the fourth quarter, though remaining above the first
half pace and also in excess of the expected growth of nominal GNP. Treasury
indebtedness is increasing rapidly--at an estimated 18 percent seasonally
adjusted annual rate in the fourth quarter--and is projected to continue
rising at this pace in early 1983. Growth in credit raised by private non-
financial sectors this quarter remains below its first half pace. However,
the recent decline of interest rates appears to be stimulating credit usage
by households, whose mortgage and other borrowing is projected to pick up
this quarter and to continue rising moderately into 1983. Lower rates
apparently also are inducing greater borrowing by state and local govern-
ments, but bond issuance in anticipation of new regulation at year-end is
also a factor behind recent record tax-exempt bond volumes, and the credit
demands of this sector are expected to moderate in early 1983. Business
borrowing appears to be moderating somewhat in the current quarter as
financing needs are held down by a further reduction in inventories, and
as greater reliance is placed on equity issuance in the wake of the advance
of stock prices. Businesses also are projected to continue the recent
pattern of heavier issuance of bonds and reduced borrowing from banks.
Largely as a result, bank credit growth in coming months is expected to
remain close to the more moderate pace established in the second half of
this year.
(13) An increase in the Committee's fourth-quarter M2 target to
a 10 percent annual rate, as in alternative A, might be required for some
further easing of money market conditions in an environment of continued
strong liquidity demands on the part of the public. The percentage point
of more rapid growth in M2 under this alternative, as compared with
alternative B, would entail a relatively more rapid expansion in M1--by
about 1¼ percentage points over the 3-month period. What information we
have suggests that--in view of the availability of market-related rates
on instruments encompassed by M2--M1 may have at least twice the elasticity
with respect to market interest rates as M2. Thus, a given change in
market interest rates will have a more substantial impact on M1 growth
rates than on M2 rates.
(14) Under alternative A, we would expect the federal funds
rate to decline from its present level to the area of 8½ percent, with
total reserves rising at about an 8 percent annual rate in November and
December. Assuming such a decline in the funds rate, adjustment borrowing
would be at minimal levels ($150 million or less), given the present or
a somewhat lower discount rate. Nonborrowed reserves would rise at about
an 11½ percent annual rate over the balance of the year.
(15) The further easing in bank reserve positions contemplated
by alternative A might involve a drop in the 3-month bill rate to around
7½ percent, or perhaps somewhat lower depending on expectations of further
policy adjustments. As markets ease, and confidence in markets and the
economy improves, some little further narrowing in quality spreads might
develop. The bank prime rate would probably decline to around 11 percent.
Bond rates would also likely share in these downward adjustments, as
investors hastened to lock up still relatively high longer-term yields.
And the lower cost of thrift institution deposits would bring additional
downward pressure on mortgage rates. The further decline in U.S. interest
rates would tend at least to blunt the strength of the dollar on foreign
exchange markets, and may well bring some depreciation.
(16) Alternative C involves M2 growth over the fourth quarter at
a 9 percent annual rate and constraint on reserve provision that would
probably lead to a federal funds rate of 10 percent or somewhat higher.
Total reserves would be expected to expand at a 5 percent annual rate over
the last two months of the year. With the discount rate unchanged at 9
percent, borrowings would likely be in the area of $600 million, and non-
borrowed reserves would rise at only a 1 percent annual rate.
(17) A substantial reaction to a tightening of basic reserve
positions would be expected in short-term and longer-term markets. The
3-month bill rate and other short-term rates could rise by as much as 1
percentage point. Longer-term rates would also adjust upwards, though
much higher rates would probably not be long sustained. A significant
rise in short rates would probably be seen by market participants as
retarding economic recovery and reducing the odds on a strengthening of
private credit demands, thus making the present or higher levels of long-
term rates attractive to investors despite a near-term rise in short rates.
Directive language
(18) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for the
directive, with specifications adopted at the meeting on Ocotber 5 shown
in strike-through form.
Specification of the behavior of M1 over the balance of
the year [DEL: is] REMAINS subject to unusually great uncertainties
because [DEL: it will be substantially affected by] OF special
circumstances [DEL: in-the-very-near-term-by] THE reinvestment of funds
from maturing all savers certificates and [DEL: later by] the public's
response to the new account directly competitive with money market
funds mandated by recent legislation. The [DEL: probable] difficulties in
interpretation of M1 [DEL: during the period] suggest THAT much less than
usual weight be placed on movements in that aggregate during the
current quarter. These developments are expected to affect M2 and
other broader aggregates to a much smaller extent.
In all the circumstances, the Committee seeks to maintain
expansion in bank reserves needed for an orderly and sustained flow of
money and credit, consistent with growth of M2 (and M3) in a range of
around [DEL: 8½ to 9½] ____ TO ____ percent at an annual rate from September to
December, and taking account of the desirability of somewhat reduced
pressures in private credit markets in the light of current economic
conditions. Somewhat slower growth, bringing those aggregates around
the upper part of the ranges set for the year, would be acceptable and
desirable in a context of declining interest rates. Should economic
and financial uncertainties lead to exceptional liquidity demands,
somewhat more rapid growth in the broader aggregates would be tolerated.
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives
and related reserve paths during the period before the next meeting
is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently
outside a range of [DEL: 7 to 10½] ____ TO ____ percent.
