Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
June 25, 1982
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) June 25, 1982
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) Though showing only a very slight rise on balance over the
last two months, M1 grew over the March-to-June period at a 4 percent
annual rate, somewhat above the Committee's 3 percent short-run objective.
From the fourth quarter of 1981 to June, M1 is estimated to have increased
at a 6.3 percent annual rate, almost 1 percentage point above the upper
end of its 1982 range. Following a surge in late 1981 and early 1982,
growth in the OCD component has slowed markedly on balance over the last
few months, roughly in line with expectations built into the intermeeting
M1 path; this slowing suggests some abatement in precautionary demands for
(2) M2 growth at an 8.7 percent annual rate over March-June also
was somewhat above the Committee's second-quarter path, reflecting stronger
than expected expansion of its nontransaction component as well as the
overshoot in M1. From the fourth quarter of 1981 to June, M2 is estimated
to have increased at a 9.3 percent annual rate, just above its longer-run
range. The strength in M2 growth, accompanied by a substantial decline in
its income velocity, suggests that enhanced liquidity demands affected
this aggregate, as well as M1, over the first half of the year. In June,
however, M2 growth slowed substantially.
(3) Bank credit growth is estimated to have slowed markedly
in June, after growing at about a 9 percent annual rate over the preceding
two months. Business loan growth appears to have remained fairly rapid.
Bank issuance of large CDs accelerated sharply in the past two months,
sustaining growth in M3--which by June was just above the Committee's
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted, annual rates of growth)
1982
March 1981 Q4 to
to
April May Junepe June 1982:Q2Pe1982:June p e
Money and Credit Aggregates
Reserve Measures- /
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment borrowing 1323 941 983
Excess reserves 274 361 292
n.a.--not available. pe--partly estimated.
1. Growth rates of reserve measures are adjusted to remove the effects of dis-
continuties resulting from phased changes in reserve ratios under the Monetary
Control Act.
2. Nonborrowed reserves include special borrowing and other extended credit
from the Federal Reserve.
3. Measured from December-January average base.
1982 range. Businesses have continued to tap the commercial paper market
for sizable volumes of new funds. Bond issuance on domestic markets in
May rose to its highest level since last fall, before subsiding more
recently as bond yields moved higher.
(4) Total reserves expanded at about a 3¼ percent average annual
rate in May and June; with nonborrowed reserves growing at an 8½ percent
rate over the two months, borrowing at the discount window fell about
$340 million from the April level. Throughout the intermeeting period
borrowing has remained above the initial level of $800 million specified
by the Committee, averaging $950 million for the six weeks. Borrowing in
excess of the initial level early in the period partly reflected increased
needs for borrowed reserves resulting from unexpected shortfalls in reserve
factors late in the week as well as apparent difficulties of some large
individual institutions in gauging reserve positions.1/ Most recently,
nonborrowed paths have implied borrowing around $1 billion, as money growth
above Committee objectives has boosted the demand for total reserves rela-
tive to the path for nonborrowed reserves.
(5) The federal funds rate has averaged around 14¼ percent during
the two most recent full statement weeks,2/ compared with the 14½ percent
area prevailing at the time of the May FOMC meeting. At the same time,
however, other interest rates have risen about ½ to 1½ percentage points
over the intermeeting period. Publication of money stock increases in
early June, along with expectations of a further rise in July, affected
market sentiment, as did the approach of a period of heavy Treasury
financing demands and indications that economic activity was no longer
1/ Reserve paths and intermeeting adjustments are shown in Appendix I.
2/ Trading in the past couple of days has been in the 14¾-15 percent
range, possibly reflecting cautious reserve management as the mid-
year statement date approaches.
declining. Difficulties associated with the failure of Drysdale Government
Securities in mid-May and the problems of Comark in early June appear not
to have affected the attainment of reserve objectives by the System. How-
ever, these episodes have fostered a heightened awareness of differences in
credit risk throughout the securities markets, and some changes in quality
spreads. Some smaller dealers have had to pay a higher premium for funds.
(6) The rise in U.S. interest rates has contributed to the 7 3/4
increase in the weighted average value of the dollar since the May FOMC
meeting. A secondary factor in the strength of the dollar has been its
attractiveness as a safe-haven currency in the context of intensified
hostilities in the Middle East. On Saturday, June 12, the European Monetary
System realigned its currency band, devaluing the French franc and the lira
and revaluing the mark and the guilder. When trading resumed on the Monday
following the realignment, exchange markets were judged to be disorderly
and the United States intervened for the first time since March 1981,
purchasing $21 million equivalent of marks and $9 million equivalent of
Longer-run targets
(7) Two options that seem reasonable under current circumstances
in reconsidering the monetary aggregate targets for 1982 are retention of
the present ranges (shown as alternative A below) or adoption of somewhat
higher ranges (shown as alternative B).1/ The desirability of higher ranges
depends in part on whether it is thought that the strong demands for
liquidity of the first half of the year--reflected in declines in velocity
of both M1 and M2--are likely to abate. It also depends, of course, on the
degree of monetary restraint the Committee deems appropriate under current
economic circumstances and on assessment of the expectational impact on
interest rates and the economy of announced changes, if any, in target
Alt. A Alt. B
M1 2½ to 5½ 2½ to 6
M2 6 to 9 6½ to 9½
M3 6½ to 9½ 6½ to 10
(8) Whether the Committee retains its current longer-run ranges,
or raises them modestly as in alternative B, a marked slowing in growth of
M1 would be required from the first-half pace of a little over 7 percent at
an annual rate (as measured from QIV '81 to QII '82). If the Committee were
to aim at 5 percent growth for the year, expansion in the second half would
have to slow to around a 2¾ percent annual rate. Second-half growth could
1/ Somewhat the same effect as raising the ranges could be obtained in the
case of M1 by rebasing on the lower limit of last year's growth ranges
rather than basing on the actual outcome, which would effectively
raise the range by 1 percentage point. This had been discussed by
the Committee last February. Whatever the advantages and disadvantages
at that time, there is an added disadvantage now because the considerable
time that has elapsed since the base period tends to make raising issues
in connection with the base seem a bit strained.
be about 4¾ percent at an annual rate if the Committee were to accept a
6 percent growth for the year.
(9) It is believed that the degree of slowing in M1 growth
implied by retention of the current longer-run target ranges is generally
consistent with the staff's forecast of a moderate pickup in economic
activity in the second half of this year, assuming growth in M1 over the
year near the upper limit of its long-run range. Growth in M2 and M3
would be expected to be around the upper end of their ranges. An accelera-
tion in the velocity of monetary aggregates is expected in the second half
of the year--in the case of M1 to the 4½ to 5½ percent range. Apart
from the positive impact of renewed economic confidence and reduced demands
for precautionary balances on velocity growth, more intensive use of cash
balances could emerge if there is a spread of sweep accounts or shifts
out of cash into the kinds of highly liquid time deposit accounts that are
being considered by DIDC at its forthcoming meeting. On the other hand,
continued unusual demands for liquidity could damp the expected rebound
in velocity, and make it less likely that a significant upturn in economic
activity would occur in the context of money growth within the bounds of
the existing target ranges.
(10) Factors relevant to the setting of tentative targets for
1983 include expectations about the impact on money demand of changes
in financial structure and technology, progress in curbing wage-price
pressures, and the continued need to encourage economic recovery. Un-
certainties about the impact of financial innovation and public attitudes
toward money and other liquid assets argue for maintaining relatively wide
ranges for targets, such as the present 3 percentage points. Continuing
progress toward price stability suggests that these ranges might be
reduced next year, but slower growth in money next year can also be
accomplished, of course, within the present ranges.
(11) A reduction in 1983 of the upper and lower limits of the
ranges for M1, M2, and M3 from their current levels by ½ percentage point
would be consistent with the staff's GNP projection for that year--if
actual growth in the aggregate were permitted to be near the upper limits
of the ranges. The table on the following page summarizes implications
for economic activity of various monetary policy strategies, as indexed
by growth rates for M1. Strategy 1 underlies the staff's judgmental
GNP projection, which is based on growth of M1 at a 5 percent rate in
1982, with growth declining by point in each succeeding year. The
alternative projections are derived from differences calculated by the
quarterly econometric model.
(12) Strategy 2 projects the possible outcome of a modest
increase in the target range for money this year, while returning to the
strategy 1 assumptions for M1 growth in the next years. This approach
tends to have a positive effect on economic activity this year, but it
leads to a somewhat higher inflation rate over time and the probability
of a noticeable rebound of interest rates in 1983 after a drop in the
latter part of this year. This interest rate rebound contributes to
a slowing in growth of economic activity in the latter part of the pro-
jection period. Strategy 4 contemplates an increase in money growth this
year and also more growth than under strategy 2 during the next two years.
Economic activity would tend to be stronger over the three projection
years, but the rate of price inflation, after falling for a while, begins
to accelerate in 1984. The rate of inflation could, of course, pick up
Economic Projections Associated
with Alternative Long-run
Monetary Growth Strategies
Nominal GNP (0%, Q4/Q4)
Real GNP (,%,Q4/Q4)
Implicit Deflator (%, Q4/Q4)
Unemployment Rate (Q4)
Treasury Bill Rate (Q4)
1/ This array of figures represents assumptions about growth in Ml for
the years 1982, 1983, and 1984, respectively, measuring growth on
a QIV to QIV basis. Additional information on the interest rates
believed consistent with strategy 1--the Greenbook forecast for
1982-83--may be found in Appendix II.
1983 1984
earlier, with economic activity weaker, should such a monetary course
itself have adverse effects on inflationary expectations. Strategy 3,
which contemplates a more rapid deceleration in money growth over the next
two years following 5 percent growth this year, produces the most rapid
progress toward price stability but at the cost of stronger pressures
on short-term interest rate and reduced real growth. With all of the
monetary strategies, short-term interest rates remain relatively high
in real terms. This evolves out of the continued strength in nominal
income and associated money demand relative to money supply targets, with
nominal income sustained by stimulative fiscal policy of the Federal
Government whose credit demands are generally insensitive to interest
Alternative short-run targets
(13) The table below presents three alternative sets of monetary
targets for the third quarter, plus associated ranges for the federal funds
rate during the intermeeting period. More detailed data for the alternatives
are shown in the table on page 11.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from June to September
M1 5½ 4 2½
M2 8½ 7¾ 7
Federal funds rate range 10 to 15 11 to 16 12 to 17
(14) Under alternative A, M1 over the next three months would
grow at a rate matching that of the upper bound of the Committee's current
longer-run range. Because such a trajectory would mean that there would
be no narrowing of the existing absolute gap relative to the top of the
range, alternative A might be viewed as especially consistent with a deci-
sion to raise the 1982 range or to tolerate a small overshoot. Under
alternative B, M1 would expand at a rate that, if sustained, would result
in growth for the year at about the 5½ percent upper bound of the longer-
run range, while alternative C contemplates growth in M1 which would move
the aggregate to just within this year's range by September. Under all
alternatives, the level of M2 by September would be around its upper limit--
a bit above in the case of alternative A and somewhat below in the case
of alternative C. (See charts on the next two pages).
(15) Under any of the alternatives, growth of M1 in July probably
will be relatively strong owing in part to special factors. The introduc-
tion of lower income tax withholding schedules tends to boost M1 balances
for a while since spending or investing patterns generally take some time
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
1982--April 452.3 452.3 452.3 1880.7 1880.7 1880.7 2257.9 2257.9 2257.9
May 451.5 451.5 451.5 1897.1 1897.1 1897.1 2278.1 2278.1 2278.1
June 452.8 452.8 452.8 1905.7 1905.7 1905.7 2293.6 2293.6 2293.6
July 456.6 456.2 455.8 1921.0 1920.3 1919.7 2313.1 2312.4 2311.8
August 457.2 456.2 455.2 1934.3 1932.3 1930.3 2330.4 2328.4 2326.4
September 459.0 457.3 455.6 1945.7 1942.2 1938.6 2344.2 2340.6 2337.1
Growth Rates
Monthly
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
to adjust to changes in disposable income. Growth in July is also likely
to be increased in some small degree by enlarged social security benefits
stemming from this year's COLA which will be paid out just prior to the
long July 4th holiday weekend.
(16) The growth of M1 at a 4 percent pace specified in alterna-
tive B for the whole June-September period is not expected to be accompanied
by upward interest rate pressures despite the anticipated strengthening
in nominal GNP. It seems likely that transaction demands for cash in the
third quarter will be satisfied in part by liquidity built up earlier this
year. The federal funds rate might be at or somewhat below the 14¼ percent
level of recent statement weeks, trading generally in a 13-14¼ percent
range. At the current 12 percent discount rate, adjustment borrowing
from the discount window likely would be in the $800 million to $1 billion
area. With expansion in total reserves at a 5 percent annual rate over
the quarter, a nonborrowed reserve path calling for growth at a slightly
faster rate would be implied.
(17) Other short-term rates might decline some under this
alternative, with the 3-month bill rate moving back toward 12 percent or
somewhat lower. Bond yields might also decline a little, but any break-
out from the rate range of the past few months probably would require in
addition more favorable fiscal policy developments or indications that
economic recovery, and associated private capital demands, will be weaker
than now generally anticipated. However, Treasury borrowing in the third
quarter is currently estimated by the staff at about $50 billion, con-
siderably higher than announced to date by the government and possibly
more than generally anticipated in the market. Barring a large decline
in longer-term rates, corporate bond issues are likely to remain limited.
Business borrowing at banks and in short-term markets may taper off, but,
if so, is likely to be replaced by a reduced accumulation of liquid assets,
following the apparent second quarter surge. Household borrowing is likely
to remain restrained, owing to the deterrent effects of high real interest
rates and lender caution.
(18) Alternative A, which targets faster growth in M1 than
alternative B, could well produce a fairly substantial decline in money
market rates. An increase in total reserves on the order of 6 ¼ percent
from June to September would be consistent with the 5 ½ percent growth
rate specified for M1 during the quarter. The federal funds rate likely
would decline to a zone somewhat above the present discount rate, with
adjustment borrowing falling into the $300 to $500 million range. Assuming
borrowing were to average about $400 million, growth of nonborrowed reserves
would be 12 percent.
(19) The easing of the funds market likely to occur under this
alternative should result in a substantial lowering of market rates generally.
The 3-month Treasury bill rate probably would fall to around the 11-11½
percent area and the decline in bank costs of funds would likely push the
prime rate down. Mortgage rates would again begin declining, encouraging
moderately stronger loan demand in that sector. Lagging yields on money
market funds would tend to strengthen M2 and M3 a bit in the short run as
more aggressive money managers shift away from market instruments. In
exchange markets, the dollar likely would probably decline substantially;
this tendency could be limited to a degree, however, if foreign central
banks responded by seeking an easing of their domestic interest rates.
(20) Alternative C sets the most restrictive monetary target,
with M1 growth during the third quarter specified at only 2½ percent.
It seems likely that the more restrained reserve provision consistent
with such growth would place further pressure on the money markets, with
the federal funds rate moving to 15 percent or a bit higher over the inter-
meeting periods. Borrowing at the discount window would rise to the vicinity
of $1½ billion, and nonborrowed reserves would drop at a 1½ percent annual
rate over the quarter.
(21) The firming in the funds market expected under alternative
C should be accompanied by moderately higher market rates generally but
with the likelihood that commercial paper and CD rates may rise more
rapidly than Treasury bill rates as concerns about spreading financial
problems are exacerbated. The 3-month bill rate may be in a 13 to 13½
percent range, and 3-month CD rates could move above 16 percent. Financial
pressures would inhibit the upturn in aggregate demand. The bank prime
rate likely would rise, as would primary mortgage rates. The dollar
probably would come under further substantial upward pressure in exchange
Directive language
(22) Given below is a suggested operational paragraph for the
directive. The specifications adopted at the meeting on May 18 are
shown in strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks behavior of reserve
aggregates consistent with growth of M1 and M2 from March to June
TO SEPTEMBER at annual rates of about [DEL: 3] ____ percent and [DEL: 8] ____
percent respectively. [DEL: The Committee also noted that deviations
from these targets should be evaluated in light of changes in the
relative importance of NOW accounts as a savings vehicle.] The
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to
the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary
objectives and related reserve paths during the period before
the next meeting is likely to be associated with a federal
funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 10 to 15] ____ TO ____
