Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC February 5, 1988
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) In the conduct of open market operations over the intermeeting
period, the Desk increasingly placed more emphasis on reserve positions when
feasible and less on day-to-day money market conditions, in accordance with
the Committee's assessment that reductions in financial market fragility
since the crash permitted a cautious return to more normal operating
procedures. Still, informal adjustments to borrowing objectives were needed
to take account of unusual borrowing behavior. After the December 15-16
FOMC meeting, reserve paths continued to be constructed assuming $300
million of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing, and the federal funds rate
was expected to remain centered on 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent. Despite
difficulties in estimating demands for excess reserves near the year-end,
actual borrowing, at $355 million, turned out fairly close to path in the
first reserve period. It was substantially higher in the next period at
$1,460 million, however, owing to unusually heavy borrowing over the 4-day
New Year's weekend and to subsequent borrowing resulting from a fire at a
large bank; the Desk made allowance for both developments in its provision
of nonborrowed reserves. Late in the next maintenance period ended Janu-
ary 27, with average borrowing running very low, an informal downward
adjustment in the borrowing assumption was made to avoid forcing a bulge in
borrowing in the final days of the period, and borrowing averaged $176
(2) With incoming data suggesting some weakening in economic
expansion, the borrowing assumption for the current period was formally
reduced to $250 million, with funds expected to trade in a range of 6-1/2 to
6-3/4 percent. Over the first eight days, borrowing has averaged only about
$165 million. The low borrowing in the current and previous maintenance
periods may reflect a retrenchment after heavy discount window usage at
year-end and in early January, as well as some remaining reluctance to be
seen at the window given still unsettled financial markets and sensitivity
to the financial condition especially of large banks. The funds rate
averaged 6.82 percent over the three complete maintenance periods since the
December FOMC meeting; in recent days funds have moved down toward 6-1/2
percent. Total reserves contracted in December with the continued weakness
in transactions deposits, but rebounded strongly in January as reservable
deposits grew rapidly and excess reserves increased as well.
(3) Year-end pressures in money markets proved much milder than
expected by many market participants. A greatly reduced need for funds
compared with the previous year, the timing of the statement date at the
beginning of a maintenance period rather than on the settlement date, more
advance planning by banks and others, and fairly generous reserve provision
all contributed to this outcome. When pressures failed to develop as
anticipated, rates on money market instruments of private issuers plummeted
in late December. Yields on Treasury securities of all maturities and on
longer-term debt of private borrowers changed little on balance over the
first few weeks of the intermeeting period, despite considerable weakness in
the dollar. More recently, rates have fallen as the dollar firmed on
evidence of improved trade data for November and as subsequent economic data
were interpreted as pointing to a softer economy and modest price pressures,
increasing the odds on a near-term easing of monetary policy. Short rates
have fallen about 1/4 percentage point since mid-January, and the prime rate
was reduced 1/4 point on February 2. Longer rates have dropped more, about
3/4 of a percentage point in recent weeks, leaving them at nine-month lows.
Broad equity indexes are up 1-1/2 to 3-1/2 percent on balance since mid-
December, though daily price movements still were unusually large on
occasion. Spreads between short-term private and Treasury issues narrowed
substantially with the unwinding of year-end pressures, and have fallen a
little further in recent weeks. However, these spreads remain well above
their lows of last summer.
(4) The dollar weakened sharply on foreign exchange markets in
the last half of December.
The dollar
jumped further in mid-January with the release of better-than-expected U.S.
trade figures, and since then has traded in a fairly narrow range, even as
U.S. interest rates declined relative to those abroad. On balance, the
weighted average dollar is up about 3-1/4 percent from the time of the
December Committee meeting.
Desk's intervention accounted for nearly $2-1/4 billion
divided about equally between System and Treasury accounts.
(5) Preliminary data show a strong rebound in money growth in
January after weakness in December. Over the two months combined, M2 and M3
grew at 6 and 5 percent rates respectively, close to the Committee's short-
run paths of 5 and 6 percent, and M1 expanded at a 5 percent pace. Demand
deposits were particularly weak late last year, reflecting in part
incentives to adjust compensating balances downward before year-end, but
other checkable deposits also fell in November and December without a
corresponding increase in other deposits in M2. The pickup of money growth
in January was widespread over various components of the aggregates.
Reasons for the extent of the weakness late last year and strength in
January are not entirely clear. However, the decline in interest rates
generally after mid-October and in private rates around year-end probably
has begun to boost money demand this year. Within M2, small time deposits
have continued stronger than the liquid components, though by a smaller
margin as their yield advantage erodes. Flows into money market mutual
funds in both M2 and M3 were especially strong in January as rates on these
funds reflected higher pre-year-end yields on short-term instruments. Even
so, for the two months combined, the non-M2 component of M3 moderated from
its rapid growth earlier in the fall, owing to slower growth in large CDs
and term RPs. Core deposit inflows quickened over the two months, and with
bank credit growth little changed on average from the previous few months,
banks reduced their reliance on managed liabilities.
(6) Domestic nonfinancial debt is estimated to have grown at a
reduced 8 percent pace on average over December and January. In January,
business offerings of bonds rose as yields fell, while shorter-term
borrowing in the form of bank loans and paper moderated. Households stepped
up consumer credit borrowing in December while their mortgage borrowing
remained moderate. Tax-exempt bond offerings continued light, despite a
pickup in refunding issues. Federal borrowing contracted in January, as the
Treasury cut back on offerings in light of a relatively high cash balance.
Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
November QIV '87
to to
November December January January JanuaryP
Money and credit aggregates
1
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Excess reserves 923 1028 1247
p - Preliminary.
1. The January figures assume a level of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $250
million over the reserve period ending February 10 and excess reserves of $850
million.
2. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
NOTES: Monthly reserve measures, including excess reserves and borrowing, are
calculated by prorating averages for 2-week reserve maintenance periods that overlap
months. Reserve data incorporate adjustments for discontinuities associated with
changes in reserve requirements. Money stock data incorporate benchmark and
seasonal updates and minor definitional adjustments.
Long-run alternatives
(7) The table below gives three alternative specifications for
growth in the money and credit aggregates from the fourth quarter of 1987
to the fourth quarter of 1988. Alternative I would carry over to 1988 the
ranges that were in effect for 1987; the ranges for 1988 adopted on a
tentative basis in July are given in alternative II; alternative III would
involve a reduction in the ranges. The table includes ranges for M1 thought
to be consistent with those for the broader aggregates, should the Committee
wish to re-establish an objective for this aggregate.
Alt. I Alt. II Alt. III
Growth from QIV '87
to QIV '88
M2 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 5 to 8 4-1/2 to 7-1/2
M3 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 5 to 8 4-1/2 to 7-1/2
Debt of domestic
nonfinancial sectors 8 to 11 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 7 to 10
Memo:
M1 4 to 10 3 to 9 2 to 8
(8) The growth in money and debt the staff considers consistent
with its forecast for the economy would be encompassed under any of the
alternatives. The greenbook forecast is for nominal GNP growth of around
5-3/4 percent, and is thought to involve interest rates at or only a little
lower than current reduced levels in the first half of the year when the
economy may be relatively soft, with some upward drift in the second half as
the economy strengthens. M2 velocity should decline in the first half in
response to the drop in market interest rates from October peaks and then
strengthen somewhat toward year-end. Given the pattern of interest rate
movements, changes in opportunity costs in 1988 are projected to have little
net effect on demand for M2 for the year. This aggregate would be expected
to expand about 6 percent, roughly in line with the growth in income, and
consistent with the long-run behavior of its velocity. (Charts of velocity
behavior for the various aggregates, including the velocities implied by
1988 projections, are on the following pages.) Projected M2 growth in 1988
also presumes the absence of special factors that apparently were damping
money demand in 1987. Econometric models of M2 demand tended to over-
predict growth of this aggregate in 1987, given actual income and interest
rates, by about a percentage point; the projection for 1988 assumes any such
shortfall would be smaller. The behavior of household saving may tend to
bolster M2 growth this year; saving was especially weak last year, but is
expected to increase substantially in 1988, and some of this should find its
way into liquid forms of wealth holding. In addition, IRAs and Keoghs,
whose use in the first part of 1987 to reduce taxable income in 1986 was
still unrestricted, will be less attractive this year, perhaps bolstering
demand for savings vehicles in M2.
(9) M3 would be expected to accelerate to around a 6-1/2 percent
rate of growth under the staff economic forecast, implying a small decline
in its velocity, nearly in line with its secular downtrend. Expansion of
bank and thrift credit is expected to moderate somewhat in 1988 relative to
1987. These institutions are likely to continue to securitize and sell
assets, given pressures on capital, holding down the growth of their credit
next year. However, to fund asset growth depository institutions are
expected to rely less in 1988 than in 1987 on sources of funds from outside
M3. In part, this reflects stronger expansion of core deposits in M2, and
a reduced need to rely on managed liabilities, some of which likely would be
outside M3. For example, borrowing from foreign branches in the Eurodollar
market is expected to be less than in 1987--though still above the
relatively low totals of 1985 and 1986. In addition, Treasury deposits at
commercial banks, which increased substantially in 1987, are not expected to
rise further on balance over the year.
(10) The growth of the debt of nonfinancial sectors is projected
to slow in 1988, to a rate of 8-1/2 percent, also within the ranges under
any of the alternatives. Consequently, debt growth would remain well in
excess of the expansion of GNP. Borrowing will continue to be boosted by
sizable net equity retirements by businesses, owing partly to a dropoff in
gross stock issuance at lower share prices, and business credit demands also
will be augmented by an increase in the financing gap. In the household
sector, the recent pattern of credit usage is projected to persist in 1988,
with sluggish consumer credit and robust growth of mortgages, some of which
would represent home equity borrowing to substitute for consumer debt.
Among governments, federal borrowing should decrease as the deficit falls on
a calendar year basis, and debt issuance by state and local entities is
projected to remain quite light as capital spending by many of these
governments is restrained by budget problems as well as the continuing
effects of tax reform. The foreign sector will remain an important source
of funds in 1988, as the current account deficit, while declining, stays
very high. The placement of foreign inflows in various financial assets
depends in part on the extent of intervention purchases of dollars and the
disposition of those funds. Implicit in the staff expectation of a lower
dollar by the end of 1988 is the view that dollar assets of a magnitude
corresponding to the projected current account deficit will not be willingly
accumulated by private investors at existing exchange rates and interest
rate differentials.
(11) The staff's expectations for growth in money and credit
would be around the middle of the Committee's tentative ranges, given in
alternative II. They are also near the middle of the slightly lower growth
rates associated with alternative III. But the alternative III ranges would
better allow for another shortfall in money demand in 1988, if, for example,
households finance spending more from liquid assets and less from borrowing
as the tax deductibility of consumer debt interest is phased down further,
or if banks once again tap the Eurodollar market in size. The alternative
III ranges would also leave room for greater restraint on demand should the
possibility of a strengthening of inflation pressures emerge as a
substantial risk. With the economy already at higher levels of resource
utilization, such a risk could arise in the process of continuing adjustment
of our external imbalances, especially should real net exports advance more
rapidly than projected, or domestic demand be insufficiently damped to
release the needed resources. In addition, a flight from dollar assets
could cause a sharp drop in the exchange value of the dollar, boosting
expectations of future price and resource pressures. In any of these
circumstances, with fiscal policy unlikely to move toward greater restraint,
the responsibility would fall on monetary policy to promote better balance
between internal spending and production. If, for example, circumstances
called for a rise in interest rates beginning in the first half of the year,
money growth later in the year might need to be around, or even below, the
lower end of the alternative II ranges, accelerating relatively little from
1987. Alternative III would leave open this possibility. A further
reduction in ranges would underscore the Committee's intention to resist
inflation pressures, should they arise, and continue to move toward price
(12) The more rapid growth associated with the Alternative I
ranges could be considered necessary to offset the shortfall from last year,
if that shortfall were thought to point to substantial risks on the side of
weak demands in the economy. Significantly lower interest rates might be
needed to support income growth if demands in the U.S. economy from domestic
or foreign sources were appreciably below expectations. Such a fall in
rates is likely to involve much faster M2 growth, perhaps even exceeding the
upper end of its tentative range, and a substantial decline in velocity
would be anticipated, as in 1985 and 1986. This alternative also would
allow room for a reversal of the unexplained portion of weakness in money
growth in 1987. If this were to occur, relatively high rates of money
growth might be needed to promote satisfactory economic performance.
(13) M1 would be expected to expand around 5 percent with the
staff's economic forecast. Given the projected pattern of interest rates,
OCDs should expand about in line with income, but with domestic spending
sluggish, currency expansion might be damped. The velocity of demand
deposits should rise at a moderate pace reflecting continuing efforts to
economize on zero-interest deposits and ongoing shifts from compensating
balances to fees to pay for services. Because of the higher interest
elasticities of M1, a range about twice the width of those for M2 and M3
would be needed to encompass the same set of possible outcomes for income
and interest rates. Thus a range for M1 of 3 to 9 percent would appear
consistent with alternative II, placing expected M1 growth a little below
the midpoint of its range, as would be the case for M2 under this
alternative. Alternatives I and III would seem to be consistent with M1
ranges of a percentage point more and less, respectively.2
Short-run policy alternatives
(14) Three short-run policy alternatives are presented for con-
sideration by the Committee. Current reserve and money market conditions
would be maintained under alternative B while alternatives A and C would
involve somewhat easier or somewhat tighter conditions, respectively. The
level of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing associated with alternative B,
$250 million, is expected to entail federal funds trading around recent
6-1/2 to 6-3/4 percent levels. Such a relationship between borrowing and
the funds rate would be broadly consistent with recent behavior but would
involve a lower amount of borrowing than indicated by model relationships,
reflecting some continued unusual reluctance by banks to borrow from the
window. Remaining uncertainties about the borrowing relationship, as well
as lingering sensitivities in financial markets, might call for some
continued flexibility in implementing open market operations. Alternative A
would be associated with a reduction in the federal funds rate of about 1/2
percentage point--achieved by a lowering of the borrowing objective to $100
million, a near-frictional level--or by a 1/2 percentage point cut in the
discount rate. Alternative C would be associated with an increase in the
borrowing objective to about $450 million and a rise in the federal funds
rate of approximately 1/2 percentage point.
(15) Expected growth rates of the monetary aggregates from
November to March under each alternative are shown in the table below, along
with associated federal funds rate ranges. Implied December to March growth
rates, which are higher owing to the weakness in December, also are shown,
should the Committee wish to shift the base for short-run money growth from
November to December, the more usual starting point for quarterly growth
specifications. (More detailed data are shown on the table and charts on
the following pages).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from November
to March
M2 7 6-1/2 6
M3 6-1/4 6 5-3/4
Ml 6-3/4 6 5-1/4
Associated federal
funds rate range 4 to 8 4 to 8 5 to 9
Implied growth from
December to March
(16) Alternative B contemplates a continuation of reserve
conditions now expected to prevail after the recent slight easing. Although
market participants may be uncertain as to whether a reduction in reserve
pressures has already occurred, the structure of market interest rates
suggests that some easing has already been discounted. With federal funds
around the 6-5/8 percent area, the three-month Treasury bill rate would
likely fluctuate around or a little above its recent 5-5/8 percent level.
This bill rate is unusually low relative to the expected funds rate, but
public supplies of Treasury bills continue to be reduced by Treasury
paydowns. Rates on private money market instruments also would be expected
to remain around current reduced levels prompting another 1/4 percentage
point cut in the prime rate as the spread between the prime and money market
yields still remains wide after this week's reduction. The recent rally in
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in billions
1987 October 2894.8 2894.8 2894.8 3643.7 3643.7 3643.7 756.2 756.2 756.2
November 2897.0 2897.0 2897.0 3658.5 3658.5 3658.5 752.7 752.7 752.7
December 2902.7 2902.7 2902.7 3664.8 3664.8 3664.8 750.8 750.8 750.8
1988 January 2926.5 2926.5 2926.5 3690.3 3690.3 3690.3 759.1 759.1 759.1
February 2944.8 2943.3 2941.8 3713.0 3712.4 3711.8 764.2 763.4 762.6
March 2963.9 2960.0 2956.1 3734.1 3731.7 3729.3 769.4 767.5 765.6
1987 Target Ranges: 5.5 to 8.5 5.5 to 8.5
1988 Ranges (Tentative): 5.0 to 8.0 5.0 to 8.0
the long-term credit markets appears to reflect an outlook for sluggish
economic growth, broadly consistent with the staff forecast; consequently,
long-term rates are expected to vary around current levels, absent renewed
substantial downward pressure on the dollar.
(17) Under the specifications of alternative B, M2 would be
expected to grow in February and March at nearly a 7 percent annual rate, a
little above the average pace of December and January. On a quarterly
average basis, growth would accelerate from 4 percent in the fourth quarter
to 6-1/4 percent in the current quarter as the response of demand to the
drop in interest rates since October more than offsets the effects of slower
income growth. Consequently, M2 velocity would decline at around a 1 per-
cent rate--the first drop in more than a year. From its fourth-quarter
base, M2 by March would advance at a 6-1/2 percent annual rate, the midpoint
of its tentative long-run range. Within M2, rate relationships would tend
to increase the attractiveness of the more liquid interest-earning com-
ponents owing to the stickier adjustment of their offering rates following
the recent declines in market rates. From the fourth quarter, M1 by March
would rise at a 5-3/4 percent rate.
(18) M3, under alternative B, would advance at a 6 percent annual
rate from November to March as growth over February and March strengthens
somewhat from the 5 percent average of December and January. By March, M3
would be 6-1/4 percent above its fourth-quarter base, also near the center
of the tentative range. Inflows to core deposits at banks and thrifts are
likely to fall short of credit demands, leading both types of institutions
to issue a moderate volume of managed liabilities in M3. Credit growth at
banks is expected to slow somewhat in February and March from its
exceptional January pace, which was boosted by a resurgence of security
lending. Overall credit growth is forecast to increase slightly over coming
months, reflecting primarily a pickup in borrowing by the federal government
from its recent reduced pace. A continued wide financing gap along with a
quickening pace of corporate acquisitions and restructurings are expected to
give rise to sizable business credit demands. In addition to heavier
borrowing from banks and in the commercial paper market, businesses are
expected to tap the bond markets to avail themselves of reduced long-term
borrowing costs. By March domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to be
around 9 percent above its fourth-quarter base, also in the middle of its
tentative range.
(19) Although some easing of reserve conditions is now thought by
market participants to be in train or at least in prospect, the reserve
specifications of alternative A embody a larger move by the Federal Reserve
than has been anticipated in market rates. The downward movement of rates
associated with this alternative might be especially large if it were
accomplished through open market operations, since the resultant narrow
spread of the funds rate over the discount rate could foster expectations
that a further easing through a discount rate cut was imminent. The easier
conditions of alternative A are likely to put considerable downward pressure
on the dollar, though the extent to which this would show through in dollar
declines over the near-term would be affected by the incoming trade data.
The response of bond yields to an easing of policies and possible drop in
the dollar would depend importantly on perceptions of the situation in the
economy at the time. If economic conditions were thought to be quite soft--
weaker than consistent with the staff forecast--and incoming price data
suggested no more inflationary pressures, the drop in the dollar would be
less likely to adversely affect the bond market, which could register
further substantial gains.
(20) The tightening of conditions under alternative C would be
entirely unexpected, and probably would result in substantial increases in
both short- and, at least initially, long-term interest rates. Stock prices
could drop, perhaps sharply, if the higher rates were seen as contributing
to weakness in the economy as well as raising the rate at which future
earnings are discounted, and risk premiums could widen again. The effects
on long-term rates and markets might be muted over time, however, if this
policy initiative bolstered confidence in the future purchasing power of the
dollar, in circumstances in which inflation concerns had been aggravated by
strong downward pressure on the dollar or greater economic strength than now
generally anticipated.
(21) The changes in reserve conditions under alternatives A and C
would have fairly small effects on money growth in the current quarter,
which has less than two months to run. Under alternative A, growth of the
aggregates would accelerate noticeably relative to the pace of the last two
months, leaving both M2 and M3 at or a little above the midpoints of their
tentative long-run ranges in March. The delayed effects of the declines in
interest rates contemplated under this alternative could push these
aggregates well into the upper halves of those ranges during the second
quarter, given the staff's GNP forecast. Thus, this alternative might be
considered most consistent with the higher paths for money growth envisioned
under long-run alternative I. Under the tighter reserve conditions of
alternative C, the broad aggregates would remain within the lower halves of
their tentative ranges through March. By reversing most of the interest
rate declines since October, Alternative C would tend to keep money growth
on a fairly slow path over coming months, dropping further below the
midpoint of the tentative ranges, and might be most consistent with the
growth rates in long-run alternative III.
Directive language
1988 Ranges
(23) Presented below for Committee consideration is draft
directive language relating to the decisions on the longer-run ranges
(draft language for the operating paragraph is shown in (24) below). As
is now the case, a separate paragraph would be devoted to M1. The draft
assumes in light of the discussion at the December meeting that the
Committee will continue its practice of not setting a numerical range for
M1. The proposed paragraph explaining this decision is drawn from that in
the current directive, but it has been shortened and modified somewhat.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster reasonable price
stability over time, promote growth in output on a
sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved pattern
of international transactions. In furtherance of these
objectives, the Committee [DEL: agreed] at THIS [DEL: its] meeting [DEL: in
July to reaffirm the ranges] established [DEL: in February for]
growth RANGES of [DEL: 5-1/2 to 8-1/2] ____ TO ____ percent for
[DEL: both] M2 and TO PERCENT FOR M3, measured from the
fourth quarter of 1986 1987 to the fourth quarter of 1987
1988. [DEL: The Committee agreed that growth in these
aggregates around the lower ends of the ranges might be
appropriate in light of developments with respect to
velocity and signs of the potential for some strenthen-
ing in underlying inflationary pressures, provided that
econmic activity was expanding at an acceptable pace.]
The monitoring range for growth in total domestic
nonfinancial debt WAS set [DEL: in February for the year was
left unchanged] at ____ TO ____ [DEL: 8 to 11] percent FOR THE YEAR.
[DEL: For 1988, the Committee agreed in July on tentative
ranges of monetary growth, meaured from the fourth
quarter of 1987 to the fourth quarter of 1988, of 5 to 8
percent for both M2 and M3. The Committee provisionally
set the associated range for growth in total domestic
nonfinancial debat tat 7-1/2 to 10-1/2 peercent.]
With respect to M1, [DEL: the Committee recognized that,
based on experience, the behavior of that aggregate must
be judged in the light of other evidence relating to
economic activity and prices; fluctuation in M1 have
become much more sensitive in recent years to changes in
interest rates, among other factors. Because of this
sensitivity, which had been reflected in a sharp slowing
of the decline in M1 velocity over the first half of the
year], the Committee again decided [DEL: at the July meeting] not
to establish a specific target for 1988 [DEL: growth-in-M1-over
the remainder of 1987 and no tentative range was set for
1988]. THE BEHAVIOR OF THIS AGGREGATE IN RELATION TO
ECONOMIC ACTIVITY AND PRICES HAS BECOME VERY SENSITIVE TO
CHANGES IN INTEREST RATES, AMONG OTHER FACTORS, AS
EVIDENCED BY SHARP SWINGS IN ITS VELOCITY IN RECENT YEARS.
CONSEQUENTLY, the appropriateness of changes in M1 this
year WILL would continue to be evaluated in the light of
the behavior of its velocity, developments in the economy
and financial markets, and the nature of emerging price
pressures. [DEL: The Committee welcomed substantially slower
growth of M1 in 1987 than in 1986 in the context of
continuing economic expansion and some evidence of greater
inflationary pressures. The Committee indicated in July
that in reaching operational decisions over the balance of
the year it would take account of growth in M1 in the
light of circumstances then prevailing. The-issues
involved with establishing a target for M1 will be
carefully reappraised at the beginning of 1988.]
Operational Paragraph
(24) Draft language for the operational paragraph, including the
usual options, is shown below. Should the Committee wish to retain a
sentence on its operating procedures, an updated version of the second
sentence in the current directive [shown in brackets] could be used.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (ALT. A)/
maintain (Alt. B)/INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. [The Committee
agrees that [DEL: the passing of time and the year end should
permit further progress toward restoring a] THE CURRENT
MORE normal approach to open market operations REMAINS
APPROPRIATE; [DEL: although] still sensitive conditions in
financial markets and uncertainties in the economic
outlook may continue to call for some flexibility in
operations.] Taking account of conditions in financial
markets, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) lesser reserve restraint
(WOULD) (MIGHT), or somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater reserve
restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable depending on the
strength of the business expansion, indications of
inflationary pressures, developments in foreign exchange
markets, as well as the behavior of the monetary
aggregates. The contemplated reserve conditions are
expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over
the period from November through March at annual rates of
about [DEL: 5] ____ percent and [DEL: 6] ____ percent, respectively. Over
the same period, growth in M1 is expected to remain
relatively limited. The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic
Operations that reserve conditions during the period
before the next meeting are likely to be associated with a
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 4 to 8]
____ TO ____ percent.
