Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
JUNE 26, 1998
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) June 26, 1998
Class I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The federal funds rate averaged near its intended level of 5-1/2 percent over the
intermeeting period. Intermediate- and long-term rates fell 5 to 30 basis points over the
period (chart). Markets were responding primarily to developments overseas--in particular,
further deterioration in several Asian economies, along with the associated strengthening of
the dollar and turmoil in financial markets in Asia and in emerging market economies
elsewhere, all of which damped the outlook for U.S. economic growth, strengthened market
participants' conviction that inflation would stay low, and prompted some investors to seek
the safety of U.S. Treasury instruments. Short-term rates, anchored by continued expectations
that the funds rate will remain at its current level for a while, generally fell by less, though
the three-month bill rate has moved down about 15 basis points over the last week, as turmoil
in a number of foreign markets persisted and in some cases intensified. The slope of the
nominal term structure from three months to ten years dropped to the low end of its range for
the past several years. However, it is not unusually flat relative to the slopes posted in the
1950s and 1960s, when inflation was well behaved on a sustained basis.
(2) Spreads between rates on private and Treasury securities generally rose over
the intermeeting period, especially for lower-rated issues. In part, the widening likely
reflected the increased value some investors attached to the safety and liquidity of Treasury
securities in light of the turmoil in emerging markets. However, it may also suggest that
some investors are taking a more cautious view of the outlook for the profits and financial
I I I I
strength of businesses. This possible shift in attitude is also consistent with the performance
of the stock market despite the decline in interest rates: On balance, major stock indexes
have posted mixed changes since the last FOMC meeting. With the exception of the S&P
500, which touched a record high on June 26, most major indexes have fallen a few percent
from their peaks reached earlier this year.
(3) The dollar appreciated significantly in the early part of the intermeeting period,
led by an 8 percent rise against the yen. Evidence of a steep drop in economic activity in
Japan and a lack of confidence that government policies were coming to grips with the
country's economic and financial problems were the main factors behind the yen's weakness.
The bellwether government bond yield in Japan declined to a record low in early June on
speculation that the Bank of Japan might reduce its official discount rate. After reaching an
eight-year low against the dollar of almost 147 on June 15, the yen began to firm on rumors
of imminent intervention. On Wednesday, June 17, the Desk purchased yen
for $833 million for U.S.
accounts, split evenly between the Federal Reserve and the Treasury. In conjunction with the
intervention, a statement by Japanese officials noted their government's intention to consider
further fiscal stimulus and to act quickly to resolve problems in their banking sector.
Immediately after the intervention, the dollar fell 4 percent against the yen and 1 percent
against the mark. Over the last week, however, the yen has given up all of its gains against
the dollar as it became clear that the Japanese government would not take immediate action
and as concerns about the viability of a number of major Japanese banks mounted. The yen
ended the intermeeting period down 4 percent against the dollar. Relative to continental
European currencies, the dollar has risen only modestly on net since the last FOMC meeting,
as declines in long-term interest rates in those countries about matched those on comparable
U.S. instruments. In contrast, the dollar fell 2 1/4 percent against sterling, which was buoyed
by a surprise increase of percentage point on June 4 in the Bank of England's official RP
rate and by subsequent incoming data that fostered expectations of at least one more rate
increase in the near term. On net, the foreign exchange value of the dollar relative to major
currencies increased more than 2 percent over the intermeeting period.
(4) Declines in the exchange value of the yen put added pressure on financial
markets in other Asian economies. Prior to the joint U.S.-Japanese intervention, Chinese
officials speculated openly about the possibility of abandoning the renminbi's current peg to
the dollar, but following the intervention and the yen's initial rebound, they reiterated their
commitment to their current exchange rate policy. The Indonesian rupiah has depreciated 20
percent against the dollar over the intermeeting period, pressured by political uncertainty.
Despite the drop in the rupiah, Indonesian stock prices rose 11 percent, and credit spreads on
the nation's sovereign foreign currency debt narrowed a bit over the intermeeting period. By
contrast, the currencies of other Asian economies depreciated slightly on average relative to
the dollar. However, these economies' equity markets were down about 5 to 25 percent, and
credit spreads on their dollar-denominated sovereign debts moved up 30 to 110 basis points.
(5) A number of other countries appeared to be affected over the intermeeting
period by a general increase in investors' concern about the outlook for emerging market
economies. Speculative pressure on the Russian ruble intensified in late May and again at the
end of June, as market participants reportedly became concerned about persistent shortfalls in
government revenues and the impact of lower commodity prices on Russian exports. The
government announced a new fiscal program that calmed markets for a while and made it
possible for the IMF to restart disbursements under Russia's suspended IMF program. Over
the intermeeting period as a whole, credit spreads on dollar-denominated Russian foreign
debts increased 330 basis points. Credit risk spreads for Latin American sovereign borrowers
widened 90 to 140 basis points, on balance, over the same period.
(6) Growth of the monetary aggregates moderated somewhat in the second quarter.
Smoothing through the tax-induced bulge in M2 growth in April and subsequent marked
slowing in May, growth in those two months averaged about a 6 percent rate, down from 8-1/2
percent over the first three months of the year. Preliminary data for June suggest a small
further moderation.2 Despite this slowing, through June of this year M2 has expanded at a 7-1/4
percent pace from the final quarter of last year, and velocity has declined over the first half at
an estimated 2-1/2 percent rate. More than 1 percentage point of this drop can be attributed to
identified special factors that have temporarily boosted deposit holdings, including the sharp
rise in mortgage refinancing and outsized tax payments. In addition, the demand for money
relative to income may have been boosted by the comparative attractiveness of M2 assets as
rates on long-term fixed-rate instruments fell and by the effects of household portfolio
decisions in light of the sharp run-up of share prices in recent years. Growth in M3 has also
slowed in the last few months, reflecting the behavior of M2 Nonetheless, M3 has grown a
couple of percentage points faster than M2. The difference reflects continued very rapid
growth in the non-M2 components of M3, especially institution-only money funds, which
have made further gains in attracting corporate cash-management business. From the fourth
quarter of last year through June, M3 has grown at a 10-1/4 percent pace.
(7) Outside the federal sector, the growth in domestic nonfinancial debt has been
fairly rapid this year, owing to robust demand for credit and the availability of funds on
attractive terms from intermediaries and the capital markets. Business borrowing has been
strong in recent months, although it appears to have edged back from its very rapid pace in
the first quarter, when a surge in inventory investment probably added to already large credit
demands. With the yield curve quite flat and long-term corporate rates near their lowest
levels in some time, businesses have issued bonds in record volume this year. Household
debt growth also likely has slowed a bit from its first quarter pace but has remained brisk in
the second quarter. Mortgage debt has expanded particularly vigorously this year, buoyed by
the high level of home purchases and low long-term interest rates, which have encouraged
some households to substitute mortgage finance for higher-cost consumer debts. Despite the
continued strong growth in the debt of the nonfederal sectors, paydowns of federal debt made
possible by robust tax revenues trimmed the expansion of total domestic debt to a bit less
than 5 percent in recent months, reducing the growth rate of the aggregate from the fourth
quarter of last year through May to about 5-3/4 percent.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
97:4
to
April May June June2
Money and Credit Aggregates
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank Credit
Adjusted1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed Reserves
Total Reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary Base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Excess Reserves
4.9
-2.6
7.4
-3.1
-1.8
-2.3
10.3
3.4
4.9
-3.1
0.6
4.5
-5.7
7.9
7.7
7.3
-9.5
-0.3
4.7
5.3
-3.9
2.7
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
3.7
1.8
0.9
5.2
5.8
-1.3
8.2
7.8
7.6
-9.5
4.5
-4.0
5.7
(FIN 39 and FASB 115).
- - -~ - - -~ -~ - - - ~
Longer-Term Strategies
(8) This section considers alternative longer-term strategies for monetary policy.
We do this by constructing a "baseline case" that extends the Greenbook forecast, bringing
unemployment gradually back to the NAIRU. We then use the staff model to construct an
alternative strategy that eventually achieves price stability--as proxied by core PCE inflation
of about 3/4 percent (on a 1999 measurement basis).
(9) Key factors underlying the extended baseline forecast, which also provide the
underpinnings for the alternative strategy, generally represent a continuation of conditions at
work in the Greenbook forecast. In labor markets, the NAIRU is 5.4 percent and the sacrifice
ratio is about 2--that is, a 1 percentage point reduction in inflation can be achieved by
pushing the unemployment rate above the NAIRU by the equivalent of 2 percentage points
for one year. On the demand side, the federal government runs a small budget surplus that
remains about unchanged as a percent of nominal GDP. Stock market wealth rises more
slowly than nominal income; the price-earnings ratio declines over the simulation horizon
from about 28 to around 21, still somewhat high by historical standards. Finally, the current
account deficit continues to worsen over time. This development, which is driven by stronger
secular growth in the demand for imports in the United States than for U.S. exports overseas,
occurs despite a return to trend growth abroad and a partial offset from a sustained mild
depreciation in the real foreign exchange value of the dollar. These last three influences
progressively restrain aggregate demand relative to potential and consequently over time
reduce the real federal funds rate needed to hold the economy at potential.
(10) In the baseline strategy, shown by the solid lines in Chart 2, the current level
of the real funds rate is sufficient to bring about a gradual rise in the unemployment rate,
given the other restraining influences on aggregate demand. However, because the
unemployment rate stays below the NAIRU through 2001, inflation continues to rise
somewhat after the end of the Greenbook forecast period. (As in the Greenbook, technical
changes to price indexes through 1999 hold down measured inflation, but we are assuming no
further adjustments after that.) Thus, by holding the nominal funds rate constant for the next
several years, in effect the Committee would be modestly easing, all else equal, because the
real funds rate edges down. The slow decline limits the long-term rise in the unemployment
rate, producing a "soft landing" by 2002, with unemployment at its steady-state rate and
inflation stable at 2-1/4 percent. Thereafter, the FOMC slowly reduces the nominal and real
funds rates so as to keep the economy at full employment in the face of a falling wealth-to-
income ratio and a worsening trade deficit.
(11) The price stability strategy (shown by the dashed lines) eventually achieves
effective price stability as gauged by an inflation rate of 3/4 percent, close to the estimated
measurement error. In this strategy, the Committee raises the nominal funds rate to a little
above 6 percent by the end of this year, and maintains it at that level through 1999. Inflation
begins to decline in 1999 even though unemployment remains below the NAIRU, reflecting a
rise in the dollar, the sharp slowing of real output (a "speed effect"), and the public's growing
recognition that the Federal Reserve is seeking a lower inflation rate. With inflation declining
and the nominal federal funds rate unchanged, the real federal funds rate climbs further to 4-1/2
percent, almost a percentage point above the baseline strategy. As inflation moves closer to
the Federal Reserve's assumed objective and the output gap widens, the Committee begins to
lower nominal rates in 2000 by enough to produce a gradual decline in the real funds rate, a
process that caps the rise in the unemployment rate at about 6-1/4 percent early in the next
decade and thereafter brings it slowly back down to NAIRU.
Ranges for Money and Debt
(12) The paragraphs below present projections for money and debt for 1998 and
1999 consistent with the Greenbook forecast. The table on page 13 and the discussion
following give the current ranges and alternatives that the Committee may wish to consider.
Projected Money and Debt Growth.
(13) M2 is projected to grow 6 percent this year, about 1-3/4 percentage points faster
than nominal GDP. The unusual strength in M2 is not associated with a decrease in the
traditional measure of opportunity costs--the three-month Treasury bill rate less the weighted-
average yield on M2 assets--which has been virtually unchanged this year and is expected to
remain constant under the staff forecast. A small part of the strength in M2 reflects a
temporary buildup in deposits associated with the recent surge in mortgage refinancings. In
addition, the demand for M2 assets in the first half of the year was perhaps augmented by the
effects of a strong stock market and reduced bond yields, and these influences should persist
for a while. However, with bond yields expected to decline no further and the stock market
slipping a bit, the boost to M2 growth from mortgage refinancing and portfolio adjustments is
expected to abate in 1999. The staff projects M2 growth of 4 percent for 1999, only a bit
faster than that of nominal GDP. (Historical and projected money and debt velocities are
plotted in Chart 3.)
(14) M3 is likely to grow a robust 9 percent this year, a bit faster than in 1997, as
depositories continue to see profitable opportunities to expand credit, and they begin to rely
somewhat less on increases in overseas and other non-M3 funding sources. Also, the
outsourcing of money management services by businesses to institutional money funds should
persist. Private debt is expected to grow quickly this year, lifting expansion of the domestic
nonfinancial debt aggregate to 5-1/2 percent, despite a surplus for the federal government.
Business borrowing is projected to remain robust, with investment spending moderating in
coming quarters but still outpacing internal financing given the anticipated weakening of
profits. Household borrowing also should be brisk this year, supporting strong spending on
housing and consumer durables. In 1999, total debt is projected to decelerate to a 4-1/2 percent
growth rate, owing primarily to slower expansion of nominal spending; any tightening in
credit terms and standards is expected to be modest and selective and not impinge on the
general availability of credit. As the increase in depository credit moderates next year, M3
growth is projected to throttle down to a 6-1/2 percent pace.
Rangesfor 1998 and 1999
(15) The table below summarizes the staff projections for money and debt and
presents three alternative sets of ranges for Committee consideration. Alternative I is the
current set of ranges (unchanged since July of 1995); alternative II raises the money ranges to
make them more consistent with the staff projections, particularly for 1999, and trims the debt
range to reflect the projected slowdown in this aggregate; 3 alternative III maintains the current
money ranges but lowers the debt range further, making it more consistent with the expected
growth of debt under conditions of price stability and no trend in debt velocity.
(16) Since the M2 range was first interpreted four years ago as reflecting the
behavior of this aggregate under price stability, the Committee has been reviewing whether
the velocity of M2 has again become stable or predictable enough to justify restoring a range
for M2 that reflects its projected annual growth. Chart 4 shows the relationship between
Nominal GDP
Growth of Money and Debt and Alternative Ranges
1998 1999 Alt. I Alt. I
--- projected--- (current)
9 6% 2 to 6 4 to 8
5/ 4% 3 to 7 2 to 6
P 43 3Y4
levels of M2 velocity and opportunity cost over four subperiods. The responsiveness of V2 to
opportunity cost implied by the left and right scales over each of the four subperiods is
constrained to equal the value derived using data from 1977 to 1990; however, the average
levels of velocity and opportunity cost were aligned in each subperiod. As can be seen from
the lower right panel, after the completion of the large shift in its level in the early 1990s, V2
recently has had about as close a relationship to short-run opportunity costs as over history.
The differences between the lines on Chart 4 (expressed as a percent of velocity) are plotted
in Chart 5; these plots confirm that, after allowing for the level shift in velocity, the
relationship recently has experienced about the same errors as previously. The relationship of
V2 to opportunity costs is the core of the staffs formal money demand model, which has also
Alt. II
1 to5
2 to 6
Chart 4
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost by Period
(Quarterly, ratio scales)
-- - Opportunity Cost*
-- V2
1959Q3-63Q4
Opportunity
Cost
1964-76Opportunity
Cost
I I J.. p p
1977-92Opportunity
Cost
2
I t I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
1993-98Q1
Opportunity
Cost
93 95 97
* Opportunity Cost (left scale), in percentage poins, the dotted line, is a two-quarter moving average,
V2 (rlght scale), the solid line, s In levels; both are ratio scales.
Chart 5
Deviations of V2 from the Simple Relationship to Opportunity Costs*
Percent
6
SPercentage deviations from actual V2 of estimates based on opportunity costs.
The years 1991 and 1992, when long-run velocity was shifting up sharply, are omitted.
been performing about as well in predicting quarterly M2 growth in the last few years as over
its estimation period of 1964 to 1988.
(17) Nevertheless, even supposing there were no further disruptions to V2 of the
magnitude of those of the early 1990s, V2 may not be viewed as sufficiently predictable to
justify basing the ranges on projections. The upper panel of Chart 6 shows the Board staffs
ability to predict in February the growth of V2 over that year. It begins in 1983, when M2
became the monetary aggregate of greatest interest to the Committee. The solid line shows
the judgmental errors in predicting V2 and compares them to a range 4 percentage points in
width centered on the staff projection (as indicated by the dashed lines). In six of the last
fifteen years these errors by themselves (apart from any misforecast of nominal GDP) would
have caused M2 to fall outside this 4 percent range. Two of the misses in the 1980s are
attributable to deviations of the funds rate from the Greenbook assumption, as shown by the
adjusted V2 errors -- the dotted line.4 Nevertheless, the dotted line itself moves outside the
band on four occasions, showing that unpredictable shifts in money demand may throw M2
out of its range. However, M2 has provided some value as an indicator for nominal GDP, as
shown for example in the positive correlation of surprises in the behavior of M2 with
surprises in GDP relative to the Greenbook forecast (the bottom panel of Chart 6). Chart 7
depicts a similar analysis for M3. The V3 errors, adjusted for the effects of deviations of the
federal funds rate from Greenbook assumptions, have tended to be a bit larger than those for
Chart 6
Analysis of Judgmental Projections of M2 Made in February for the Current Year
Errors in the Growth of V2 and Adjusted V2*
(Actual less predicted, Q4-to-Q4) P'ercentage
--- V2 Growth Error
..-.... Adjusted V2 Growth Error*
Errors in the Growth of GDP and Adjusted M2*
(Actual less predicted, Q4-to-04)
- GDP Growth Error
------- Adjusted M2 Growth Error"
Percentage
Points
Correlation =.39
* The errors are adjusted for the effects of deviations of the federal funds rate from Greenbook assumptions, based
on the semi-elasticity of 1.9 implied by the correlation between the forecast errors of V2 growth and of the funds rate
' .
I \
Chart 7
Analysis of Judgmental Projections of M3 Made in February for the Current Year
Errors in the Growth of V3 and Adjusted V3*
(Actual less predicted, Q4-to-Q4) Percentage
- V3 Growth Error
..- Adjusted V3 Growth Error*
Errors in the Growth of GDP and Adjusted M3*
(Actual less predicted, Q4-to-Q4)
- GDP Growth Error
--.---- Adjusted M3 Growth Error*
Correlation = .24
-/.j. A. f
4 1-
Percentage
Points
*The errors are adjusted for the effects of deviations of the federal funds rate from Greenbook assumptions, based
on the semi-elasticity of .63 implied by the correlation between the forecast errors of V3 growth and of the funds rate.
i---------l2 -----
V2, and, as suggested by the bottom panel, the relationship of M3 to GDP is a little weaker
than that for M2.
(18) Because M2 has some desirable indicator properties and because its velocity
has been no more unpredictable in the past few years than over the 1960-90 period, the
Committee might want to return to announcing a range based on its projection for this
monetary aggregate. Such a range also could be selected for M3 in order to establish a
consistent interpretation for all three ranges. If the Committee shifted to projection-based
ranges for M2 and M3 for 1998, substantial adjustments to the ranges that were set in
February would be needed to encompass the projected growth of those aggregates, particularly
if a cushion between projected growth and the upper bound were thought desirable. More
modest upward adjustments would be needed if the Committee shifted to a projection basis
for the provisional monetary ranges only for next year, given the staff projection of a
deceleration in these aggregates. The alternative II ranges were constructed to be consistent
with the staff forecast for 1999. The apparently stronger nominal GDP forecasts of
Committee members might imply somewhat faster money and debt growth, assuming the
Committee members' preliminary forecasts are based on approximately the same paths for
interest rates and stock prices as in the staff forecast. Those more rapid growth rates next
year would still be below the staff projections for 1998. Selection of projection-based ranges
need not signal that the monetary aggregates are again being given greater consideration in
policymaking. The Committee could explain that, even though it believed that velocity
behavior had become somewhat more predictable, it nevertheless was simply setting ranges
for money and debt consistent with its economic outlook and was not intending to adjust the
stance of policy in response to deviations of the aggregates from their ranges. Alternatively,
the Committee may in fact wish to signal added emphasis on the money and debt aggregates
at this time of heightened uncertainties regarding the NAIRU and other nonmonetary leading
indicators of inflation, for such emphasis may help it communicate its concerns about
inflation pressures when policy needs to be tightened, particularly if the tightenings have a
preemptive quality. Careful explanation could make clear that the added emphasis does not
go so far as to imply a presumption that deviations from ranges would trigger policy
responses, only that money is one of the many indicators the Committee is using.
(19) On the other hand, the continuing possibility of major shifts in monetary
velocities and their lack of close predictability even in ordinary circumstances raise questions
about the value of employing ranges based on annual forecasts, even if such ranges are not
being used to guide policy. In consequence, the Committee may wish to retain the current
rationale for its M2 and M3 ranges. In addition, it may also wish to alter the rationale for its
debt range to provide a consistent interpretation for all three ranges. This shift would require
lowering the debt range, as in alternative III. The range given in this alternative is based on
price stability and the historical pattern (apart from the 1980s) of zero trend in the velocity of
debt. All of the alternative II ranges are centered around rates of money and credit growth
consistent with expansion of nominal GDP at a 3 percent annual rate; growth around that rate
would be associated with conditions of true price stability.5 If the Committee saw a higher
growth rate of potential GDP than does the staff, or preferred a small positive trend to
inflation, abstracting from measurement error, in order to avoid potential risks to policy
associated with the zero bound on the nominal funds rate, ranges somewhat above those in
alternative III would be appropriate.
(20) Finally, the Committee might prefer to use the current ranges, alternative I, as
the provisional ranges for 1999 as well as to reaffirm them for 1998. Such a decision would
not preclude paying more attention to the money and credit aggregates as policy indicators
during the year. Nonetheless, the Committee may still feel too uncertain about prospective
monetary developments, even with somewhat more predictable behavior of velocity in the last
few years, to specify in advance the rates at which money growth would become worrisome.
As for debt, the slowdown projected by the staff for 1999 would not necessarily suggest
lowering the range below its current specification because that setting still readily
encompasses the staff projection. Indeed, with the Committee projecting faster nominal GDP
growth than the staff, more rapid debt growth would be probable as well, which would
undercut even further any need to alter the current range for the debt aggregate.
Short-run Policy Alternatives
(21) The data received since the May FOMC meeting suggest that the economy was
a little stronger in the first quarter than the staff had expected in the last Greenbook but that
its growth has cooled off more this quarter than had been projected. In the staff forecast for
this meeting, under an unchanged federal funds rate, growth over the next six quarters will
settle in at a little below the rate of increase in the economy's potential, as domestic demand
is damped by a further decline in inventory accumulation to a more sustainable level, and by
the ebbing of the effects of previous increases in equity prices and declines in bond yields.
Despite a modest incline to the jobless rate, unemployment is anticipated to remain below its
natural rate over the forecast period. As a consequence, inflation on an underlying basis will
pick up, though the rise in published inflation will be muted by technical adjustments.
(22) The choice of the unchanged policy stance of alternative B would seem to
follow if the Committee found the Greenbook forecast both probable and--despite the
projected upcreep in underlying inflation--acceptable. The Committee might be especially
willing to live with an outlook in which the most likely outcome was a modest increase in
inflation if it saw the risks around that outcome as unbalanced, with the odds of a
considerably larger and persistent rise in inflation less than those of a substantial weakening
in activity. Even if underlying inflation tendencies turn out to be a little more intense than
anticipated, weakness in commodity and import prices and damped inflation expectations
should restrain price increases for a time. Thus, the Committee should be able to react
sufficiently promptly to any emerging cost pressures in labor markets to limit any incipient
increase in inflation and inflation expectations. On the demand side, an important
vulnerability of the staff forecast revolves around developments overseas. That forecast
embodies more stable foreign financial markets and a recovery in the Japanese economy
starting in the second half of the year. However, so long as conditions in Asian economies
and emerging market economies elsewhere stay unsettled and the eventual implementation of
effective measures to deal with those conditions remains uncertain, the Committee may see a
distinct possibility of substantially greater drag on the U.S. economy from the external sector
than is in the staff forecast. Moreover, developments abroad may not be wholly immune to
monetary policy actions within the United States, and the Committee might be willing to
delay action for a time, at the risk of a possible pickup in inflation, to avoid further
complicating the already unsteady situation in Asia and several non-Asian emerging market
(23) Financial market prices appear to embody the anticipation that monetary policy
is on hold for some time, so the choice of the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B
should elicit little response in money, capital, or foreign exchange markets. If the economic
data reveal, as under the staff projection, a considerable slowing in spending and muted
inflation, intermediate- and longer-term yields could edge lower, while equity prices could
falter as corporate profits again prove disappointing. This downward pressure on yields,
however, may be offset somewhat to the extent that the situation in emerging markets does
show signs of stabilizing as in the forecast, perhaps unwinding some of the flight-to-quality
effects that Treasury yields now reflect.
(24) The Committee might favor the quarter-point tightening of alternative C if it
viewed the updrift in underlying inflation in the staff forecast as unacceptable. Indeed, the
Committee may view the recent upside surprises in core consumer price inflation, coupled
with the persistently low level of the unemployment rate, as implying that inflation may
advance to even higher rates than the staff has built into its forecast. That risk would be
exacerbated if the staff has overestimated the extent of the coming slowdown in spending
growth, considering still-accommodative conditions in financial markets, as well as the ability
of the economy to expand without intensifying pressures on prices. In that environment,
putting off policy action in deference to uncertain conditions in foreign markets may pose too
great a risk to the continued good performance of the U.S. economy, and the longer-term
health of the global economy itself, particularly as a quick resolution to the problems abroad
is probably not in the cards. Given the current high levels of resource utilization, the
Committee might believe that delay would only raise the odds that greater, probably more
wrenching, policy tightening will be required later.
(25) Tighter policy at this meeting, perhaps involving a move in the federal funds
rate to 5-3/4 percent as under alternative C, would catch domestic and international markets
unawares. Money market yields would rise at least as much as the federal funds rate, if not
more. Intermediate- and longer-term yields could rise substantially as well, particularly if
market participants viewed the Federal Reserve's willingness to tighten in the face of ongoing
turmoil in Asian and other emerging markets as evidence that U.S. domestic macroeconomic
imbalances were seen to be large and that further restraint might well be in store. By
contrast, if the market viewed the tightening as a limited mid-course correction--perhaps
guided by the wording of the press release announcing the action--the sell-off in capital
markets might be modest. In any event, equity prices would fall, as investors reconciled
themselves to both a higher rate on competing assets and a slower expansion of profits in the
future. Similarly, the dollar would tend to appreciate. If the action were not viewed as
presaging additional tightening in the United States and other industrial countries, the rise in
the dollar and pressure on foreign interest rates would be limited. With the exchange market
remaining skittish, large gains in the dollar against some currencies and further deterioration
in the financial markets of emerging market economies could not be ruled out.
(26) Consistent with the staffs projections of the annual growth of the monetary and
debt aggregates that were discussed in the previous section, some slowing in the expansion of
M2, M3, and debt is anticipated over the remainder of this year. The staff outlook, which
assumes the maintenance of the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B, projects that
M2 and M3 will grow at rates of about 4-1/4 percent and 7 percent respectively over the third
and fourth quarters, considerably below their pace so far this year, and that the growth of
domestic nonfinancial debt will edge down a notch. For the most part, this slowing in the
expansion of the money and debt aggregates mirrors the expected step-down in the growth of
nominal GDP in the second half of the year relative to the first. In addition, the growth of
the monetary aggregates should be held down by a waning or reversal of some of the special
factors that boosted them early in the year. Total debt growth should slow as the paydown of
securities by the federal government accelerates slightly on a seasonally adjusted basis and
borrowing by nonfederal sectors edges down. Maintenance of the slightly higher short-term
interest rates of alternative C would lower these growth rates only slightly over this year and
still leave both M2 and M3 above their annual ranges.
Directive Language
(27) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording relating to the
Committee's ranges for the aggregates in 1998-1999 and the operational paragraph for the
intermeeting period.
1998-1999 RANGES
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In furtherance of
these objectives, the Committee REAFFIRMED at THIS its meeting THE RANGES IT HAD
ESTABLISHED in February [DEL: established ranges] for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent
and 2 to 6 percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1997 to the fourth
quarter of 1998. [IN FURTHERANCE OF THESE OBJECTIVES, THE COMMITTEE AT
THIS MEETING RAISED/LOWERED THE RANGES IT HAD ESTABLISHED IN
FEBRUARY FOR GROWTH OF M2 AND M3 TO RANGES OF ____ TO ____ PERCENT
AND ____TO ____ PERCENT RESPECTIVELY, MEASURED FROM THE FOURTH
QUARTER OF 1997 TO THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1998.] The range for growth
of total domestic nonfinancial debt was MAINTAINED set at 3 to 7 percent (RAISED/
LOWERED TO ____ TO ____ PERCENT) for the year. FOR 1999, THE COMMITTEE
AGREED ON TENTATIVE RANGES FOR MONETARY GROWTH, MEASURED FROM
THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1998 TO THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1999, OF ____ TO ____
PERCENT FOR M2 AND TO PERCENT FOR M3. THE COMMITTEE
PROVISIONALLY SET THE ASSOCIATED RANGE FOR GROWTH OF TOTAL
DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEBT AT _ TO _ PERCENT FOR 1999. The behavior of
the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light of progress toward price
level stability, movements in their velocities, and developments in the economy and financial
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks
conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/DECREASING the
federal funds rate at/TO an average of around ____ [DEL: 5-l/2] percent. In the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, a
somewhat/SLIGHTLY higher federal funds rate would/MIGHT or a SOMEWHAT/slightly
lower federal funds rate WOULD/might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with [DEL: considerable moderation in
the] MODERATE growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
M2 M3
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C All Alternatives
--------------------------------- ----------------- ----------------
1.0 to 5.0 2,0 to 6.0
1998 Annual Ranges:
