Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 5/26/2009.
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) January 23, 2003
Class II – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Over the intermeeting period, prices in financial markets were buffeted
by shifting perceptions of global risks, including the situations in Iraq and North
Korea and the disruptions to oil supplies in Venezuela.1  U.S. economic releases were
mostly mixed, although since the surprisingly strong ISM report in early January
market participants have mostly been disappointed with incoming data.  Adding to
that discontent, the guidance many firms have been offering during the current
corporate reporting season about earnings prospects and capital spending plans has
been downbeat.  That said, the absence of a major revelation of corporate wrongdoing
seemed to lighten investors’ concerns on that score.  In addition, the unveiling of the
Administration’s economic stimulus package, which was larger than had been
previously anticipated, created the sense that substantial additional fiscal impetus is in
train.  Market participants apparently are now betting that the fourth-quarter lull in
economic activity will linger a bit longer than had previously been expected, at least as
can be read from money market futures.  These contracts suggest that the FOMC will
stay on hold well into the third quarter and tighten by almost ½ percentage point less
by mid-2004 than was expected at the time of the December meeting.
(2) Against this backdrop of revised policy expectations, Treasury note
yields shed 10 to 20 basis points on net over the intermeeting period.  The yield on
the ten-year on-the-run indexed security fell about 1/4 percentage point, implying that
inflation compensation ticked higher over the period.  However, market
The Implementation of Monetary Policy over the Intermeeting Period
 
  The Desk relied entirely on temporary operations to offset the factors 
affecting reserves over the intermeeting period.  The trend increase in currency 
seems to have slowed some, making it unnecessary to purchase Treasury 
securities outright.  Repurchase agreements were built up to accommodate the 
holiday increase in currency in circulation and then run down as currency 
flowed back to the Federal Reserve after year-end (table).  In the event, the 
federal funds rate has averaged close to 1-1/4 percent since the December 
meeting and has mostly traded in a tight range around that level (chart).  As a 
result, only a modest volume of credit was extended through the discount 
window.  Since January 9, loans made outside the seasonal lending program 
have been charged a penalty rate under our new lending facilities.  The daily 
quantity of primary credit outstanding averaged about $9 million.  A total of 
thirty-one, predominantly small, institutions have borrowed, including twenty-
five commercial banks, five thrifts, and one credit union.  No secondary credit 
loans were extended.
Chart 1
Financial Market Indicators
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2003 2004
4
Percent
January 23, 2003
December 9, 2002
Expected Federal Funds Rates Estimated from
Financial Futures*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures rates with an
 allowance for term premia and other adjustments.
Basis points
Change in One-Year Treasury Forward Rates
Since 12/9/02
Years Ahead
3.5
Percent
Long-Run Inflation Expectations
Michigan Survey
Philadelphia Fed Survey
TIIS Inflation
Compensation*
*The inflation rate that equalizes the price of the January 2012 TIIS and
the value of a portfolio of nominal securities with the same payments.
June July Aug. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan.
2002
5.6
Index Percent
S&P 500
Index
(Left Scale)
Ten-year Treasury
(Right Scale)
S&P 500 and the Ten-year Treasury
9
Percent
12-Month Forward Earnings-Price Ratio
for S&P 500 and 10-Year Treasury
Monthly
E/P ratio
Real 10-year Treasury yield*
* 10-year Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year expected
inflation.
+ Denotes the latest observation using daily prices and latest earnings
data from I/B/E/S.
Apr. June Aug. Oct. Dec.
2002
36
$US
Gold (Left Axis)
Oil (Right Axis)
Commodity Prices
participants have attributed a significant portion of the reduction in real yields to an
improvement in the liquidity of the ten-year TIIS following new auction supply.
Supporting that assessment, survey measures of inflation expectations were little
changed.  Major equity indexes have moved in a wide range over the past six weeks;
most now stand about ½ to 1 percent below their levels at the time of the December
meeting although the NASDAQ finished up about 1-1/2 percent.  Despite this
volatility, forward-looking measures of uncertainty inferred from options prices have
come off their December peaks.  Bank stock prices edged up over the intermeeting
period, as reports confirmed that most large banks remained quite profitable in the
fourth quarter.  Moreover, subordinated debt spreads for major banking corporations
have narrowed further, even those for banks that have been under scrutiny for their
possible involvement in accounting scandals.  Indeed, more broadly in the corporate
market, a sense of diminished concern about governance issues and perhaps also
some increased appetite for risk-taking spurred a substantial decline in yields across
the credit spectrum, further narrowing risk spreads.
(3) The foreign exchange value of the dollar declined about 4-1/4 percent
against major currencies on balance over the intermeeting period.  Market anxiety
about global risks appeared to be the key factor weighing on the dollar, but concerns
about the potential vulnerability of the dollar to a general pull-back of international
capital and the weakish cast of U.S. economic data further dampened market
sentiment.  The fall occurred despite continued signs of weak growth in both the euro
area and Japan and net declines of 20 to 30 basis points in yields on their long-term
government securities.  Broad measures of stock prices were down sharply in the euro
area and about unchanged in Japan.
Chart 2
Financial Market Indicators
Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct.
2000 2001 2002
350
Basis points
Ten-year AA
Ten-year BBB
Ten-year Swap
Spreads of Selected Private Long-Term Yields
July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2001 2002
1500
Basis Points Basis Points
High-Yield Debt Spreads
Telecom Sector
Master II
Sept. Jan. May Sept. Jan. May Sept. Jan.
2000 2001 2002
114
Index(8/31/00 = 100)
Broad Index
Major
Currencies Index
Other Important
Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Exchange Rates
Sept. Jan. May Sept. Jan. May Sept. Jan.
2000 2001 2002
3000
Basis Points
EMBI+ Index
Our Desk did not intervene.
. 2
(4) The dollar rose about 1 percent over the intermeeting period against an
index of the currencies of our other important trading partners, mainly reflecting a
6 percent gain against the Mexican peso.  Continued above-target inflation forced the
central bank of Mexico to tighten policy in January, its third tightening in four
months.  The ongoing general strike in Venezuela has sliced oil revenue and
contributed–along with worries about the possible curtailment of crude oil from
Iraq–to a sharp rise in the price of oil on global markets.  The Venezuelan bolivar
tumbled more than 30 percent against the dollar, to a new low, and Venezuela’s
EMBI+ spread widened 475 basis points.  In contrast, financial market sentiment
toward Brazil and Argentina improved on balance over the intermeeting period.
Market participants were encouraged by the new Brazilian administration’s signal of its
intention to run a tight fiscal policy and reform the pension system and by the
Brazilian central bank’s tightening to bring inflation back toward its target, but this
enthusiasm appears to have waned in recent days.  On net, the real rose more than
7 percent against the dollar and Brazil’s EMBI+ spread contracted 280 basis points.
The Argentine peso appreciated nearly 13 percent versus the dollar, and the extremely
high spread on Argentina’s debt narrowed 130 basis points, as Argentina negotiated
an agreement with the IMF that will allow it to stay current on its official obligations.
Stock markets in both Brazil and Argentina recorded sharp gains during the
intermeeting period.  In emerging Asia, tensions over the North Korean situation
weighed on South Korean equity prices, which fell nearly 14 percent.
(5) In recent months, business demands for credit have firmed a bit, albeit
from a quite anemic pace, while household borrowing has edged off its previous rapid
rate.  Nonfinancial corporations have raised funds in the bond market on net over the
past few months after paydowns in the third quarter, and runoffs of bank loans and
commercial paper have abated somewhat.  A smaller net percentage of banks
responding on the January Bank Lending Practices survey reported that demand for
business loans continued to weaken.  However, as in the past few surveys, banks on
net continued to indicate that they had tightened terms and standards on business
loans over the past three months.  In the household sector, growth of mortgage debt
has remained robust while revolving credit appears to have decelerated, perhaps
reflecting the only modest increase in sales over the holiday season and continued
substitution of mortgage credit for other forms of consumer credit.  The federal
budget seems poised to record a small surplus this month, but is projected to return to
deficit in February.
(6) M2 growth stepped down from a 7-3/4 percent rate in November to
about a 2-3/4 percent pace last month, considerably weaker than projected in the
December Bluebook.3  Much of the deceleration was concentrated in the liquid
components of M2, likely in part reflecting a falloff in the volume of mortgage
refinancings and the associated prepayments on mortgage-backed securities, which
boost liquid deposits for a time.  Even so, the drop-off in money growth runs counter
to the impetus that might be expected from the November policy easing.
Policy Alternatives
(7) The data that have become available since the December meeting have
made even starker the contrast in the economic outlook in the past few Greenbooks
between near-term sluggishness and longer-term strength.  Businesses’ apparent
reluctance to invest and willingness to keep even leaner inventory positions brought
output growth to a standstill last quarter.  But the continued resilience of household
spending, prospects for enhanced fiscal stimulus, an upward revision to estimated
structural productivity growth, and a weaker dollar have led the staff to raise its
projection for real GDP growth this year and next.  With the funds rate target
assumed to be unchanged until tightening begins in mid-2004, stock prices rising
steadily, and corporate bond yields edging down as risk spreads narrow (all about as
projected in the December Greenbook), output is expected to expand 3-1/2 percent
this year and 4-3/4 percent in 2004, around 1/4 and ½ percentage points faster,
respectively, than in the previous forecast.  While businesses have remained cautious
about new investment and hiring, they are apparently managing to make their existing
resources more productive, leading the staff to raise its assessment of structural
productivity.  As a result, actual GDP growth is projected to remain below that of its
upward-revised potential over the first half of this year, contributing to a rise in the
unemployment rate to 6-1/4 percent.  Thereafter, economic activity is seen as
accelerating noticeably, owing in part to a strengthening fiscal impetus–though the
fiscal stimulus that eventually materializes is projected to be smaller than the proposals
currently on the table.  The unemployment rate drops to just under 5-1/2 percent by
the end of next year, still about ½  percentage point above the staff’s NAIRU
estimate.  Inflation edges down a bit more than in the December Greenbook owing to
the greater resource slack and faster productivity growth, offset in part by the effects
of higher oil and non-oil import prices.  The core PCE inflation rate is only a tad
above 1 percent by the fourth quarter of 2004. (Some observations on monetary
policy and geopolitical tensions are offered in the box on the next page.)
Monetary Policy and Geopolitical Tensions
The phrase “geopolitical tensions” that has gained much currency of late is
meant to stand in for a variety of global trouble spots, most notably including a
possible war with Iraq, nuclear standoff on the Korean peninsula, a general strike in
Venezuela that has curtailed the flow of oil from that important supplier, and the
risk of terrorist attacks around the globe.  To put it mildly, economists cannot
provide much guidance on quantifying the probability of when these problems will
come to a head or how the public will react as they are played out.
The difficulties in specifying such uncertainties in a meaningful way lie at the
heart of why the staff forecast does not spell out a single scenario as to how the
situation in Iraq is settled.  But to the extent that the staff follows the lead of
markets–say, as in the forecast that oil prices will gradually recede from their
current levels–some average of potential scenarios is implicit in parts of the
Greenbook.
Over the years, a simple syllogism has served the Committee well in
explaining how an event essentially exogenous to its action influences its decisions,
whether that event be a major fiscal initiative, a change in the stance of monetary
policy abroad, or a significant swing in a key asset price.  The logic runs:
• Given the lags in the effect of monetary policy, a central bank should
be preemptive–that is, act in advance of anticipated major shocks to
the economic system;
• Setting policy preemptively requires basing decisions on a forecast of
aggregate demand and inflation pressures;
   
   • As a result, any event that affects the forecast influences monetary
Following this argument, the Committee would presumably want to put in place
policy that best positions the economy to absorb the effects of potential hostilities. 
But in that regard, the Committee has already responded to geopolitical tensions by
pulling the funds rate down to a historically accommodative level to counter the
effects of those tensions in exacerbating businesses’ reluctance to hire and spend.
Monetary Policy and Geopolitical Tensions (continued)
Thus, all else equal, the current stance of policy would not need to be
changed unless the Committee’s assessments of the probability of war and the likely
effect of war on the economy have changed significantly.  Perhaps the more
pertinent possibility is to consider how the Committee should act if it came to the
conclusion that war with Iraq was almost a certainty.  The problem is putting a sign
to the effect of war on aggregate demand and inflation pressures.  A lesson from
the Gulf War is that uncertainties may be resolved by military action, making it
possible that household and business confidence will be emboldened should it
become evident that the war will be brief and successful.  If so, an unleashing of
pent-up private demands fueled in part by the currently accommodative stance of
monetary policy (at least as judged by the level of the real federal funds rate relative
to estimates of its equilibrium) would likely combine with near-term fiscal impetus
to spur aggregate demand, particularly if added supplies on the world market sent
oil prices tumbling.  But the Committee might also envisage worse outcomes,
including a protracted stalemate, the use of weapons of mass destruction, or a
slashing of available oil supplies.  While the relative probabilities of such tail events
might heavily favor positive outcomes for spending, the expected cost to the
Committee’s objective of the adverse ones should they occur might be substantial.
This is a specific example of the general property that the Committee has
previously noted:  Heightened uncertainty makes forecasting difficult, implying that
it is harder to act preemptively.  The Committee may be even less inclined to key its
policy now on the expectation of a specific war scenario if it believed that at some
later date public confidence or fragile financial markets might need the boost
associated with significant policy ease.  That said, research on the zero bound to
nominal interest rates generally has the implication that it is better to ease early in
anticipation of an adverse shock than to “save your ammunition.”
(8) If the Committee shares the staff’s assessment of economic prospects, it
may want to keep policy unchanged at this meeting, even granted that the
unemployment rate seems poised to head higher and stay at an elevated level for
longer than had been expected in December.  Given the lags in monetary policy, the
Committee may view the near-term increase in economic slack as inevitable and be
satisfied that the existing policy stance will help to return economic growth to a pace
Uncertainty Regarding the Equilibrium Real Funds Rate
As in recent bluebooks, the shaded region in Chart 3 portrays the range of
estimates of equilibrium real federal funds rates shown in the table.  This range
reflects uncertainty across the two models used (FRB/US and a statistical model)
and across two estimation methods (a “one-sided” approach that uses only
historical data and a “two-sided” approach that takes account of data and
projections after the date of the estimate of the equilibrium rate).  However, the
shaded region understates the full extent of uncertainty because it does not
incorporate the imprecision with which specific models are estimated–that is,
parameter uncertainty.  For example, standard errors of the equilibrium rates
estimated using the “two-sided” statistical filter are about 1-1/4 percentage points. 
This yields a 70 percent confidence interval of 2-1/2 percentage points, wider than
the shaded region itself.  Moreover, the standard error for the “one-sided” filter
estimates, which probably better characterizes statistical uncertainty regarding the
current equilibrium rate estimate, implies a 3-1/2 percentage point confidence
interval.
above that of its potential by the second half of this year.  Indeed, with private yields
lower and the dollar weaker than in December, the Committee may be more
convinced that the existing financial stimulus will be adequate to achieve satisfactory
economic growth with low inflation, especially given the odds of more substantial
fiscal impetus.  While considerable uncertainty surrounds estimates of equilibrium
interest rates (as addressed in the box below), the current real funds rate is negative
and below nearly all current estimates of its equilibrium level.  Even though economic
slack persists through 2004, the Committee may place slim odds on the possibility that
disinflation would cumulate to the point that core inflation becomes unacceptably
Chart 3
Actual Real Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Estimated Equilibrium Real Rates
5
Percent
Actual Real Funds Rate
TIIS-Based Estimate
Historical Average: 2.70
  (1966Q1-2002Q4)
Current Rate
25 b.p. Easing
Equilibrium Real Funds Rate Estimates (Percent)
2001 2002H1 2002H2 2003Q1    ____ ______ ______ ______
December Bluebook
December Bluebook
December Bluebook
December Bluebook
December Bluebook
Statistical Filter
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data*
FRB/US Model
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data**
Treasury Inflation-Indexed Securities
* Also employs the staff projection for the current and next quarters.
** Also employs the staff projection for the current quarter.
low.  To date, inflation expectations have remained stable, and the response of
inflation to resource slack has been very sluggish.  Moreover, the Committee may
view the staff’s estimates of the natural rate of unemployment or of the trend of
structural productivity as too optimistic.  In that regard, the Committee may now see
upside risks (perhaps in the form of a sharp revival of private spending, greater-than-
expected fiscal stimulus, or a steeper dollar depreciation than is built into the staff
forecast) as well balanced with downside risks (including the failure of business
confidence to recover or more protracted tensions around the globe).
(9) Alternatively, the Committee may choose to ease policy 25 basis points
at this meeting to make faster progress than in the Greenbook baseline in reducing
economic slack, which runs along a higher path than in the prior forecast.  For
example, the policymaker perfect foresight simulations indicate that near-term easing
would bring the unemployment rate more quickly to its natural rate, even with a
1 percent core PCE inflation target and an element of interest-rate smoothing (see
chart).  The case for easing would be strengthened if the Committee believes that
current inflation is already at the lower end of its desirable range so that the further
disinflation in the Greenbook should be avoided.  Moreover, the Committee might be
concerned that inflation could well fall short of the path in the Greenbook absent an
easing, producing a firming in the real short-term interest rate.  The Committee might
put particular weight on that possibility if it believes that, owing to the global threats,
continued capital overhangs, and lingering business pessimism, the chance of further
sluggish investment and hiring remains unacceptably high.  In such a circumstance,
the Committee may see additional stimulus as needed to support overall spending
until business confidence can recover.  In addition, while the staff has read the
continuing weakness in the labor market as signaling higher structural productivity,
the Committee may place sizable odds on the view that the same data augur more
sluggish economic activity than in the Greenbook forecast.
(10)  According to futures markets and surveys, market participants see only
Chart 4
Policymaker Perfect Foresight Strategy for Monetary Policy
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Greenbook
1 percent inflation goal
1-1/2 percent inflation goal
Real Federal Funds Rate
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Civilian Unemployment Rate
The perfect foresight simulations extend the key assumptions of the staff outlook (other than the path for monetary policy) through 2008:
      ●      potential output grows at about 3-3/4 percent per year
      ●      the relative price of oil stabilizes at its end of 2004 level
      ●      the exchange value of dollar measured in real terms falls at a 3 percent clip
      ●      federal budget deficit relative to GDP declines moderately
very slim odds of an easing of policy at this meeting and only a few expect a change in
the balance-of-risks statement.  Market prices would therefore likely react little to a
Committee decision that confirmed those expectations, absent a change in the tone of
the announcement.  In contrast, a 25 basis point easing, even if associated with
continued balance in the risk assessment, would surprise markets and likely induce a
decline in short-term interest rates of roughly comparable magnitude.  Longer-term
yields and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would probably also fall, but the
declines would be tempered if equities rallied.  However, the odds of a significant
stock market rally would be reduced by any impression that the FOMC saw
appreciable further weakness in economic activity.
(11) Under the Greenbook forecast, the growth of total nonfinancial debt is
projected to slow to a 6-1/4 percent rate this quarter and to 5-1/2 percent in the next.
The government components, both federal and state and local, register the sharpest
deceleration over the period.4  Household borrowing is projected to moderate, as
purchases of cars and new homes finally slow from their brisk run.  Business
borrowing is projected to pick up over the first half of this year, with some restocking
of inventories, recovery of fixed investment, and resumption of merger activity.
Firms are expected once again to turn to the bond market for most of their external
financing needs in order to lock in longer-term financing at historically low interest
The Treasury Debt Ceiling
 
 Congress raised the debt limit to $6.4 trillion last summer, but the pace of
borrowing since then has pushed debt subject to the limit to within about $60 
billion of this ceiling (chart).  Staff estimates suggest that–absent Congressional 
action–the current ceiling will become binding by mid-February.  Thereafter, 
the Treasury would need to resort to the tactics it has followed in past 
episodes–calling in compensating balances at depository institutions to obtain 
more operating cash and temporarily disinvesting government pension funds--
to create room under the ceiling for the issuance of marketable debt.  Such 
maneuvers could create a funding cushion of perhaps $100 billion–enough to 
allow the Treasury to operate comfortably for a few weeks and perhaps until its 
cash is replenished by April tax receipts.
(12) Over the first half of this year, M2 is projected to grow at a pace closer
to that of nominal income, after having posted a 2-3/4 percent decline in its velocity
last year.  The moderation in M2 growth owes partly to the ebbing of the response of
money demand to the easing of last November and partly to the unwinding of the
boost to the aggregate from the latest wave of mortgage refinancings.  That said,
monthly growth rates of M2 are likely to be uneven in the period just ahead, in part
because the staff projects an unusually small buildup of deposits ahead of the April tax
date owing to another year of low individual tax payments.
M2 Growth Under Alternative Policy Actions
No Change*           Ease 25 bp
Monthly Growth Rates
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(13) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for
(1) the directive and (2) the “balance of risks” sentence to be included in the press
release issued after the meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around ___1-1/4 percent.
(2) “Balance of Risks” Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available,
the Committee believes that the risks [ARE WEIGHTED MAINLY
TOWARDS CONDITIONS THAT MAY GENERATE ECONOMIC
WEAKNESS]  [are balanced with respect to prospects for both goals]
[ARE WEIGHTED MAINLY TOWARD CONDITIONS THAT
MAY  GENERATE HEIGHTENED INFLATION PRESSURES] in
the foreseeable future.
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
4-week 3-month 6-month 3-month 1-month 2-year 5-year 10-year 30-year 5-year 10-year Fixed-rate ARM
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
p - preliminary data
Jan 
Feb 
Mar 
Apr 
May 
Jun  
Jul  
Aug  
Sep  
Oct  
Nov  
Dec
Nov  
Nov  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan
22
29
6
10
17
24
7
8
9
01   -- High
-- Low
02   -- High
-- Low
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Exhibit 1
Money Aggregates
Seasonally adjusted
nontransactions components
Annual growth rates(%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
  2000            
  2001            
  2002 p
Quarterly(average)
  2002-Q1         
       Q2         
       Q3         
       Q4 p
Monthly
  2001-Dec.       
                  
  2002-Jan.        
       Feb.        
       Mar.        
       Apr.        
       May         
       June        
       July        
       Aug.        
       Sep.        
       Oct.        
       Nov.        
       Dec. p
Levels ($billions):
Monthly
  2002-Aug.        
       Sep.        
       Oct.        
       Nov.        
       Dec. p
Weekly
  2002-Dec.  2     
             9     
            16     
            23     
            30p    
                   
  2003-Jan.  6p
-1.7
     6.8
     3.3
5.9
    -0.6
     2.4
     5.4
16.0
        
      3.7
      1.9
      3.0
    -11.2
      6.8
      6.9
      7.3
    -14.2
      8.1
      8.7
      1.2
     18.1
1183.2
   1191.2
   1199.8
   1201.0
   1219.1
1229.5
   1207.4
   1210.6
   1228.0
   1227.6
         
   1206.0
6.1
    10.3
     7.0
5.4
     3.3
    10.3
     8.3
2.1
      6.7
     -1.3
     -3.6
     14.4
      7.3
     12.7
      9.5
      5.3
     10.3
     10.0
      2.7
5680.3
   5705.5
   5754.6
   5802.4
   5815.6
5822.3
   5810.2
   5813.9
   5825.9
   5816.1
         
   5797.8
8.6
    11.3
     8.0
5.3
     4.4
    12.4
     9.0
1.7
      8.0
     -2.4
     -1.5
     16.5
      7.5
     14.2
     16.0
      4.6
     10.8
     12.3
     -1.3
4497.1
   4514.3
   4554.9
   4601.4
   4596.4
4592.8
   4602.8
   4603.3
   4597.9
   4588.5
         
   4591.9
17.4
    18.5
     5.2
3.1
     2.8
     4.8
     9.7
-8.3
      3.6
      0.3
      1.6
      6.5
      3.1
     -0.5
     13.6
      4.7
    -12.5
     41.4
     18.9
2611.0
   2621.3
   2594.1
   2683.5
   2725.7
2719.7
   2732.1
   2736.9
   2719.3
   2724.5
         
   2684.2
9.3
    12.8
     6.4
4.6
     3.1
     8.5
     8.7
-1.2
      5.7
     -0.8
     -2.0
     11.9
      6.0
      8.5
     10.8
      5.1
      3.2
     19.7
      7.8
8291.3
   8326.7
   8348.7
   8485.9
   8541.2
8542.0
   8542.3
   8550.8
   8545.2
   8540.6
         
   8482.0
Period
In M3 onlyIn M2
p    prel iminary
