Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Content last modified 04/01/2015.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
SEPTEMBER 17, 2009
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Financial market conditions continued to become more supportive of
economic activity over the intermeeting period.  Despite economic data that
appeared to be about in line with expectations, Treasury yields declined over
the period as statements by policy makers were seen as consistent with a flatter
path for interest rates and term premiums apparently fell.  Risk spreads
narrowed a bit further, and equity prices rose, on net, over the period.  On
balance, conditions in short-term funding markets showed some additional
signs of improvement, and borrowing from Federal Reserve facilities declined
further over the intermeeting period.  In contrast, bank credit remained very
weak, with the runoff particularly notable for business loans.  Moreover,
spreads on commercial and industrial loan rates increased further to a very high
Financial market conditions abroad also improved over the intermeeting
period.  Equity prices increased in most advanced foreign economies and
emerging markets, although they decreased in Japan and China.  With several
foreign central banks underscoring their commitments to keep interest rates
low for an extended period, yields on sovereign debt generally fell.  The dollar
depreciated against most major currencies.
MONETARY POLICY EXPECTATIONS AND TREASURY YIELDS
The Committee’s statement following the August FOMC meeting was
broadly in line with market expectations, and subsequent price action was
muted, with both nominal and real Treasury yields edging down.  Market
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 1 of 73
1 The effective federal funds rate averaged 0.15 percent over the intermeeting period.  
Trading volumes were roughly constant throughout the period, and the intraday 
standard deviation averaged 4 basis points.  Market participants speculated recently 
that the impending decline in the Treasury’s supplementary financing account and 
the resulting increase in reserve balances may put some downward pressure on the 
effective federal funds rate.
participants reportedly took particular note of the reiteration of the “extended
period” language, of the indication that “economic activity is leveling out,” and
of the decision to gradually slow the pace of Treasury securities purchases.
Investors also noted the continued discussion of reserve management tools
that could be employed in the context of a withdrawal of policy
accommodation.  The release of the minutes on September 2 also generated
little market reaction, although mention of the Committee’s discussion about
the possible tapering of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities (MBS)
purchases garnered attention, as did comments indicating that the economy
would likely recover only slowly in the second half of the year. 1
Futures quotes combined with the staff’s standard assumptions about term
premiums imply that policy expectations for the second half of 2010 and for
2011 shifted down about 30 to 55 basis points over the intermeeting period
(Chart 1).  Futures rates now suggest that investors do not expect the first
increase in the federal funds target rate until the second quarter of 2010, slightly
later than at the time of the last FOMC meeting and closer to expectations
obtained from survey data.  Indeed, the Desk’s September dealer survey results
indicated that all but 3 of the 17 respondents expect the first target rate increase
to occur during or after the third quarter of 2010.  This prediction was
essentially unchanged from the August survey; the lack of change – along with
a decline in policy uncertainty measured from implied volatility from options
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 73
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
2010 2011
0.0
3.0
Percent
September 17, 2009
August 11, 2009
Expected federal funds rates
Distribution of expected quarter of first rate increase
from the Desk’s Dealer Survey
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Recent: 17 respondents
Last FOMC: 17 respondents
2010 2011 2012
Source. Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
5
Percentage points
September 17, 2009
August 11, 2009
Months ahead
Eurodollar implied volatility term structure*
*Width of a 90 percent confidence interval computed from the term
structures for the expected federal funds rate and implied volatility.
Source. Bloomberg.
7
Percent
10-year
2-year
Nominal Treasury yields
Aug.
FOMC
Sept. 
 17
Next 5 years
5-to-10 year forward
Inflation compensation
Aug.
FOMC
Sept. 
 17
4.0
Percent
Philadelphia Fed
Michigan Survey
Survey measures of long-term inflation
Source. Survey of Professional Forecasters; Reuters/University of Michigan.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 73
on interest rate futures – suggests that at least part of the decline in the policy
path owed to lower term premiums, which are not captured in staff models.
Nominal Treasury yields declined, on net, across the curve over the
intermeeting period.  Against the backdrop of weak economic activity and a
benign outlook for inflation, investors may have simply concluded that a lower
path of interest rates would be more consistent with the likely pace of
economic recovery.  As with shorter-term rates, however, some of the decline
in longer-term yields may have reflected lower term premiums.
Yields on five-year Treasury inflation-protected securities fell more than
their nominal counterparts, leaving five-year inflation compensation 20 basis
points higher, while five-year inflation compensation five years ahead declined
by roughly 35 basis points.  The reduction in forward inflation compensation
unwound some of the run-up in this measure over the preceding intermeeting
period.  Staff models indicate that recent fluctuations in this measure mainly
reflect changes in liquidity and inflation risk premiums rather than changes in
inflation expectations.  Readings on long-term inflation expectations from
surveys were about flat over the period.
Auctions of $254 billion in Treasury coupon securities across the term
structure were conducted during the intermeeting period.  Most auctions were
well received, with stop-out rates close to or lower than when-issued rates just
prior to the auctions and bid-cover ratios near or above average.  Indirect
bidding participation continued to be strong, led by demand from foreign
accounts and investment funds.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 73
2 On September 9, the FDIC issued a notice of proposed rulemaking presenting an 
option for extending the Debt Guarantee Program (DGP), a component of the 
Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program.  Under the option, the DGP would expire 
as indicated in the current regulation; however, the FDIC would establish a limited 
six-month emergency guarantee facility under which the FDIC would guarantee 
senior unsecured debt issued on or before April 30, 2010.  Market participants 
reportedly noted that use of the emergency guarantee facility would likely be very 
limited as the high participation cost and stringent application requirements would 
attach significant stigma to its use.
CAPITAL MARKETS
Broad equity indexes rose about 6 to 10 percent, on net (Chart 2).  Implied
volatility as measured by the VIX ended the period a bit lower.  The equity risk
premium – measured by the staff’s estimate of the expected real equity return
over the next ten years relative to the real ten-year Treasury yield – edged down
over the period, but remains elevated.
Developments regarding banks were mixed over the period.  While equity
prices for large banks rose 10 percent, stock prices for regional and smaller
banks were about unchanged.  Market participants reportedly continue to be
concerned about smaller institutions’ exposure to the commercial real estate
sector.  In addition, 21 depository institutions failed over the intermeeting
period, likely contributing further to the reduction in investor confidence in
smaller banks.  Meanwhile, CDS spreads for banks were about unchanged on
balance over the period.  Despite the fact that spreads on nonguaranteed senior
unsecured debt increased somewhat over the period, issuance continued in
August at roughly the rate posted in July.  While none of the debt issued in
August carried an FDIC guarantee, so far in September, one firm, Citigroup,
has issued $5 billion in FDIC-guaranteed debt.2
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 73
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
2008 2009
 20
Jan. 02, 2008 = 100
S&P 500
Bank ETF
Insurance ETF
Equity prices
Aug.
FOMC
Sept. 
 17
100
Percent
Implied volatility on S&P 500 (VIX)
Source. Chicago Board Options Exchange.
Aug.
FOMC
Sept. 
 17
2000
Basis points Basis points
10-year BBB (left scale)
10-year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate bond spreads
Aug.
FOMC
Sept. 
 17
100
$Billions
Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sept.
FDIC-guaranteed
  Non-guaranteed
Senior unsecured debt issuance
2008                                            2009
Note. September issuance is through September 17.
Source. Bloomberg and Staff estimates.
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug.
2009
7
Percent
FRM
MBS yield
On-the-run 10-yr treasury
Aug.
FOMC
Selected interest rates
Sept. 
 16
Sept. 
 17
40
$Billions
H2 Q1
Gross ABS Issuance
Monthly Rate Credit Card
Auto
Student Loan
*Actual issuance as of September 11, 2009.
Note. Auto ABS include car loans and leases and financing for buyers of
motorcycles.
Source. Inside MBS & ABS, Merrill Lynch, Bloomberg, and the Federal
Reserve.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 73
In the broader corporate bond market, risk spreads edged down further
over the period.  While indexes of investment-grade corporate CDS spreads
ended the period little changed on balance, those of speculative-grade CDS
spreads narrowed appreciably.  Municipal bond yields declined, on net,
resulting in very little change in the ratio of municipal bond yields to those on
comparable-maturity Treasury securities.
The new-issue market for commercial mortgage-backed securities remained
closed as conditions in the commercial real estate sector continued to be quite
weak.  Commercial property prices fell further in the second quarter, reaching a
level about one-third below their peak in 2007.  Delinquencies on commercial
mortgages held by banks continued to rise in the second quarter, and the
delinquency rate on securitized commercial mortgages remained near its
historical high in July.  Commercial real estate sales ticked up in August but
remained well below historical norms.  Indexes of CDS spreads on AAA
tranches of commercial mortgages were little changed on net, over the
intermeeting period.
Interest rates on 30-year conforming fixed-rate residential mortgages
retraced a portion of the increase recorded in the late spring and ended the
intermeeting period at about 5 percent, down roughly 20 basis points over the
intermeeting period.  Yields on agency MBS also trended down in line with the
yields on Treasury securities.  Reflecting the lower interest rates on mortgages
early this spring, issuance of MBS by the housing-related GSEs remained very
strong in July.
In the consumer sector, spreads on AAA-rated consumer-loan asset-backed
securities (ABS) have now retraced almost entirely the run-up seen over the
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 73
past year.  Delinquencies on consumer loans remained elevated, and charge-
offs on such loans at commercial banks increased further in the second quarter.
Gross issuance of consumer-loan ABS proceeded at a pace well above that
recorded earlier in the year, and issuance (at least in some sectors) appeared to
be somewhat less reliant on Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility
(TALF) financing.  Despite the improved conditions in ABS markets, overall
consumer credit registered a noteworthy decline in July, contracting at a 10½
percent annual rate, after falling at a 6½ pace in the second quarter.
MARKET FUNCTIONING
Functioning and liquidity improved modestly or held steady in most
financial markets over the intermeeting period.  Spreads between Libor and
overnight index swaps (OIS) at the three- and six-month maturities narrowed
somewhat further; however, tiering in the interbank market reportedly
remained substantial (Chart 3).  Bid-asked spreads and haircuts for most types
of repurchase agreements were little changed, and no bids were submitted at
either of the Term Securities Lending Facility auctions during the period.
Spreads on A2/P2-rated commercial paper and AA-rated asset-backed
commercial paper fluctuated near the bottom of the ranges established since
the beginning of the crisis.  Average fitting errors in staff yield curve models for
nominal Treasury issues were little changed, but those for TIPS securities
declined further.  Trading volume for Treasury securities was little changed, but
remained relatively low.
Some improvements in functioning and liquidity were also evident in the
corporate bond market.  The median estimated bid-asked spreads for both
speculative- and investment-grade bonds edged lower, and the average range of
CDS dealer contributions narrowed a bit further.  However, the basis between
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 73
Chart 3
Market Functioning
Jan. May Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct.
2007 2008 2009
400
Basis points
1-month
3-month
6-month
Spreads of Libor over OIS
Daily Aug.
FOMC
Sept. 
 17
July Nov. Mar. July Nov. Mar. July
2007 2008 2009
700
Basis points
ABCP
A2/P2
Sept. 
 15
Aug.
FOMC
Spreads on 30-day commercial paper
70
Basis points
10-year note
Treasury on-the-run premium
Monthly average
Aug.
FOMC
7
$Billions
Trading volume (left scale)
Turnover (right scale)
On-the-run Treasury market volume and turnover
Monthly average
Aug.
FOMC
Jan. May Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct.
2007 2008 2009
80
Basis points
Investment-grade: Financial
Daily
Average range of CDS dealer contributions
Aug.
FOMC
Source. Markit.
Sept. 
 16
June Aug. Oct. Dec. Feb. Apr. June Aug.
2008 2009
700
Basis points
JPMorgan US liquid index*
Investment-grade CDX
Daily Aug.
FOMC
Sept. 
 16
*Spread to swaps.
Source. JPMorgan.
Cash-synthetic spread in corporate bond market
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 73
the CDX investment-grade index of CDS spreads and investment-grade
corporate bond spreads – a rough gauge of possible arbitrage opportunities in
corporate debt markets – was little changed at a level that remains somewhat
high by historical standards.
Total Federal Reserve assets increased about $135 billion over the
intermeeting period as increased holdings of securities outpaced declines in
credit supplied through liquidity and credit facilities.  (See box entitled “Balance
Sheet Developments during the Intermeeting Period.)  Reflecting further
improvements in market conditions, the Federal Reserve announced that the
amount offered at the September Term Auction Facility (TAF) auctions would
be reduced another $25 billion to $75 billion.  For the two auctions that took
place over the intermeeting period, propositions continued to fall short of the
amounts offered, and the auctions stopped out at their minimum bid rates.
The TALF was the only facility to register an increase over the period.  The
$6.5 billion in loans issued under the September 3 TALF operation supported
roughly $16.8 billion in ABS issuance; this ratio is the lowest ratio of TALF
support to issuance to date.  The low ratio partly reflects the narrowing of ABS
spreads.  In addition, a large proportion of the deals were backed by prime auto
loans, which have tended to rely less on TALF financing.
BANK CREDIT, DEBT, AND MONEY
Total assets at commercial banks decreased at an average annual rate of
almost 12 percent in July and August, as declines in bank credit more than
offset a significant increase in cash assets that owed to higher levels of reserves.
Indeed, bank credit continued to contract rapidly in August, declining at nearly
an 11 percent annual rate.  As in July, all major loan components decreased.
Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans dropped at a 28 percent annual pace
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 73
Balance Sheet Developments during the Intermeeting Period
Since the August FOMC meeting, the Federal Reserve’s total assets edged up 
to about $2.1 trillion.1  As a result of ongoing asset purchases, securities held 
outright increased by $191 billion, which more than offset the $60 billion decline in 
lending through liquidity and credit facilities.
The Open Market Desk purchased $34 billion in Treasury securities, $15 billion 
in agency debt securities, and $142 billion in agency mortgage-backed securities 
(MBS) during the intermeeting period.2,3  In contrast, most of the System’s other 
liquidity and credit programs contracted further, reportedly due to improvements in 
global bank funding markets and market participants’ desire to reduce their reliance 
on government sponsored programs for funding.  Term auction credit declined $38 
billion, foreign central bank liquidity swaps declined $14 billion, and primary credit 
declined $5 billion.  Lending under the Primary Dealer Credit Facility remained at 
zero, and securities lent through the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF)—
which do not affect on-balance-sheet assets because the Federal Reserve retains 
ownership of the securities lent—fell to zero.
Use of facilities supporting money funds and the commercial paper market also 
declined as a result of improvements in market conditions.  Credit extended by the 
Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) decreased $15 billion.  Loans made 
under the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity 
Facility (AMLF) fell by $35 million to $79 million.  Term Asset-Backed Securities 
Loan Facility (TALF) loans increased $14 billion over the intermeeting period.  
Roughly $7 billion of this increase represents loans extended under the TALF 
operation conducted on August 6, 2009 and settled on August 13, 2009.  The two 
TALF operations conducted during the intermeeting period were also of relatively 
modest size.  The first loan subscription, totaling $2.1 billion, funded legacy 
commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS).  The second loan subscription, 
totaling $6.5 billion, financed issuance of asset-backed securities collateralized by 
auto, credit card, student, small business, and mortgage-servicing-advance loans.
1 These data are through September 16, 2009. 
2 The figures for securities holdings reflect only trades that have settled.  Over the intermeeting period, the 
Open Market Desk committed to purchase, but has not settled, an additional $113 billion of MBS, on net. 
3 On August 17, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York announced that it reduced the number of external 
investment managers for the agency mortgage-backed securities purchase program from four to two; one 
investment manager provides trade execution and the other provides analysis.  The first settlement with one 
external investment manager went smoothly.  On September 1, the Open Market Desk began to accept on-
the-run agency debt securities for purchase in order to mitigate market dislocations and promote overall 
market functioning.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 73
On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, the U.S. Treasury’s 
general account decreased $30 billion.  The Treasury’s supplementary financing 
account remained unchanged at $200 billion, but the Treasury announced its 
intention to reduce supplementary financing balances over the next several weeks 
to preserve flexibility in conducting debt-management policy as outstanding debt 
approaches the federal debt ceiling.  Reserve balances of depository institutions 
increased $101 billion over the intermeeting period.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 73
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet 
Billions of dollars
Change 
since last 
FOMC
Current 
(09/16/2009)
Maximum 
level
Date of 
maximum
Total assets 133 2,143 2,256 12/17/08
Selected assets: 
Liquidity programs for financial firms -57 286 1,247 11/06/08
Market Desk committed to purchase an additional $113 billion of MBS, on net.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 73
(Chart 4).  Market commentary suggests bank loan demand remained weak in
part because proceeds from a portion of high-yield bond issuance were used to
repay leveraged loans.  In addition, according to the results of the Survey of
Terms of Business Lending conducted in August, the weighted-average spread
of C&I loan rates over comparable-maturity market rates increased further.
However, the average spread on loans to the subset of lower-risk borrowers
edged down.  The contraction in commercial real estate lending intensified last
month, with large decreases posted by both large and small domestic banks.
Some large banks reported substantial originations of residential mortgages, but
that development was more than offset by increased sales of such loans to the
GSEs, resulting in a 15 percent annualized decrease in on-balance-sheet
holdings in August.  Home equity and consumer loans also continued to fall.
Consistent with the recent runoff in total assets, banks shed managed liabilities
again in August.
Debt of the private domestic nonfinancial sector is estimated to have run
off at an annual rate of 1¾ percent in the second quarter, as the levels of both
household and nonfinancial business debt fell.  Household mortgage debt
declined at an annual rate of about 1½ percent in the second quarter while
nonmortgage consumer credit shrank at an annual rate of 6½ percent.  On net,
nonfinancial debt financing likely stepped down again in August, as sizable
issuance of nonfinancial bonds was more than offset by the decrease in C&I
lending.  Net issuance of commercial paper was about flat as firms apparently
continued to substitute toward longer-term financing.  Federal government
debt growth remained elevated, while state and local government borrowing
picked up with the improved conditions in the municipal bond market.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 73
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Feb May Aug Nov Feb May Aug Nov Feb May Aug
2007 2008 2009
Bank credit
Jan. 2008 = 100
Monthly average
Source. Federal Reserve.
210
Basis Points
Source: Survey of Terms of Business Lending.
*The spread over market interest rate on an instrument of comparable
maturity adjusted for changes in non-price loan characteristics.
NBER
peak
C&I loan rate spreads*
Quarterly Q3
Growth of debt of nonfinancial sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
2007
2008
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3p
4.1
4.8
4.1
-0.2
-1.8
-1.5
-0.5
-1.7
-1.1
-1.7
-0.3
Government__________
6.1
17.5
6.7
4.4
28.6
26.7
18.0
23.2
17.0
Growth of debt of household sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
credit
Home
mortgage
Source. Flow of Funds, Federal Reserve G.19 release.
C&I loans
Commercial paper
Bonds
Changes in selected components of debt of
nonfinancial business sector
2006 2007 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 July Aug
2008 2009
Monthly rate
Growth of M2
Source. Federal Reserve.
2006 H1 H2 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 July Aug
2007 2008 2009
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 73
Overall, domestic nonfinancial sector debt is estimated to have increased at
an annual rate of 4¾ percent in the second quarter, up from 4 percent in the
first quarter.  In the third quarter, domestic nonfinancial debt is projected to
expand at annual rate of 4 percent, with household and nonfinancial business
debt contracting further and government borrowing remaining rapid.
The contraction in M2 steepened in August.  (See box “Why Is Money
Growth So Weak?”)  The expansion in liquid deposits slowed further, and
runoffs in small time deposits and retail money market mutual funds
accelerated, likely in part a result of investors’ increased appetite for riskier
assets as the economy shows signs of recovery.  Currency expanded in recent
months at much slower rates than in the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first
quarter of 2009.  Staff estimates suggest this deceleration caused by a
moderation in foreign demand for U.S. banknotes coupled with solid domestic
demand.  The monetary base increased at about a 9 percent annual rate on
balance over July and August as Federal Reserve asset purchases more than
offset declining usage of most Federal Reserve liquidity and credit facilities.
FOREIGN DEVELOPMENTS
The trade-weighted index of the exchange value of the dollar against the
major foreign currencies has declined 2½ percent since August 10.  Most of
this depreciation occurred recently and may be attributable in part to investors’
reduced perceptions of risk.  In contrast, the exchange value of the dollar
against the currencies of our other important trading partners has increased
slightly over the period, as the dollar has appreciated 2½ percent against the
Mexican peso.  This appreciation came after the Bank of Mexico signaled that it
would scale back its foreign exchange intervention.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 73
Why Is Money Growth So Weak?
M2 grew at a tepid pace in the second quarter of this year and contracted 
appreciably over July and August. Steep declines in small time deposits and retail 
money market mutual funds (MMMFs) accounted for the contraction; liquid 
deposits and currency, while still growing moderately, also decelerated from their 
earlier pace.  As shown in the figure, this recent behavior follows robust money 
growth late last year and early in 2009 (the solid line).  In general, the recent 
weakness (and prior strength) of M2 growth cannot be explained by a model based 
on the historical relationships of M2 with nominal income and opportunity costs 
(model predictions portrayed by the dashed line).  Instead, two factors appear to 
account for the recent low growth.  First, declining bank credit and revised rules 
regarding deposit insurance premiums have likely led banks to bid less aggressively 
for deposits than they had in the past.1  Second, with financial markets healing, the 
appetite for risk among investors evidently recovering, and returns on M2 assets 
quite low, households are apparently reallocating their wealth away from the 
relative safety and liquidity of M2 assets.
1 As of the second quarter of 2009, the FDIC began including brokered deposits in excess of 10 percent of an 
institution’s domestic deposits in the metrics used to price an institution’s deposit insurance.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 73
Table 1: Growth of M2 and Major Components 
(percent, seasonally adjusted annual rate)
M2  Liquid 
Deposits1
Small Time
Deposits
Retail 
MMMF
2008:Q1  8.4  6.9  2.0  30.7  ‐1.2
2008:Q2  5.6  6.8  ‐3.1  12.6  3.1
2008:Q3  4.0  3.2  11.6  ‐2.8  7.1
2008:Q4  14.3  9.8  35.5  9.3  13.7
2009:Q1  12.9  20.6  0.2  ‐7.6  16.0
2009:Q2  2.6  12.6  ‐16.3  ‐23.9  6.9
July – August 2009  ‐5.2  6.0  ‐29.6  ‐43.0  3.7
Memo:  Level, 
August 2009 ($B)
8,298  5,317  1,218  899  858
1 Includes non‐interest bearing transaction accounts (demand deposits), other 
checkable deposits, and savings accounts (including money market deposit 
accounts, or MMDAs).
2 Funds swept from noninterest-bearing transaction accounts to noninterest-bearing savings accounts are also 
covered by the TLGP.
As shown in Table 1, the expansion in liquid deposits, the largest component 
of M2, picked up late last year amid the turmoil in financial markets.  Growth 
remained robust through the second quarter of 2009 as the FDIC’s Temporary 
Liquidity Guarantee Program (TLGP), which provides unlimited insurance on non-
interest-bearing transaction accounts at participating banks, likely made such 
deposits especially attractive to depositors during the crisis.2  Small time deposits 
also surged in late 2008, as some depository institutions bid aggressively for these 
funds amid strained conditions in wholesale funding markets.  Later, as conditions 
in funding markets began to improve, and as banks began to shrink their balance 
sheets, rates offered on these deposits fell and small time deposits began to 
contract.  Similarly, as MMMF rates hovered near zero, balances at such funds ran 
off sharply.  Thus, the shift away from M2 assets is likely being boosted by the 
exceptionally low rates paid on M2 deposits.  Notably, the outflows from M2 have 
coincided with robust flows into long-term mutual funds, especially bond funds.
The recent decline in M2 deposits is consistent with commercial banks’ 
reduced funding needs.  Loans on banks’ books have contracted steeply this year in 
response to weak loan demand and tight lending standards and terms, and banks’ 
securities holdings have expanded only modestly.  As a result, banks have pared
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 73
their managed liabilities considerably over the course of the year, and M2 deposits 
at banks have edged back, on average, since mid-year.
Table 2: Growth of Commercial Bank Sources and Uses of Funds 
(percent, seasonally adjusted annual rate)
Sources  Uses  Memo: 
Total 
Assets5
M2 
Deposits1
Managed 
Liabilities2
All 
Other3
Loans  Securities
All
2008:Q1  3.9  11.9  25.1  12.4  0.5  20.6  11.3
2008:Q2  3.9  3.5  ‐9.3  1.5  1.2  6.2  0.9
2008:Q3  7.9  3.0  ‐6.4  2.3  7.3  9.3  3.1
2008:Q4  18.8  37.7  6.2  2.0  18.1  104.1  22.9
2009:Q1  14.5  ‐25.5  3.2  ‐7.1  ‐0.3  8.9  ‐2.6
2009:Q2  9.1  ‐15.2  ‐12.3  ‐6.6  6.4  ‐5.6  ‐3.8
July – August 2009  ‐0.3  ‐15.1  ‐33.6  ‐18.2  7.6  ‐14.2  ‐11.7
Memo:  Level, 
August 2009 ($B)
5,653  3,890  2,264  6,886  2,315  2,798  11,807
1 Includes liquid and small time deposits at commercial banks.  Based on weekly data reported on 
Wednesdays that exclude primary obligations.
2 Includes large time deposits, net due to related foreign offices, and nonbank borrowing (including from 
the Federal Reserve).
3 Includes borrowings from banks, some trading liabilities, and equity. 
4 Includes interbank loans, cash (including reserve balances), trading assets, and other assets. 
5 Unlike loans, total assets are net of banks’ allowance for loan and lease losses, which currently stands 
at about $192 billion.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 73
Headline stock indexes in Europe increased about 9 percent, which market
participants partly attributed to upbeat economic data releases, but the Japanese
stock market was down about 3 percent.  CDS spreads on emerging market
sovereign debt declined moderately, and equity prices in most major emerging
market economies rose.  One exception is China’s A-shares, which declined
about 6 percent.  Part of this decline was associated with media reports that
authorities were taking actions to moderate the pace of loan growth in China.
Despite the release of upbeat economic indicators, expected policy rates
over the next two years and sovereign yields declined in most major industrial
economies (Chart 5).  Market participants attributed part of these movements
to major central banks emphasizing their commitments to keeping interest rates
low.  The European Central Bank left its main policy rate unchanged at 1
percent, as expected, but surprised markets by announcing that it will offer
banks twelve-month funds at only 1 percent at its upcoming long-term
refinancing operation.  The Bank of England (BoE) released its quarterly
Inflation Report, which market participants interpreted as more pessimistic
than had been expected on the outlook for recovery.  In connection with the
release, Governor King expressed concern that the remuneration of all reserves
at Bank Rate, introduced along with its quantitative easing program in March,
created a disincentive for banks to turn those reserves into other assets.  Some
market participants expect the BoE to revert to a framework in which reserves
exceeding a particular level are remunerated at a penalty.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 73
Chart 5
International Financial Indicators
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Nominal ten-year government bond yields
Source. Bloomberg.
Aug.
FOMC
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock price indexes
Industrial countries
Dec. 31, 2006 = 100
Source. Bloomberg.
Aug.
FOMC
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock price indexes
Emerging market economies
Dec. 31, 2006 = 100
Source. Bloomberg.
Aug.
FOMC
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal trade-weighted dollar indexes
Dec. 31, 2006 = 100
Source. FRBNY and Bloomberg.
Aug.
FOMC
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 73
3 The current Greenbook includes projections for 2011 in the medium-term outlook 
and 2014 in the long-term outlook for the first time.
4 Purchases of $300 billion in Treasury securities are assumed to be completed by the 
end of October; $150 billion in agency debt and $1.25 trillion in agency MBS are 
projected to be finished by the end of the first quarter of 2010.
ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
Information received since the August meeting provides further evidence
that economic activity has begun to recover from its severe downturn.  The
staff has revised up its forecast based on the accumulation of better-than-
expected data on economic activity.  With the sharp decline in residential
investment apparently over and business spending on equipment and software
likely to recover sooner than previously anticipated, the staff now anticipates
that real GDP growth will increasingly exceed the growth of potential output
over the second half of this year and through 2011.3  As a consequence, the
unemployment rate is projected to decline steadily in 2010 and 2011, although
it remains nearly 8 percent at the end of the forecast period.  Core and headline
PCE inflation are projected to slow, reaching 1 percent in 2011.
As in August, the staff outlook assumes that the federal funds rate will
remain at its current level through 2011.  The staff has made no change in its
assumptions about the sizes of the Federal Reserve’s large-scale asset purchase
(LSAP) programs.  However, agency debt and agency MBS purchases are
assumed to be completed a quarter later than in the August Greenbook.4  The
staff continues to anticipate that fiscal policy will contribute about 1 percentage
point, on average, to real GDP growth in 2009 and 2010, but will be roughly
neutral in 2011.  In response to favorable news on the housing market in recent
months, the staff now projects markedly less house price depreciation through
next year than in the August Greenbook, and a slight appreciation in 2011.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 73
The staff projects longer-term Treasury yields and 30-year fixed mortgage rates
to edge up through 2011, with little change in the spread between the two rates.
In contrast, yields on investment-grade corporate bonds are projected to
decline substantially, as improvements in financial markets and the economic
outlook lead to a ¾ percentage point narrowing in risk spreads by the end of
2011.  Similarly, the equity risk premium is expected to continue to decline over
coming quarters and stock prices are projected to rise at a brisk annual rate of
about 14 percent over the next two years.  The availability of bank credit to
firms and households is expected to increase over time but remain tight by
historical standards.  The real foreign exchange value of the dollar is assumed
to fall at a 2½ percent annual rate over 2010 and 2011.  Based on readings from
futures markets, the staff expects oil prices to rise gradually to about $77 per
barrel for West Texas Intermediate by the end of 2011; this path is about $5
per barrel lower than in the August Greenbook.
Against this backdrop, the staff now expects real GDP to grow at an
annual rate of about 2¾ percent during the second half of 2009, compared
with 1¼ percent in the August Greenbook, and to expand about 3½ percent in
2010 and about 4½ percent in 2011.  The unemployment rate is projected to
peak at nearly 10 percent late this year and then to decline to about 9¼ percent
by the end of 2010, which is about ½ percentage point lower than in the
August Greenbook.  Unemployment is projected to decline further over 2011
to slightly under 8 percent—still well above the staff’s estimate of the NAIRU,
which has been revised up to 5¼ percent over the forecast horizon.  In light of
the current and prospective level of economic slack, as well as inflation
expectations that are expected to remain reasonably well anchored, the staff
projects core PCE inflation to slow to 1¼ percent in the second half of this
year and to about 1 percent in 2010 and 2011.  With energy prices rising at a
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 73
diminishing rate, total PCE inflation is projected to be about 2 percent in the
second half of 2009, 1¼ percent in 2010, and 1 percent in 2011.
Looking further ahead, the staff assumes that the funds rate will rise
steadily starting in early 2012, climbing to about 2½ percent by the end of that
year and to 3¾ percent in 2013, before leveling out at 4 percent in 2014.  The
staff forecasts that real GDP will grow nearly 5 percent in 2012 but then
decelerate to about 2¾ percent by 2014.  With GDP growth outpacing growth
in potential output, which is forecast to average about 2¾ percent per year over
this period, the unemployment rate is projected to fall rapidly for a time before
stabilizing at about 4¾ percent, close to the staff’s estimate of the NAIRU in
2014.  Inflation expectations remain well anchored and as growth returns to
trend, total PCE inflation slowly rises to about 1¾ percent by 2014, still below
the inflation objectives implicit in the majority of policymakers’ longer-run
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 73
5 If the previous version of the FRB/US model is used, the Greenbook-consistent r* 
measure for the current Bluebook is -2.2 percent.  This means that 50 basis points 
of the rise in r* are due to the improved outlook and 30 basis points are due to 
changes in the in the FRB/US model.  The Greenbook-consistent r* measure using 
the prior vintage of the EDO model is -3.3 percent, implying that 170 basis points 
of the rise in the EDO-based r* come from the better outlook and 20 basis points 
from changes in the EDO model.
MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES
As shown in Chart 6, estimates of r*—the value of the real federal funds
rate that would close the output gap within twelve quarters—have risen
substantially since the August Bluebook.  Though all the estimates of short-run
r* remain negative, they are no longer uniformly well below the actual real
federal funds rate.  The different r* estimates have increased for various
reasons, but all were substantially boosted by the effects of stronger-than-
expected incoming economic data on the staff assessment of the current level
of aggregate demand, and its implications for future slack in the various
models.  The Greenbook-consistent measures of short-run r* from the
FRB/US and EDO models stand at -1.9 and -3.1 percent, respectively, while
the FRB/US and EDO model-based estimates of short-run r* are -2.4 and -0.3
percent, respectively.  The changes in the FRB/US and EDO r* estimates
largely reflect the improved economic outlook implied by incoming data but
they also have been affected by the respecification and reestimation of the
models that followed the comprehensive NIPA revision in July.5  The estimate
of short-run r* produced by the single-equation model is now -1.3 percent,
about 100 basis points higher than in the August Bluebook, while the r*
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 73
Chart 6
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
8
Percent
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
The actual real funds rate based on lagged core inflation
Range of model-based estimates
70 Percent confidence interval
90 Percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure (FRB/US)
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
Single-equation model -1.3 -2.4
Small structural model -1.1 -3.0
EDO model -0.3 -2.3
FRB/US model -2.4 -4.1
Confidence intervals for four model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval -3.0 to 0.4
90 percent confidence interval -3.9 to 1.3
Greenbook-consistent measures
EDO model -3.1 -5.0
FRB/US model -1.9 -2.7
Medium-Run Measures
Single-equation model 1.3 (1.2
Small structural model 1.3 (1.5
Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval (0.4 to 2.2
90 percent confidence interval -0.2 to 2.9
TIPS-based factor model (2.0 2.0
Actual real federal funds rate -1.2 -1.5
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 73
6 The single-equation and small structural models have not changed since the August 
Bluebook.
7 In the current projection, the staff estimate of the NAIRU is 5¼ percent, a 25 basis 
point increase over the previous Greenbook estimate.
estimate based on the small structural model is -1.1 percent, about 200 basis
points higher than in the previous Bluebook.6
Chart 7 shows the results of optimal control simulations of the FRB/US
model.  These simulations use the extended staff forecast as a starting point.
Policymakers are assumed to place equal weight on keeping core PCE inflation
close to a 2 percent inflation goal, on keeping unemployment close to the
NAIRU, and on minimizing changes in the federal funds rate.  As in recent
Bluebooks, optimal monetary policy under these simulations is constrained by
the zero lower bound, with the nominal funds rate remaining at the lower
bound until early 2012 (black solid lines).  The unemployment rate at the end
of 2011 is well above the NAIRU, and core PCE inflation is appreciably below
the 2 percent goal.7
Chart 7 also displays the optimal control results that would be obtained if
the nominal funds rate were not constrained by the zero bound (blue dashed
lines).  Under this unconstrained policy, the funds rate falls to about -4¾
percent by late next year and does not turn positive until 2012.  The
unconstrained funds rate in 2010 and 2011, although negative, is consistently
more than 100 basis points above that shown in the August Bluebook,
reflecting the staff’s stronger forecast of aggregate demand.  The improved
economic outlook and the reestimation of the FRB/US model imply an
appreciably faster decline in the unemployment rate than in the previous
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 73
8 Real economic activity is considerably more sensitive to interest rate movements in 
the reestimated version of FRB/US model than in the previous version.  The model 
revision thus contributes to a faster decline in the unemployment rate in the optimal 
control simulations.
Bluebook, while the unconstrained optimal path for core PCE inflation in 2010
and 2011 is broadly similar to that shown in the previous Bluebook.8
Also consistent with the improved outlook, the outcome-based policy rule
prescribes a higher path for the federal funds rate than in the August Bluebook,
as shown in Chart 8, with the rate starting to move above the effective lower
bound in 2011Q4, one quarter earlier than in August.  In contrast, based on the
staff’s standard assumption about term premiums, market participants’
expectations regarding the path of the federal funds rate over the next few
years appear to have shifted down by about 50 basis points.  However, as noted
earlier, at least part of the apparent decline in investors’ expectations may
reflect a decline in term premiums.
The lower panel of Chart 8 provides near-term prescriptions from simple
policy rules.  For the constrained rules, the current prescriptions are uniformly
at the effective lower bound, except for the prescription from the first-
difference rule.  The first-difference rule prescribes that the funds rate be raised
when there is an increase in expected output growth.  The rule therefore calls
for an increase in the funds rate as the recovery gains strength.  The right-hand
columns show the prescriptions that would be implied by these rules if the
lower bound was not imposed.  While the first-difference rule prescribes a
positive interest rate, the remaining rules’ unconstrained prescriptions are for
negative policy rates.  In every case, however, these prescribed values are less
negative than in the previous Bluebook, consistent with the staff’s improved
assessment of the outlook.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 73
POLICY ALTERNATIVES
This Bluebook presents three policy alternatives—labeled A, B, and C—for
the Committee’s consideration.  Table 1 gives an overview of key elements of
these alternatives; draft statements are provided on the subsequent pages.
Each of the three alternatives maintains the 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate and the previously announced plan to purchase $300
billion of Treasury securities by the end of October, but the alternatives differ
with respect to the size and timing of the Federal Reserve’s purchases of agency
MBS and agency debt.  Under Alternative A, the Committee would increase its
purchases of agency MBS to “a total of $1.5 trillion” (from the previous “up to
$1.25 trillion”) and would extend the time over which purchases would be
completed through the second quarter of 2010.  The increase would provide
additional macroeconomic stimulus, while the extension would permit the pace
of transactions to be tapered until completion to promote a smooth transition
in markets (although this tapering is not explicitly noted in the statement).
Language about the amounts and timing of agency debt purchases (up to $200
billion by the end of the year) would be as in the August statement.  Alternative
B would essentially maintain the current stance of monetary policy but specify a
tapering strategy for the purchases of agency MBS and agency debt: The pace
would gradually slow, with purchases completed either by the end of the first
quarter of 2010 or, in a variant of this alternative, by sometime in the second
quarter of 2010.  In recognition of the pending completion of Treasury security
purchases and the gradual scaling down of the Federal Reserve’s liquidity
programs, Alternative B notes that the Federal Reserve will use “a range of
tools” rather than “all available tools” to promote economic recovery and
preserve price stability.  Under Alternative C, the size of agency MBS purchases
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 73
would be reduced to “about $1 trillion” and that of agency debt to “about $150
billion,” from their previously announced maximums, and the pace of
purchases would be gradually reduced until their completion by year-end.
Alternative C also makes more explicit the conditionality of the funds rate
target on the evolution of the economic outlook by changing the language that
characterizes the period over which the target range is likely to remain
extraordinarily low.
Each alternative provides a distinct characterization of the economic
outlook.  Alternative A states that economic activity “is leveling out” but notes
that the economic recovery could be relatively weak.  Alternatives B and C are
progressively more optimistic, with Alternative B saying that economic activity
has “picked up following its severe downturn” and Alternative C stating
explicitly that the data suggest a “recovery in economic activity has begun.”  All
three alternatives acknowledge some further improvement in financial market
conditions.  Alternatives B and C note increased activity in the housing sector.
As in the August statement, all three alternatives reiterate the Committee’s
expectation that inflation “will remain subdued for some time.”  To explain this
view, Alternatives A and B note that “substantial resource slack [is] likely to
continue to dampen cost pressures,” while Alternatives B and C state that
“inflation expectations [are] apparently well anchored.”  Alternative A also
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 73
Table 1:  Overview of Alternative Language  
for the September 22‐23, 2009 FOMC Announcement
August FOMC
September Alternatives
A B C 
Forward Guidance on Funds Rate Path
“for an
extended period” 
“for an
extended period” 
“for an
extended period”
“So long as inflation 
remains well contained …
until it has greater 
assurance that the
economic recovery will be 
sustained”
Treasury Securities Purchases
Total  
Amount
$300 billion $300 billion  $300 billion $300 billion
Pace pace will “gradually slow” ----- ----- -----
Completion 
by the end of
October 
 by the end of
October 
 by the end of
October 
 by the end of
Agency MBS Purchases
Total  
Amount
“up to”  
$1.25 trillion
“a total of”  
$1.5 trillion
“up to”  
$1.25 trillion
“a total of about” 
 $1 trillion
Pace ----- ----- pace will “gradually slow” pace will “gradually slow”
Completion by the end of the year through the  second quarter of 2010
by the end of the  
first quarter of 2010
OR in the  
second quarter of 2010
by the end of the year
Agency Debt Purchases
Total 
Amount
“up to” 
$200 billion
“up to” 
$200 billion
“up to” 
$200 billion
“a total of about”  
$150 billion
Pace ----- ----- pace will “gradually slow” pace will “gradually slow”
Completion by the end of the year by the end of the year
by the end of the  
first quarter of 2010
OR in the  
second quarter of 2010
by the end of the year
Evaluation of LSAP Timing and Overall Amounts
adjustments  
to timing and amounts of
all LSAPs  
will continue
to be evaluated
adjustments 
to timing and amounts of
all LSAPs  
will continue
to be evaluated
adjustments 
to timing and amounts of
all LSAPs  
will continue
to be evaluated
adjustments 
to timing and amounts of
all LSAPs  
will continue
to be evaluated
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 73
August FOMC Statement
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in June suggests 
that economic activity is leveling out.  Conditions in financial markets have improved 
further in recent weeks.  Household spending has continued to show signs of 
stabilizing but remains constrained by ongoing job losses, sluggish income growth, 
lower housing wealth, and tight credit.  Businesses are still cutting back on fixed 
investment and staffing but are making progress in bringing inventory stocks into 
better alignment with sales.  Although economic activity is likely to remain weak for a 
time, the Committee continues to anticipate that policy actions to stabilize financial 
markets and institutions, fiscal and monetary stimulus, and market forces will 
contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth in a context of 
price stability.
The prices of energy and other commodities have risen of late.  However, substantial 
resource slack is likely to dampen cost pressures, and the Committee expects that 
inflation will remain subdued for some time.
In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote 
economic recovery and to preserve price stability.  The Committee will maintain the 
target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and continues to anticipate 
that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal 
funds rate for an extended period.  As previously announced, to provide support to 
mortgage lending and housing markets and to improve overall conditions in private 
credit markets, the Federal Reserve will purchase a total of up to $1.25 trillion of 
agency mortgage-backed securities and up to $200 billion of agency debt by the end 
of the year.  In addition, the Federal Reserve is in the process of buying $300 billion 
of Treasury securities.  To promote a smooth transition in markets as these purchases 
of Treasury securities are completed, the Committee has decided to gradually slow 
the pace of these transactions and anticipates that the full amount will be purchased 
by the end of October.  The Committee will continue to evaluate the timing and 
overall amounts of its purchases of securities in light of the evolving economic 
outlook and conditions in financial markets.  The Federal Reserve is monitoring the 
size and composition of its balance sheet and will make adjustments to its credit and 
liquidity programs as warranted.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 73
September FOMC Statement – Alternative A
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 73
September FOMC Statement – Alternative B
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 73
September FOMC Statement – Alternative C
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 37 of 73
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
If policymakers believe that the policy stimulus already in train is likely to foster
the most satisfactory economic outcomes feasible given current economic
circumstances, the Committee could reaffirm its forward guidance regarding the funds
rate and continue implementing its previously announced large-scale asset purchases
(LSAPs), while providing additional information regarding the winding-down process,
as in Alternative B.  Maintaining the current stance of monetary policy might be
appealing if the Committee shares the staff’s assessment that incoming economic and
financial news is consistent with inflation remaining subdued and economic growth
picking up to an acceptable pace in coming quarters as financial market conditions
and the housing sector continue to improve.  While the staff’s forecast has been
revised up, projected employment growth remains modest, with the level of private
payroll employment at the end of 2011 still about 1 million below its pre-recession
peak, suggesting that a very accommodative stance of monetary policy remains
appropriate.  Although the improved outlook has led to sizable increases in the
Greenbook-consistent measures of short-run r* since August, these measures are still
negative.  The anticipation that the federal funds rate is likely to remain exceptionally
low “for an extended period” remains consistent with the funds rate path implied by
the estimated outcome-based rule, despite the upward shift in this path since the
August Bluebook (Chart 8).
Even if some participants now foresee a more rapid resumption of economic
growth and a stronger recovery than in the Greenbook (similar to the Greenbook’s
“V-Shaped Recovery” alternative scenario), they may prefer to wait for more
definitive signs of this stronger recovery before modifying their policy stance, given
the uncertainties surrounding the economic outlook and the approaching expiration
of some government programs that have been supporting growth.  Even under the
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 38 of 73
9 See the September 16, 2009, Desk memorandum, “Tapering of Agency MBS and Agency 
Debt LSAPs.”
more robust conditions of this scenario, the Taylor rule does not prescribe a policy
tightening until early 2011.
Alternatively, policymakers may view the prospective economic recovery with its
protracted return to full employment as less than satisfactory, but they may believe
that the potential benefits of providing further monetary stimulus through expanded
LSAPs are likely to be outweighed by the potential costs.  These costs include
potential losses on the Federal Reserve’s portfolio under scenarios involving a sharp
increase in short-term interest rates over the next few years, the possibility that an
expanded balance sheet could lead to higher inflation expectations, and the increased
complications that a larger balance sheet could entail for the Committee’s exit
The Committee may find it desirable to slow the pace of its agency MBS and
agency debt transactions so that these purchases taper off instead of ending abruptly,
thereby minimizing the risk of financial market disruptions.9  This approach would be
consistent with the gradual slowing of the pace of Treasury purchases announced in
August and with market expectations that the Federal Reserve will adopt a similar
strategy for the agency debt and agency MBS programs (as indicated by responses to
the Desk’s survey of primary dealers).  Implementing the slowing without changing
the total maximum amount to be purchased would necessitate extending the time
over which the purchases would be completed.  Alternative B suggests two possible
end dates for the purchases:  the end of the first quarter or sometime in the second
quarter of 2010.
To the extent that the primary influence of the programs is through the
cumulative effect that they generate on the publicly available stocks of securities
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 39 of 73
rather than through the pace of new purchases, the choice between these end dates
would probably make little difference to the macroeconomic effect of the asset
purchases.  But the desire to taper purchases as they end is predicated on the belief
that the pace of asset purchases affects asset prices to some degree, even if stock
effects dominate.  Extending the timeframe would allow for a more gradual tapering,
thereby helping to alleviate market participants’ concerns that there could be an
abrupt price reaction upon the Fed’s exiting the market.  The Committee might also
consider the longer extension desirable because it would allow for more flexibility in
the path of future purchases, so that the total amounts purchased could be better
calibrated to changes in the economic outlook.  For example, the Committee might
value the optionality in a strategy that initially involved appreciably smaller weekly
purchases than at present.  Such a strategy would provide more opportunities for the
Committee to evaluate, based on the evolution of the economic outlook, whether to
end purchases before the maximum levels are reached or to raise the level of
purchases.  However, the cost of greater optionality for the Committee is that it
entails less certainty for market participants.  In addition, the longer extension means
a reduced flow of purchases, given no change in the total amount purchased.
Policymakers who view the flow of purchases as having a significant macroeconomic
impact may see the reduced flows entailed in the longer extension as a cost.
A statement such as that suggested for Alternative B would be close to market
expectations and would likely have muted effects in financial markets.  The Desk’s
survey of primary dealers indicates that they uniformly expect no change in the funds
rate target or in the maximum sizes of the LSAPs.  Nearly all the dealers said they
expect the Federal Reserve to adopt a tapering strategy for agency debt and agency
MBS, with the median survey respondent anticipating completion by the end of the
first quarter of 2010.  Accordingly, if the Committee chooses to extend its purchases
through the first quarter of next year, there would likely be little immediate change in
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 40 of 73
short- and long-term yields, equity prices, or the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
Extending purchases into the second quarter of 2010 might put some upward
pressure on long-term yields in the near term to the extent that flow effects are
important and also to the extent that market participants view the reduced pace of
sales over a longer period as signaling higher odds that the Committee will ultimately
choose to purchase smaller quantities than currently anticipated.  However, at least to
some degree, extending purchases into the second quarter would mean lower long-
term yields during that period than otherwise.  Also, market participants may perceive
the revision in language from the Federal Reserve’s using “all available tools” to “a
range of tools” as indicating less chance of future increases in the LSAPs, but
currently, investors appear to be putting little weight on an expansion.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
If policymakers view the incoming data as pointing to more underlying
momentum in the nascent recovery than they previously anticipated and are at least as
optimistic as the staff regarding the economic outlook, they might choose to trim the
size of the LSAPs and to adjust the language regarding the anticipated period over
which the funds rate is likely to remain extraordinarily low, as in Alternative C.
Under this alternative, the Committee would announce lower amounts of planned
purchases of agency MBS and agency debt compared with the current maximum
amounts and would revise the stated expectation for a very low federal funds rate.
Instead of “for an extended period,” the statement would say: “So long as inflation
remains well contained, the Committee will maintain the target range for the federal
funds rate at its exceptionally low level of 0 to ¼ percent until it has greater assurance
that the economic recovery will be sustained.”  The revised language has the benefit
of being more explicit that the stance of monetary policy will depend on the evolution
of the economic outlook, which may prove useful as a first step in preparing the
public and the markets for an eventual increase in the federal funds rate target.  The
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 41 of 73
change in language would likely be seen by market participants as pointing to an
earlier end to the period of extraordinarily low funds rates than is implied by the
Committee’s recent statements.
Participants might prefer Alternative C if they viewed the continued improvement
in financial market conditions and the significant upward revision in the staff forecast
as suggesting that less monetary policy support from the Federal Reserve is required
and, given the improvement in the housing sector, that a reduction in the maximum
amount of purchases of mortgage-related assets, in particular, could be appropriate.
Participants might also prefer not to purchase the previously announced
maximum amounts if they saw greater upside risks to inflation than does the staff.
(The “Early Liftoff” scenario in the Greenbook, which couples a strong rebound in
growth with an increase in inflation expectations, illustrates the possible need to
remove policy accommodation earlier than in the baseline.)  Participants might, for
example, have some concern that if bankers’ attitudes toward lending were to shift
rapidly with the improvement in the economic outlook, the large amount of reserves
in the banking system could bring about a larger and more rapid expansion of bank
credit, fueling even stronger aggregate demand growth, and potentially leading to
significantly increased upward pressure on prices.  The recently announced reduction
in the Treasury’s Supplementary Financing Program, which will increase the amount
of reserves in the banking system and likely put some downward pressure on the
funds rate, may also be a consideration.  The Committee may believe that such risks
would be moderated by purchasing less than the previously announced maximum
amounts, thereby lowering the accumulation of reserves in the banking system.
Moreover, participants may perceive less slack in the economy than in the staff
forecast if they view the very large negative shock of the financial crisis and the
ensuing recession as having lowered the level and growth rate of potential output
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 42 of 73
more sharply over the forecast horizon than assumed by the staff.  A less optimistic
outlook for aggregate supply, and the attendant consequences for inflation, might
incline the Committee to scale back the LSAPs.  In addition, if policymakers put less
weight on output gaps and more weight on inflation expectations when forecasting
inflation, they may prefer to slow the growth of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet if
they are concerned that its rapid expansion could fuel inflation expectations; for the
same reason, they may also want to signal an earlier increase in the federal funds rate
target than suggested in the Committee’s recent policy statements.
The adoption of Alternative C would surprise market participants.  As noted
above, primary dealers expect LSAPs to reach their previously announced maximums.
Moreover, fewer than 20 percent of the dealers indicated that they expect the federal
funds rate to be raised above its effective lower bound by next June; another half
expect the initial rate increase to occur later next year, and the remainder expect
tightening to begin in 2011 or later.  Indeed, over the intermeeting period, the implied
path of the federal funds rate based on futures quotes and the staff’s standard
assumptions about term premiums has shifted downward.  Even if some of that
decline was a result of decreasing term premiums, it appears that market participants
expect rates to remain unchanged for at least as long as they did at the time of the last
meeting.  Thus, the release of a statement along the lines of Alternative C would likely
cause short- and medium-term interest rates to rise sharply, and equity prices to drop,
while the foreign exchange value of the dollar would probably appreciate.  Forward
inflation compensation might decline over time if the Committee’s decision caused
investors to mark down their inflation expectations at longer horizons.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
If the Committee views the staff’s economic outlook, with its very protracted
return to full employment, as unacceptably weak despite the upward revision, or if
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 43 of 73
participants are not convinced that the recent data are signaling the start of a sustained
economic recovery, policymakers may judge that additional monetary stimulus would
be appropriate.  In this case, they could decide to expand the amount of agency MBS
purchases, be more definitive about the total amount to be purchased, and extend the
timeframe for conducting those transactions, as in Alternative A.  Although the staff
has marked up its forecast for economic growth significantly, the unemployment rate
declines only slowly—it is projected to be still above 9 percent at the end of next year
and just under 8 percent at the end of 2011—and core inflation hovers around
1 percent for several years, a level below the inflation objectives implicit in individual
policymakers’  longer-run projections.  Moreover, the Committee may judge that the
staff forecast is overly optimistic on both the growth and inflation fronts.  The recent
better-than-expected data might have been driven importantly by temporary factors
(like the Cash-for-Clunkers program) and thus, may be overstating the degree of
underlying momentum of the economy.  Recent increases in house prices may not be
sustained if foreclosures rise appreciably faster or by a greater amount than in the
Greenbook forecast.  If so, the apparent bottoming out in the housing market could
be illusory.  In addition, the decline in bank lending and M2 may be interpreted as
pointing to weaker growth than in the staff forecast.  Given the significant
deceleration in wages and hourly compensation during the recession, policymakers
might see a significant risk of greater disinflation than in the staff forecast, as
discussed in the Greenbook alternative scenario, “Greater Disinflation.”
Based on the outlook for economic growth and inflation, as well as the downside
risks to that outlook, the Committee might conclude that further monetary stimulus is
warranted.  In addition, given the experience to date, the Committee may now be
more confident that the LSAPs are lowering mortgage rates and that a further
expansion in LSAPs would be effective in supporting aggregate demand.  Based on
the staff’s ongoing analysis, the Committee may also be more confident that the
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 44 of 73
FOMC has the necessary tools to exit from this period of extraordinarily low interest
rates despite a further expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  Furthermore,
the public may have become more confident in the viability of the Federal Reserve’s
exit strategy now that it has been explained in speeches and testimony by Committee
members and other participants.  Thus, the perceived benefits of increased LSAPs
may have risen while the perceived costs may have declined.  If so, the Committee
may judge that increasing the LSAPs at this juncture, even with the improved outlook,
is desirable for fostering better economic outcomes.  Being more explicit that the
Committee plans to purchase the full $1.5 trillion, rather than “up to” the increased
maximum, would likely result in a larger economic impact.
The Desk would likely encounter challenges if it were to significantly step up the
pace of agency MBS purchases.  Thus, the Committee might judge that in order to
expand the amount of these purchases without having adverse effects on market
functioning, the timeframe for their completion would need to be expanded.
Extending the timeframe to the end of the second quarter of 2010 would allow for a
gradual reduction in the pace of purchases as they near completion.  Expanding the
amount of purchases of agency debt (or even buying the maximum $200 billion)
could generate significant distortions in the markets for those securities, so this is not
proposed in Alternative A.
An announcement along the lines of Alternative A would surprise market
participants.  Judging by recent experience, the announcement of an additional $250
billion in agency MBS could generate an initial drop in mortgage yields and spreads to
Treasuries.  Equity prices would probably edge up, and the foreign exchange value of
the dollar might well decline.  Inflation compensation could increase if the
Committee’s decision prompted renewed investor concerns about the size of the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and future inflation.  All of these effects could be
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 45 of 73
magnified if market participants saw the increase in asset purchases as opening the
door to yet further increases in such transactions.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 46 of 73
10 Reflecting concerns that a higher level of purchases could distort pricing and compromise 
market liquidity, agency debt purchases are projected to cumulate to $150 billion, below the 
announced $200 billion upper limit of the program under Alternatives A and B.
LONG‐RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE
Three balance sheet scenarios are presented in this section; they differ in terms of
the size and timing of large-scale asset purchases.  The baseline scenario corresponds
to the variant of Alternative B in the Policy Alternatives section, which has agency
MBS purchases of $1.25 trillion and agency debt purchases of $150 billion both
completed by the end of the first quarter of 2010.  The second scenario corresponds
to Alternative A, in which purchases of agency MBS are increased by $250 billion to
$1.5 trillion and completed by the end of the first quarter of 2010.  Purchases of
agency debt are equal to those in the baseline in terms of size but are completed by
the end of this year rather than at the end of the first quarter of 2010.10  The third
scenario corresponds to Alternative C, in which the quantity of agency MBS
purchases is reduced by $250 billion to $1 trillion and agency debt purchases stop at
$150 billion.  Both sets of purchases are completed by the end of 2009.  All scenarios
include purchases of Treasury securities in line with the quantity and timing previously
announced by the FOMC, that is $300 billion of total purchases completed by the end
of October this year.
To construct the projections, we made assumptions about each component of the
balance sheet.  Details on the assumptions are available in Appendix C.  On the asset
side of the balance sheet, the path of large-scale asset purchases in the baseline
scenario matches the assumed path in the Greenbook.  All three scenarios assume
that the assets purchased are held to maturity and not replaced.  Due to expected
settlement lags and prepayments, agency MBS holdings under each alternative peak at
a slightly lower level than the total amount purchased and a few months after
purchases have ceased.  For all scenarios, an assumed slower-than-historical-average
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 47 of 73
11 A discussion of the issues related to the SDR allocation can be found in the memo to the 
FOMC, “Implications of upcoming SDR allocations,” August 4, 2009.
path for the prepayment of agency MBS implies that more than half of the agency
MBS purchased are still on the balance sheet in 2016.
The projections for liquidity and credit programs are essentially the same in all
three scenarios.  The Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) is assumed
to reach a peak of $137 billion at the end of the second quarter of 2010, with
$87 billion in three-year loans and $50 billion in five-year loans at the peak.  TALF
loans outstanding reach zero in 2015.  The Commercial Paper Funding Facility
(CPFF) and the foreign central bank liquidity swap lines are assumed to expire on
February 1, 2010; funds extended through these facilities wind down to zero by mid-
year 2010.  Credit extended to AIG and the Federal Reserve’s ownership of preferred
stock interests in AIG reach zero by 2013.  The assets held by Maiden Lane LLC,
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC are assumed to be sold over time;
they are essentially nil by 2016.  Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit sum to about
$1 billion from the end of 2010 forward.  Only the Term Auction Facility (TAF)
remains sizable beyond 2010 at a steady-state level of $20 billion.  In the near term,
we assume that the TAF will be scaled down.  In particular, the amounts offered at
84-day auctions will eventually decrease to zero and term lengths will be reduced so
that these loans mature at the same time as 28-day loans.   By January 2010, only 28-
day auctions will be held.  At the end of 2009, the TAF projection assumes that the
full amount offered of $125 billion is taken down, but subsequently demand drops
and the TAF reaches the steady state level by the end of April 2010.  Finally, the
Special Drawing Rights (SDR) certificate account is projected to increase by $10
billion, to $12 billion, by the end of 2011, as a result of an assumed monetization of
an allocation of SDRs.11
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 48 of 73
On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, all three scenarios
assume that currency (Federal Reserve notes in circulation) grows at the same rate as
the staff forecast for money stock currency through 2011 and after that point expands
at the projected growth rate of nominal GDP in the extended Greenbook forecast.
Reflecting the Treasury’s announcement regarding the Supplementary Financing
Program (SFP), the Supplementary Financing Account (SFA) is projected to run
down to $15 billion by October 2009 and remain there through the end of the year.
Subsequently, under the assumption that the Congress raises the debt ceiling, the
balances in the SFA return to $200 billion during the first quarter of 2010 and remain
at this level through the end of 2015 in the baseline scenario.  At this point, reserve
balances are falling towards $25 billion and, as a result, the SFP is assumed to begin to
wind down.  The U.S. Treasury is assumed to continue its recent pattern of
maintaining all of its operating balances in the Treasury general account (TGA) over
the next year.  We assume that the Treasury eventually puts in place a new cash
management system in conjunction with the implementation of new legislation and
systems and the TGA then returns to its historical level of $5 billion in 2011.  All
other liabilities with the exception of reverse repurchase agreements (with foreign
official and international accounts) and reserve balances are assumed to be constant at
their level as of August 31, 2009.  Federal Reserve Bank capital is projected to grow in
line with its average pace of expansion over the past ten years.
Under all scenarios, the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet expands rapidly over the
course of 2009.  For the baseline scenario, the balance sheet reaches a peak of
$2.4 trillion in the second quarter of 2010 and then declines to a level of $1.4 trillion
at the end of the projection period.  For Alternative A, the peak also occurs in the
second quarter of 2010 but at a higher level of $2.6 trillion.  Assets then decline to
roughly $1.6 trillion at the end of 2016.  For Alternative C, the balance sheet peaks at
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 49 of 73
12 The composition of Federal Reserve assets in all three of these projections differs notably 
from historical patterns.  Prior to August 2007, U.S. Treasury securities were about 90 
percent of assets and the Federal Reserve did not hold any agency mortgage-backed 
securities.  By contrast, under the baseline scenario, Treasuries are projected to account for 
only around 33 percent of total assets at the end of 2009 and rise to just 36 percent of total 
assets at the end of the projection period.
$2.2 trillion at the end of 2009, and assets decline to $1.4 trillion at the end of the
projection period.12
Balance Sheet Projections Summary
Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Total Assets
Peak month June 2010 June 2010 December 2009
Peak amount $2.6 trillion $2.4 trillion $2.2 trillion
December 2016 $1.6 trillion $1.4 trillion $1.4 trillion
Agency MBS
Total Purchased $1.5 trillion $1.25 trillion $1.0 trillion
December 2016 $0.9 trillion $0.7 trillion $0.5 trillion
Reserve Balances
Peak month June 2010 June 2010 December 2009
Peak amount $1.4 trillion $1.2 trillion $1.1 trillion
These projections for liabilities and capital, combined with the assumed path for
assets, largely imply a path for reserve balances under each scenario.  Note, however,
that the level of reserve balances was considered in determining the projected use of
credit and liquidity facilities, so the projected path is not purely a residual.  In all three
scenarios, the implied paths of reserve balances rise rapidly until the end of 2009.  The
timing of the peak and the eventual decline in the size of the balance sheet differs
across alternatives, however.  In the scenarios corresponding to Alternatives A and B,
reserve balances peak in June of 2010, whereas in Alternative C, they peak in
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 50 of 73
13 The calculated growth rates of the monetary base presented in the table are based on an 
approximation for month-average values.
December of this year.  Reserve balances decline as the balance sheet shrinks in all
scenarios, but in Alternative C, a resumption of open market purchases is assumed in
2016 to maintain reserve balances at a level of $25 billion.
Projections for the growth rates of the monetary base are derived from these
balance sheet projections as the growth rate of the sum of Federal Reserve notes in
circulation and reserve balances.13  After contracting in the third quarter of this year
the monetary base is projected to expand rapidly in the fourth quarter under all
scenarios.  At a quarterly frequency, the monetary base continues to expand for the
first three quarters of 2010 for Alternative A and B.  In 2011, however, as securities
holdings trend lower and the liquidity facilities wind down, the monetary base begins
to contract. For Alternative C, in which asset purchases end in 2009, the monetary
base begins to contract in the first quarter of 2010.  For all three alternatives, the
monetary base continues to contract as assets mature and the balance sheet shrinks.
For Alternatives B and C, this contraction is reversed near the end of the projection
Relative to the August Bluebook, there are a number of notable changes to the
projections.  The initial size of the balance sheet at the end of August was $95 billion
lower than projected at the time of the last Bluebook, primarily because agency MBS
purchases and settlements were smaller than forecasted.  The pattern of purchases of
agency debt and agency MBS has been modified in the new projections, as the
completion dates of the programs were extended from the end of this year to the end
of the first quarter of 2010 under the baseline scenario.  For the liquidity and credit
programs, the projection for the TAF no longer includes an uptick at the end of the
year.  The TALF is assumed to extend a somewhat lower volume of loans than
previously.  Some of the other lending facilities are now seen as running off slightly
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 51 of 73
faster than was projected last round in light of the improvement in financial markets
and more widely available liquidity and credit.  On balance, total assets at year-end
2009 are about $356 billion lower in this projection compared with that presented in
the August Bluebook, mostly a result of the change in assumptions about the TAF
and the timing of agency MBS purchases.  By the end of the projection period in
2016, however, total assets are not much different than the level projected in the
August Bluebook because the primary changes to the baseline scenario between the
two Bluebooks are related to the timing, rather than the level, of large-scale assets
On the liabilities side, the staff has made significant changes to the projections
relative to the August Bluebook.  The path for the SFA is very different.  In the near
term, the account is drawn down to a very low level until the beginning of 2010.
Thereafter, the account is assumed to return to its previous $200 billion level until the
program is run down as reserve balances approach $25 billion late in the projection
period.  In the last Bluebook the SFA was expected to be drawn down to zero by the
second half of 2010.  Moreover, the TGA is now assumed to return to its historical
level at the end of 2010 rather than this year.  On net, the level of reserve balances is
about $244 billion lower at the end of this year, primarily reflecting the slower pace of
agency MBS purchases and a lower use of the TAF over year-end.  The level of
reserve balances remains considerably below that projected in the August Bluebook
through the projection period primarily as a result of the new assumption with regards
to the SFA.
The extended Greenbook projection shows the target federal funds rate rising
from the current 0 to ¼ percent range to 2.4 percent over the course of 2012.  Under
the operating procedures employed before the financial crisis, the projected level of
reserve balances at the end of 2012 of approximately $600 billion would not have
been consistent with a federal funds rate significantly above zero.  If the interest rate
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 52 of 73
paid on excess reserve balances becomes an effective floor for the federal funds rate, a
higher target rate could be achieved even with quite elevated reserve balances simply
by raising the excess reserves rate.  Such a path is implicit in these projections.  The
experience last autumn, however, when the effective federal funds rate fell well below
the rate paid on excess reserves, may suggest that other tools could be needed to
improve the control over the funds rate.  Such tools might include reverse repurchase
agreements, outright sales of securities, a term deposit facility, or other strategies.  The
balance sheet effects of these tools, however, are not included in these projections.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 53 of 73
Growth Rates for Monetary Base
Date Baseline Alternative A 
Alternative
Memo: 
August 
baseline
Percent, annual rate 
Monthly
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 54 of 73
Baseline Scenario
Source.  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
Bi
lli
on
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasury securities Agency debt Agency MBS
Repurchase agreements TAF Central bank swaps 
TALF  Other loans and facilities SDR and other assets
$ 
Bi
lli
on
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 55 of 73
Alternative A
Source.  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
Bi
lli
on
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasury securities Agency debt Agency MBS
Repurchase agreements TAF Central bank swaps 
TALF  Other loans and facilities SDR and other assets
$ 
Bi
lli
on
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 56 of 73
Alternative C
Source.  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
Bi
lli
on
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasury securities Agency debt Agency MBS
Repurchase agreements TAF Central bank swaps 
TALF  Other loans and facilities SDR and other assets
$ 
Bi
lli
on
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 57 of 73
BANK CREDIT, DEBT, AND MONEY FORECAST
The outlook for nonfederal debt growth and bank credit expansion continues to
be quite weak, consistent with the staff’s forecast of a moderate economic recovery
and only gradual improvement in the health of the banking system.  M2 is also likely
to be weak as a result of slow income growth, anemic increases in bank credit, and a
continued gradual reallocation of household wealth toward riskier assets.
Bank credit is forecast to contract 4½ percent this year.  This is a sharper drop
than previously projected and reflects persistent declines in most major loan
categories through the fourth quarter of 2009 that are only partially offset by
purchases of securities.  This would be the first annual decline in nominal bank credit
since 1948.  Growth in bank credit is expected to increase gradually to about 4¼
percent in 2010 and 6½ percent in 2011, a bit more than in the previous projection,
reflecting the staff’s improved outlook for economic activity over the forecast period.
However, loan growth remains particularly weak until late in 2010, partly reflecting
concern among lenders about further deterioration in credit quality and its potential
impact on their own capital positions.
Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to expand at an annual rate of
about [5] percent through 2011, reflecting continued rapid growth of federal debt, a
moderate rise in state and local government debt, and a gradual resumption of growth
in household and business borrowing.  Federal debt is projected to increase rapidly
over the forecast period because of continued large deficits.  State and local
government borrowing is expected to slow from its recent rapid pace, in part because
stimulus grants will finance some of the projected rise in the sector’s capital outlays.
Private-sector debt is expected to pick up gradually.  Growth in household debt is
forecast to begin to edge up early next year as the economy improves, but the rise will
be constrained by the elevated unemployment rate, continued deleveraging by
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 58 of 73
households, and lending standards that ease only gradually.  Despite expected further
improvement in conditions in capital markets, borrowing by nonfinancial businesses
is expected to remain sluggish over the next several years, owing to weakness in
commercial real estate markets and relatively tight lending standards at banks.
M2 is projected to continue contracting in the fourth quarter of 2009 and the first
quarter of 2010 as households reallocate more of their wealth toward riskier assets.
The contraction is accounted for by substantial declines in small time deposits and
retail money market mutual funds, which partly reflect low and declining interest rates
on those instruments.  Over the course of next year, M2 is forecast to increase less
rapidly than nominal GDP, as the run-off of safe-haven M2 assets continues amid
improvements in economic and financial market conditions.  In 2011, the staff
expects M2 to accelerate to about 5 percent, somewhat less than the growth rate of
nominal GDP.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 59 of 73
Greenbook Forecast*
Monthly Growth Rates
Jan-09 12.1
Feb-09 4.0
Mar-09 10.4
Apr-09 -7.6
May-09 9.1
Jun-09 3.6
Jul-09 -3.1
Aug-09 -7.3
Sep-09 0.8
Oct-09 -3.5
Nov-09 -3.2
Dec-09 -3.0
Jan-10 -2.1
Feb-10 -0.5
Mar-10 1.6
Apr-10 2.9
May-10 3.2
Jun-10 3.3
Jul-10 4.2
Aug-10 4.2
Sep-10 4.2
(percent, annual rate)
Growth Rates for M2
Growth From To
Aug-09 Dec-09 -2.2
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.  Actual 
data through August 31, 2009; projections thereafter.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 60 of 73
The August directive and draft language for the September directive are provided
AUGUST FOMC MEETING
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to purchase agency debt, agency MBS, and longer-term Treasury securities
during the intermeeting period with the aim of providing support to private credit
markets and economic activity.  The timing and pace of these purchases should
depend on conditions in the markets for such securities and on a broader assessment
of private credit market conditions.  The Desk is expected to purchase up to $200
billion in housing-related agency debt and up to $1.25 trillion of agency MBS by the
end of the year.  The Desk is expected to purchase about $300 billion of longer-term
Treasury securities by the end of October, gradually slowing the pace of these
purchases until they are completed.  The Committee anticipates that outright
purchases of securities will cause the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to
expand significantly in coming months.  The System Open Market Account Manager
and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments
regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the
Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 61 of 73
SEPTEMBER FOMC MEETING — ALTERNATIVE A
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to purchase agency debt, agency MBS, and longer-term Treasury securities
during the intermeeting period with the aim of providing support to private credit
markets and economic activity.  The timing and pace of these purchases should
depend on conditions in the markets for such securities and on a broader assessment
of private credit market conditions.  The Desk is expected to purchase about $300
billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of October, gradually slowing the
pace of these purchases until they are completed.  The Desk is expected to purchase
up to $200 billion in housing-related agency debt by the end of the year and about
$1.5 trillion of agency MBS by the end of the second quarter of 2010.  The
Committee anticipates that outright purchases of securities will cause the size of the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to expand significantly in coming months.  The
System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee
informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could
affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 62 of 73
SEPTEMBER FOMC MEETING — ALTERNATIVE B
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To
further its long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve
markets consistent with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.
The Committee directs the Desk to purchase agency debt, agency MBS, and
longer-term Treasury securities during the intermeeting period with the aim of
providing support to private credit markets and economic activity.  The timing
and pace of these purchases should depend on conditions in the markets for
such securities and on a broader assessment of private credit market
conditions.  The Desk is expected to complete purchases of about $300 billion
of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of October, and up to $200
billion in housing-related agency debt and up to $1.25 trillion of agency MBS
[by the end of the first quarter of 2010 | in the second quarter of 2010],
gradually slowing the pace of these purchases as they near completion.  The
Committee anticipates that outright purchases of securities will cause the size
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to expand significantly in coming
months.  The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will
keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s
objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 63 of 73
SEPTEMBER FOMC MEETING — ALTERNATIVE C
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to purchase agency debt, agency MBS, and longer-term Treasury securities
during the intermeeting period with the aim of providing support to private credit
markets and economic activity.  The timing and pace of these purchases should
depend on conditions in the markets for such securities and on a broader assessment
of private credit market conditions.  The Desk is expected to purchase about $300
billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of October, and about $150
billion in housing-related agency debt and about $1.0 trillion of agency MBS by the
end of the year, gradually slowing the pace of these purchases as they near
completion.  The Committee anticipates that outright purchases of securities will
cause the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to expand significantly in coming
months.  The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the
Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet
that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
September 17, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 64 of 73
