Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
November 14, 1975Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC
November 14, 1975
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 declined at about a 3 per cent annual rate in October,
but data for early November are consistent with the staff forecast of
a substantial rebound in the current month. For the two-month target
period, M1 is projected to expand at an annual rate of about 4 per
cent, somewhat above the low end of the Committee's range of tolerance.
With growth in consumer-type time deposits a little stronger than
projected, M2 is expected to grow at about a 7½ per cent annual rate over
the two-month target period--somewhat above the mid-point of its
tolerance range.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
over October-November Period
Reserve and monetary aggregates Ranges of
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance Latest Estimates
M1 3 to 7 4.1
M2 5½ to 8½ 7.7
RPD 0 to 4 2.1
Memo: Avg. for statement
Federal funds rate week ending
(per cent per annum) 5¼ to 6¼ Oct. 22 5.73
(2) There was some increase in total short-term business credit in
October. Outstanding business loans at banks expanded by a relatively sizable
amount, mainly at banks outside the major money market centers, but this was
offset in part by another decline in commercial paper issued by nonfinancial
corporations. Outstanding bank CD's have shown little change since the
build-up that occurred in late September and early October. While this
mainly reflected the continuing weakness in business loans at large banks,
several New York City banks appear to have experienced some investor reluctance
to acquire their CD's and did not aggressively seek such funds. These banks
also relied less than they usually do on purchases of Federal funds during
the past month and generally have lengthened the maturities of their managed
(3) Immediately following the October FOMC meeting, the Desk
sought reserve conditions consistent with a Federal funds rate in a 5½ to
to 5 per cent unless incoming data on the aggregates indicated more rapid
growth. Data available shortly after the Committee meeting did in fact
suggest some strengthening in monetary growth causing the Desk to slow the
movement to a 5½ per cent rate. As a result, the funds rate averaged 5.65
per cent in the week ending October 29. When subsequent data suggested a
considerable weakening in the aggregates, the Desk followed a more
accommodative approach to reserve provision, and the funds rate moved to the
funds rate dropped increasingly below the discount rate, member bank borrowing
dwindled. Although the latest data indicate a strengthening in the aggregates,
the Desk has continued to aim at a funds rate around 5 per cent in view
of the proximity of the November Committee meeting and the continuing un-
certainties affecting financial markets.
(4) Short-term rates dropped another 20-50 basis points over the
intermeeting period, with the largest decline occuring in Treasury bill-rates. In
longer-term markets yields have also declined somewhat further except on
municipals. Municipal yields which had declined in early October from the
peak reached at the turn of the month, advanced again in late October and
early November. Most recently, however, some of this advance has been erased
as the market has come to believe that a settlement of the New York problem
is in the offing.
(5) Deposits at savings and loan associations and mutual savings
banks grew during October at an annual rate of around 11 per cent, about
the same as in September. Given the sharp declines in market rates, managers
of thrift institutions reportedly have become more optimistic about the
future course of deposit flows and therefore less cautious about extending
new mortgage commitments. Interest rates on primary mortgages have dropped
slightly; the Home Loan Bank series shows a decline in the average rate on
new commitments for 80 per cent conventional mortgages from 9.25 to 9.17
per cent over the intermeeting period. In the secondary market, average
yields in FNMA auctions dropped about 30 basis points.
(6) The table on the following page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various time
Past Past
Calendar Twelve Six Three Past
Year Months Months Months Month
Oct. '75 Oct. '75 Oct. '75 Oct.'75
1974 over over ov er over
Oct. '74 Apr. '75 July '75 Sept.'75
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change in
billions)
Large CD's 2.2 - .4 -1.2 - .3 2.2
Nonbank commercial paper .4 - .2 - .5 - .6 -1.1
1/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
2/ Based on month-end figures. Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on total
loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institu-
tions--which are derived from either end-of-month or last Wednesday-of-month
figures. Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are
adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when
reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(7) Summarized below for Committee consideration are three
alternative sets of short-run specifications for monetary aggregates
and the Federal funds rate. All three alternatives are intended to be
consistent with the FOMC's longer-run objectives for the aggregates, as
indexed by a 5-7½ per cent rate of growth in M1 from QIII '75 to QIII '76.
Each of the alternatives, therefore,implies a different pattern of interest
rate developments, as summarized in appendix table IV and as explained
in the ensuing paragraphs.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges of tolerance
for November-December
M1  7-9 6½-8½ 6-8
M2  8½-10½ 8-10 7½-9½
RPD 5½-7½ 5-7 4½-6½
Federal funds rate 4¼-5 4¾-5¾ 5¼-6¼
(8) Under alternative B the Federal funds rate range is
centered around the recently prevailing 5¼ per cent level. M is once
again expected to begin growing at a reasonably rapid rate; under this
alternative growth over the two-month November-December period is
estimated to be in a 6½-8½ per cent annual rate range. The main basis
for this expectation is the growing need for transactions balances
associated with the 14½ per cent annual rate of expansion in nominal
GNP projected by the staff for the fourth quarter M1 growth in Nov.-Dec.
at an annual rate of 7½ per cent--the midpoint of the indicated range--would
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1l  M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
QII
QIII
QIII '75-QI '76
QI '76-QIlI '76
QIII '75-QIII '76
result in expansion from QIII '75 to QIV '75 at a rate of about 2¾ per cent,
implying a rise in income velocity at about an 11 per cent annual rate between
those quarters. This would be an extremely large rise even for the early
stages of an economic recovery, particularly if, as assumed, it is not
associated with upward interest rate pressures during the quarter.
(8) Such a large rise in velocity would not appear to be long
sustainable at current interest rate levels, given the reduction in the
public's cash balances relative to income that has already occurred and
given the continued, even though somewhat diminished, rate of expansion
projected for nominal GNP in 1976. With the demand for money likely to
continue to rise, the staff would expect the Federal funds rate to increase
in the course of next year if the rate of growth in M1 is to average near
the mid-point of the FOMC's longer-run target range of 5-7 per cent. By
summer, the funds rate might peak out at around 7½ ½er cent. This would be
lower than had been projected by the staff at the time of the last meeting.
(9) If the funds rate shows little change over the next few
weeks, the 3-month bill rate might be in a 5 -6 per cent range. The rate
could show some tendency to rise from its recent trading level of about
holiday season will coincide with continued sizable net additions to
outstanding bills by the Treasury to raise new cash. Short-term rates will
also be heavily influenced by developments with respect to New York. A
resolution of the problem would affect attitudes and expectations in a manner
likely to put upward pressure on rates, whereas a dashing of hopes would
have the opposite effect.
(10) With bond volume in the corporate and municipal markets
expected to be generally moderate, longer-term market interest rates are
likely to show little further net change between now and year-end under the
specifications of alternative B. If the New York situation is resolved
without default, yields in the municipal market could well show significant
declines. Primary mortgage market yields are likely to edge down over the
period ahead in lagged reaction to earlier declines in short-term interest
rates and corporate bond yields, and in light of a continued relatively
comfortable inflow of savings funds to thrift institutions.
(11) Both banks and nonbank thrift institutions may experience
more favorable net inflows of time and savings deposits over the next
several weeks than they had in late summer and early fall, when market
interest rates were higher. However, very recent experience suggests
no more than a modest pick-up. Because upward pressures on interest rates
in the fourth quarter of 1975 and now projected for 1976 are weaker than
those antitipated earlier, consumer-type time deposit flows are no longer
expected to slacken substantially in the near future. Accordingly, the date
for an assumed upward adjustment in Regulation Q ceiling rates has been
shifted forward, from year-end to mid-1976.
(12) Alternative A contemplates a modest further decline in
the Federal funds rate between now and the next Committee meeting, to the
mid-point of a 4 -5 per cent range. This would tend to strengthen forces
making for a rebound in growth of the monetary aggregates and would also
uncertainties with regard to municipal markets and banks continue. We
would expect that such a reduction in the funds rate would have to be reversed
at least by early next year in order to keep longer-run growth in M1 at
around the mid-point of the 5-7½ per cent range, and that by Spring the funds
rate would be around 7¾ per cent.
(13) A reduction in the funds rate over the next few weeks of
about the dimensions contemplated under alternative A would probably be
accompanied by similar declines in other short-term rates and by some further
decline in longer-term market rates. Mortgage market yields would also be
likely to drop as the outlook for continued savings inflows brightens. But
declines in mortgage yields, as well as in security rates, may be limited
insofar as market participants view the easing in money market conditions
as temporary. Market attitudes will, of course, be influenced by the nature
of incoming economic news and by the degree of use, if any, of other monetary
policy instruments.
(14) Alternative C involves some rise in the Federal funds rate
over the next few weeks, to the mid-point of a 5 -6 per cent range. Such
a reversal in the recent trend of the funds rate would likely be accompanied
by a sharp rebound in market rates; the 3-month bill rate, for example, might
promptly move up to the 6-6½ per cent area. But if interest rates are pushed
up over the next few weeks, it is likely that less of an increase would
be required over the longer run than under alternatives A or B, since an
early start will have been made in restraining money demand. It seems
probable that the alternative C strategy might lead to a funds rate that
peaks out at around 6¾ per cent next year. Thus, over the longer run this
approach would place less pressure on banks and thrift institutions. In the
short run, however, recent easing tendencies in bank and mortgage loans rates
would be quickly reversed.
(15) Among the assumptions made in developing the specifications
presented in this blue book are: (a) no more than modest business loan growth
at banks in view of (i) expected conservative inventory investment policies
by business that would limit their demand for bank credit and (ii) continued
relatively cautious bank lending policies; and (b) unwillingness of major
banks to actively press CD's on the market in the period immediately ahead.
In addition, it has been assumed that there will be no significant further
impairment of confidence in the municipal market and banks.
Proposed directive
(16) Given below is a proposed operational paragraph if the
Committee wishes to continue formulating its instructions in terms of
desired growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead. No alternatives
are presented for this formulation, in the expectation that the reference to
desired growth will be taken to apply to the longer-term targets and that at
this meeting the Committee will not reconsider its present 5 to 7 per cent
target range for M1, with which all of the short-run operating alternatives
discussed in the preceding sections are consistent.
"Monetary Aggregate" proposal
To implement this policy, while taking account of
developments in domestic and international financial
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and
money market conditions consistent with moderate growth in
monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
(17) Should the Committee desire to formulate the directive in
terms of bank reserve and money market conditions, the language needed would
depend on the specific conditions sought. Alternative "money market"
directives intended to correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives
are given below.
Alternative "Money Market" proposals
Alternative A
To implement this policy while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve SOMEWHAT EASIER bank reserve and money market
conditions OVER THE PERIOD IMMEDIATELY AHEAD, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY
AGGREGATES DO NOT APPEAR TO BE GROWING AT RATES ABOVE THOSE CURRENTLY
EXPECTED [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates
over teh months ahead].
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the
Committee seeks to [DEL: achieve] MAINTAIN PREVAILING bank reserve and
money market conditions OVER THE PERIOD IMMEDIATELY AHEAD, PROVIDED
THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES APPEAR TO BE GROWIING AT ABOUT THE RATES
CURRENTLY EXPECTED [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead].
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the
Committee seeks to achieve SOMEWHAT FIRMER bank reserve and
money market conditions OVER THE PERIOD IMMEDIATELY AHEAD, PROVIDED
THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES DO NOT APPEAR TO BE GROWING AT RATES
BELOW THOSE CURRENTLY EXPECTED [DEL: consistent with moderate growth
in monetary aggregates over the months ahead].
CONFIDENTIAL (F R)
CLASS II-FOMCTABLE 1
BANK RESERVES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
NUV. 14, 1975
RESERVES AVAILABLE AGGREGATE RESERVES REQUIRED RESERVESRESERVES AVAILABLE
Ped FOR PRIVATE - SEASONALLY ADJUSTEDFOR PRIVATE
Period
NONBAN DEPOSITS Total Nonborrowed Total Private Total Time Gov't. and
SA NSA Reserves Reserves Required Demand Deposits InterbankSA I NSA
MONTHLY LEVELS-tMILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
QUARTEL Y-AV
SEPT.
OCT.
NOV.
WEEKLY LEVELS-SMILLIONS
NOV. 5
12
( 2.1)
( 4.0
S 14.7)
( 9.9)
?3,012
34,129
( 2.81)
( -?.3I
( 6.2)
( 2,010)
, 101
1,800
Table 2 CONFIDENTIAL (F R.)
CLASS II FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES NOV. 14, 1975
ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
MONEY SUPPLY Adjusted U S TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS Nondeposit
Period Narrow Broad Credit Govt Other Sources of
(M1) (M2) Proxy Deposits Total Than CD's CD's Funds
MONTHLY LFVtLS-SbILLIGNS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
OCT.-NOV. 4 4.1) I 7,7) ( 7.0) ( 11.3) ( 10.3) ( 15.2)
WEEKLY LEVELS-SILLIONS
I I I I
NCTE: DATA SHOWN IN PARtN1HESES ARE CURRENT PROJECTIONS. P - PRELIMINARY
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
NOVEMBER 14, 1975
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECT OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
July
Aug.
Sept,
Oct.
Nov.
De.
Open Market Operations 11
S ills
A A
Daily Average Reserve Effects 21
l. - i-'--i--r- II .- .. ~ r . - r - l .. -11 rn
coupon
I,.,
Agency
tI...
Kr-
NTi*
-_________ ________ I ____-.~I 4
T l upen narKetc a MemDerOn« * V ., I,, r,
(6)
urner 4/
VFt
A In Reserve Categories
Keq. res. against
"1 C 0 .A T4- tUh
a Target
avatsauLS LM .-qi ava.-auscS
(L-)+7(i-E's-(9~ II rocerva V
Represents change in System's portfolio from end-of-period to end-of-period: includes redemptions in regular bill auctions.
Represents change in daily average level for preceeding period.
Includes matched sale-purchase transactions as well as RP's
Sum of changes in vault cash, currency in circulation, Treasury operations, FR. float, gold and foreign accounts, and other F.R. accounts.
Reserves to support private nonbank deposits. Target change for October and November reflects the target adopted at the October 21, 1975 FOMC meeting.
Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month.
P - Preliminary.
U £ LI .
I- I r .~ ~1 n _ . Iri-
ccep . I ssues I ssues I et I o a perat ons an orrow ng actors 11 . . . r . 6t. I I f
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II--FOMC
NOVEMBER 14, 1975
TABLE 4
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1/
($ millions, not seasonally adjusted)
Treasury Coupons Federal Agencies Net Change
Net Purchases 3/ Net Purchases 4/ Outright
Nov. 5 -93 - -- -- - - -- - - -85 -7,526
192 - -- - - -910 6,114
i Change from end-of-period to end-of-period.
2/ Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts, and redemptions (-) in bill auctions.
3/ Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts and short-term notes acquired in exchange for maturing bills. Excludes maturity shifts,
rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury borrowings from the System.
4/ Outright transactions in market and with foreigh accounts only. Excludes redemptions and maturity shifts.
5/ In addition to net purchases of securities, also reflects changes in System holdings of bankers' acceptances, direct Treasury borrowings from the
System, and redemptions (-) of Agency and Treasury coupon issues.
6/ Includes changes in both RP's (+) and matched sale-purchase transactions (-).
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
TABLE 5 NOVEMBER 14, 1975
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
(millions of dollars)
U.S. Govt. Security Member Bank Reserve Positions
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Borrowing at FRB** Basic Reserve Deficit
Corporate Municipal Excess**
Period Bills Coupon Issues Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Others
** Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions issues
still in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserve less net Federal
funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are Friday figures.
* STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
NOVEMBER 14, 1975
TABLE 6
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(Per Cent)
Short-Term Long-Term
Treasury Bills 90-119 Day CD's New Issue-NYC Aaa Utility Municipal U.S. Government A
Federal Commercial New Recently Bond (20-yr. Constant Auctions
Period Funds 90-day 1-year PaRer 60-89 Day 90-119 Day Issue Offered Buyer Maturity) Yields
Apr.
May
June
Aug.
Sept.
Oct. 1
8
Daily--Nov. 6
13
p - Preliminary
NOV. 14, 1975
