Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
March 12, 1976
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemBy the staff
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) March 12, 1976
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent Developments
(1) Incoming data since the February FOMC meeting suggest
that M1 is growing at about a 6 per cent annual rate in the February-
March period, somewhat below the mid-point of its range. Continuing
strength in time deposits other than large CD's (particularly in savings
deposits) has sustained M2 growth. Over February-March, M2 is now expected
to expand at a little more than an 11 per cent annual rate, near the mid-
point of its range.
(2) Growth in total bank loans has remained quite modest, as
business demands for short-term credit have continued to be weak; business
loans at banks declined at a 5.3 per cent annual rate in February. Banks
have continued to allow CD's to run off in volume, as inflows of other
time and savings deposits have remained large. They have also added
further to their security holdings, particularly Treasury coupon issues
in the 1-5 year maturity area.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
over February-March Period
Reserve and monetary aggregates
(Growth at SAAR. in per cent) Ranges Latest Estimates
M1 5 to 9 6.1
M2  9 to 13 11.4
RPD -4½ to -½ -5.1
Memo: Avg. for statement
Federal funds rate 4¼ to 5¼ week ending
(per cent per annum) Feb. 18 4.70
(3) Late in February, incoming data suggested that growth in
the aggregates was strengthening rather considerably. The rate of
expansion in M2 appeared to be at the upper limit of the range specified
by the Committee, and growth in M1 was above its mid-point. Accordingly,
the Desk decided to shade its Federal funds rate target from 4¾ per cent
to a 4¾--4-7/8 per cent range. However--with incoming information at
the time pointing to a strengthening of economic activity--banks over-
reacted to the Desk's willingness to permit some additional firming in
the money market, and for a while began bidding aggressively for Federal
funds. As a result, the effective funds rate was above 5 per cent on
several days of the statement week, and the average for the week rose
to 4.95 per cent. Subsequently, with additional data indicating that
growth in M1 and M2 over the February-March period might be well within
the ranges, the Desk has operated to return the funds rate to the 4¾ per
cent area.
(4) The firming in money market conditions at the end of
February, coupled with published data which at the time indicated a
substantial strengthening in the monetary aggregates, resulted in a
general advance of short-term rates of 1/8 to 1/2 a percentage point,
with the largest increases in the bill area. With the recent easing in
the funds market, however, short-term rates have dropped back, and are
now only about 10-25 basis points above levels prevailing at the time of
the February FOMC meeting. Bond market rates showed little net change
over the intermeeting period, as declines in late February--which carried
rates on some high quality corporate issues td their lowest levels in 2
years--were reversed in early March when short-term rates rose and the
forward calendar of new issues increased. Mortgage rates have edged down
slightly on balance recently, as deposit inflows at thrift institutions
have remained strong.
(5) The table on the following page shows (in percentage
annual rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various
time periods.
Past Past
Calendar Calendar Six Three Past
Year Year Months Months Month
Feb. '76 Feb. '76 Feb. '76
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change in
billions)
Large CD's 2,2 -.6 -.6 -2.1 -3.8
Nonbank commercial paper .4 -.2 -.3 .5 .4
1/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
2/ Based on month-end figures. Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on total
loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institu-
tions--which are derived from either end-of-month or last Wednesday-of-month
figures, Growth rates p reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are
adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when
reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(6) Alternative shorter-run operating ranges for the monetary
aggregates and the Federal funds rate are summarized below for Committee
consideration. More detailed figures, as well as longer-run growth rates,
are shown in the tables on pp. 5a and 5b.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for March-April
M1 4 to 8 3½ to 7½ 3 to 7
M2  8 to 12 6¾ to 10¾ 6 to 10
RPD -2 to 2 -2½ to 1½ -3 to 1
Federal funds rate 3¾ to 4¾ 4¼ to 5¼ 4¾ to 5¾
(intermeeting range)
(7) The Federal funds rate under alternative B is centered on
such a funds rate, over the March-April period M1 is expected to expand
in a 3½-7½ per cent annual rate range. Tax refunds are likely to con-
tribute somewhat to growth in demand deposits in March. As April progresses,
however, payments by the Treasury will probably be moderating and might be
more than offset by the public's drawing down balances that had been built
up by earlier refunds. Thus, M 1 growth during the March-April period is
expected to depend essentially on transactions demands associated with
the projected relatively rapid expansion in nominal GNP. Our expectation
for money growth over the next two months assumes some continued downward
shift in money demand.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
QIV '75-QII '76
QII '76-QIV '76
QIV '75-QIV '76
Committee Longer-run
Growth Ranges
QIV '75-QIV '76
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
QIV '75-QII '76
QII '76-QIV '76
(8) M2 under alternativeB is projected to rise in a 6-10
per cent annual rate range in the March-April period. Growth in time
deposits other than money market CD's is expected to slow from its
exceptional January-February pace, when inflows were being influenced by
the initial shift of funds in response to the decline in short-term
market rates to levels near or below 5 per cent. Nevertheless, such
deposits will probably grow at a still fairly substantial 11¼ per cent
annual rate over the March-April period. Short-term rates under alterna-
tive B would be expected to change little between now and the next
Committee meeting, although they could rise a bit toward the end of the
period, reflecting mid-April tax date pressures.
(9) The staff continues to believe that interest rates will
have to rise later in the year--perhaps beginning in late spring--if a
Under alternative B, we have assumed that the Federal funds rate will
average about 6½ per cent in the fourth quarter of 1976 .1/ This represents
somewhat less upward rate pressure than assumed in the previous blue
book, and reflects the need for a little more expansion in M1 over the
last three quarters of the year to make up for the fact that growth in
the first quarter of 1976 is now expected to be somewhat slower than
anticipated a month ago. Under these assumptions, M2 growth over the
period from QIV '75 to QIV '76 would be about 9¾ per cent--somewhat above
the mid-point of the Committee's one-year range.
(10) Alternatives A and C call for an easing and tightening
of the money market, respectively, in the period before the next
Committee meeting. Through the summer months, alternative A would
encourage somewhat more growth in M1 and M2, and alternative C less.than
would alternative B. But if M1 and M2 are to grow over the year. from
QIV '75 to QIV '76 at rates near the mid-points of their respective one-
year ranges, the near-term declines in interest rates anticipated under
alternative A would be short-lived, and rates would begin rising, perhaps
by late spring. We have assumed that under alternative A the funds rate
would average about 6¾ per cent in the fourth quarter of 1976. On the
other hand, the greater near-term restraint of alternative C would mean
that more monetary expansion would be required later in 1976 to achieve the
Committee's longer-run targets. Under this alternative, interest rates
would be likely to cease rising in late summer, with the funds rate
leveling out at around 6 per cent.
(11) The staff expects that under all three alternatives
business credit demands at banks would remain weak over the next month or
two and that the bank credit proxy will show relatively little growth.
Later in the year, as business working capital needs expand, business loan
demand on banks will probably pick up. In response, banks may begin to
raise funds in the CD market. However, the need to do so may be small
since we expect that flows into other deposits--though slowing somewhat as
the year progresses in reflection of rising market interest rates--will
be generally sufficient to finance demands on banks.
(12) The forward calendar for corporate and municipal bonds
appears to be relatively substantial over the next few weeks. In addition,
the Treasury may raise some cash through an offering of intermediate-
or longer-term coupon issues. Nevertheless, if the money market remains
stable--as is assumed under alternative B--long-term interest rates are
likely to remain around current levels in view of the strong institutional
investor interest in bonds that has developed since the beginning of the
year. A tightening of the money market, as contemplated under alternative
C, would probably cause some upward adjustment in long rates. Such a near-
term adjustment may be limited, however, if borrowers postpone scheduled
issues--as they may, since many of the issues now on the calendar had been
accelerated to take advantage of propitious market circumstances.
Proposed directive
(13) Given below is a proposed operational paragraph if the
Committee wishes to formulate its instructions in terms of desired growth
in monetary aggregates over the months ahead. No alternatives are pre-
sented for this formulation, in the expectation that the reference to
desired growth will be taken to apply to the longer-term targets and
that at this meeting the Committee will not reconsider those targets.
"Monetary aggregates" proposal
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE bank reserve and money market condi-
tions CONSISTENT WITH MODERATE GROWTH IN MONETARY AGGREGATES over
the period [DEL:immediately] ahead [DEL: , provided that monetary aggregates
appear to be growing at about the rates currently expected.]
(14) Should the Committee desire to continue placing main
emphasis on bank reserve and money market conditions, the language
needed would depend on the specific conditions sought. Three alterna-
tive "money market" directives intended to correspond to the similarly
lettered policy alternatives are given below.
Alternative "money market" proposals
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE SOMEWHAT EASIER bank reserve and money
market conditions over the period immediately ahead, provided that
monetary aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates cur-
rently expected.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to maintain prevailing bank reserve and money market conditions over
the period immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates
appear to be growing at about the rates currently expected.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE SOMEWHAT FIMER bank reserve and
money market conditions over the period immediately ahead, provided
that monetary aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates
currently expected.
NARROW MONEY SUP
CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
CLASS IIFOMC
MAR. 12, 1976
TABLE 1
BANK RESERVES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
RESERVES AVAILABLE AGGREGATE RESERVES REQUIRED RESERVESRESERVES AVAILABLE SEASONALLY aDJUSTED
FOR PRIVATE ______SEASONALLY ADJUSTED_____
FOR PRIVATE
Period NONBANK DEPOSITS Total Nonborrowed Total Private Total Time Gov't. and
SA NSA Reserves Reserves Required Demand Deposits Interbank
_-SA NA
MONTHLY LEVELS-SMILLIONS
FEB.
MAR.
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
FEB.
MAR.
WEEKLY LEVELS-SMILLIONS
MAR. 3
10
( -5.0)
( -2.6)
t -5.2)
( -5.1)
I -4.1)
( -5.7)
I -6.4)
( -4.6)
( -5.41
(33 705)
I -6.6)
( -3.9)
( -4.5)
( 0.7)
( -13.0)
( -7.3)
( -15.7)
( 2,092)
IN RESERVE REQUIREMENT RATIO.
1976 THE COMMITTEE AGREED ON A RPD
Table 2 CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
CLASS II-FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES MAR. 12, 1976
ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
MONEY SUPPLY Adjusted U.S. TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS Nondeposit
Period Narrow Broad Credit Govt. Other Sources of
(Ml) (M2) Proxy Deposits Total Than CD's CD's Funds
MONTHLY LFVELS-SBILLIbNS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
FER.-MAR. ( 0.1) I 11.4) ( 1.1) ( 3.41 ( 15.6) ( -53.8)
WEEKLY LEVEL5-SBILLIGNS
HAR. 3 P 296.7 678.0 514.2 2.2 455.3 381.3 74.0 7.8
N~~lL: DATA SHOWN IN PAR6NT)IESES~ *5 URN RJCIOS RLMNR
NOIEt DATA SHOWN IN PARENTHESES ARE CURRENT PROJECTIONS. P - PPELIMINARY
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
MARCH 12, 1976
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Bills
& A nt
Onen Market Oerations 1/
Coupon
T sues
A -cc IcouponI sue IsusZ%
Fer d
Agency RF's
Tooues Net '/
Daily Average Reserve Effects /
Open Market
O atlnonstn
a Member
Bank norrotwin
- 4 8 p
-3p
Other 4/
A In 
Reserve
Cat 
s
Req. res. against Available res. 5
U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9)
meeting. Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the
month.
P - Preliminary.
P r nA
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
A Taro~t-
Available
reserves
___ ~_ _ ___ _ _i __
I , Y g .- __ , g. ^ ^.j,^^- ;I-------; -- ;;;;- I ---- L-- - L--
TABLE 4
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES
($ millions, not seasonally adjusted)
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
MARCH 12, 1976
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
--- -- -404
---- -- -1,386
-- -107 ---- -107
-- -- -- -- -1
S - - - 336
S - - - 820
S - - - 376
maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury borrowings from the System.
4/ Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts only. Excludes redemptions and maturity shifts.
5/ In addition to net purchases of securities, also reflects changes in System holdings of bankers' acceptances, direct Treasury borrowings from the
System, and redemptions (-) of Agency and Treasury coupon issues.
6/ Includes hanges in both RP's (+) and matched sale-purchase transactions (-).
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
MARCH 12, 1976
TABLE 5
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
(millions of dollars)
U.S. Govt. Security
Dealer Positions
I ___ ~.~
Dealer Positions
Corporate Municipal
n I . A
Member Bank Reserve Positions
Borrowing at FRB** I Basic Reserve Deticit
Excess**
R e~II C
Period Bills ouporx Issues 11 on s on s sI e T I8NwYr38Ohr
(1)
*4,703
*5,984
* 581
* 911
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
I
8 Now Ynrk
I r-r I
**Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
* STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
-- I ...
(6)
- 9,533
- 9,344
- 9,896
- 9,966
- 9,015
- 9,202
- 9,746
-10,108p
- 8,478
- 9,018
- 9,343p
Tot l
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL(FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
MARCH 12, 1976
TABLE 6
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(Per Cent)
S Short-Term Lon-Term
STreas ills 90-119 Day CD's New Issua-NYC Aaa Utility Municipal U.S. Govt. (20- FNMA GNMA
Federal Commercial New Recently Bond yr. Constant Auction Guaranteed
Period Funds 90-Day 1-year Paper 60-89 Day 90-119 Day Issue Offered Buyer Maturity) Yield Securities
MAR. 12, 1976
