Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
September 17, 1976
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemBy the staff
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC
September 17, 1976
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 in the August-September period appears to be increasing
at a rate slightly below the mid-point of the Committee's 4-8 per cent
operating range. However, expansion at banks of time and savings deposits
other than money market CD's has been considerably stronger than anticipated,
and growth in M2 appears to be running above the mid-point of its two-month
range. Deposit inflows at nonbank thrift institutions also picked up in
August, and this higher rate of growth appears to have continued in early
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over August-September Period
(SAAR in per cent)
Memo:
Federal funds rate
(per cent per annum)
Latest Estimates
Avg. for statement
week ending
(2) Nonborrowed reserves appear to have increased at about a
decline in outstanding large CD's released reserves to support expansion
in other deposits. Moreover, much of the growth in deposits has occurred
in categories--such as savings deposits--with relatively low reserve
(3) Given the behavior of the aggregates, the Desk has continued
to aim at a Federal funds rate around 5-1/4 per cent throughout the
inter-meeting period. Short-term credit demands have been generally weak
since the last meeting of the Committee, as businesses paid down bank debt
and the volume of commercial paper and Treasury bill issues remained
unchanged. Most short-term rates declined somewhat over the inter-meeting
period, but most of the downward adjustment occurred today following
publication of the latest weekly M1 figure yesterday.
(4) Long-term rates have declined 10 to 20 basis points since
the last Committee meeting, in part because many investors seemed to
believe that the flow of economic data suggested a further moderation in
the prospective pace of economic expansion and inflation. The largest
declines were in the corporate sector, where the volume of new bond issues
was relatively light. Issues of state and local government securities
remained relatively large, and the U.S. Treasury raised a substantial
additional volume of new money through sales of intermediate-term coupon
(5) The table on the following page shows (in terms of
percentage annual rates of change) related monetary and financial flows
over various time periods.
Past Past
Calendar Twelve Six Three Past
Year Months Months Months Month
Aug. '76 Aug. '76 Aug. '76 Aug. '76
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Nonbank commercial paper -.2 -- .3 .3 .1
loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institu-
tions--which are derived from either end-of-month or last Wednesday-of-month
figures. Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are
adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when
reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(6) Alternative short-run specifications for the monetary
aggregates and the Federal funds rate are summarized below for Committee
consideration. (More detailed data, as well as longer-run projections,
are shown in the tables on pp. 5a and 5b).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for Sept.-Oct.
M1 4½-8½ 4-8 3½-7½
M2  10-14 9-13 8-12
Federal funds rate 4¼-5¼ 4¾-5¾ 5¼-6¼
(inter-meeting period)
(7) With economic activity projected to expand at a moderate
rate over the next few months, M1 is also expected to continue rising
over the September-October period at a rate little different from that
of recent months. Under alternative B, given prevailing money market
conditions--as indexed by a Federal funds rate around 5¼ per cent--
M1 will probably grow in a 4-8 per cent annual rate range.
(8) M2 may rise in a 9-13 per cent annual rate range under
alternative B over the September-October period. In recent weeks, expansion
of time and savings deposits other than large money market CD's has been
substantially more rapid than expected. Although we have assumed that
the rate of expansion will slow somewhat over the course of the inter-
meeting period, we still expect such deposits to rise at about a 15 per cent
annual rate on balance from August to October. Much of this reflects our
assumption that the rate of increase in savings deposits at banks and--
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Semi-annual
QII '76-QIV '76
QIV '76-QII '77
Annual
QII '76-QII '77
FOMC Longer-run Range
QII '76-QII '77
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
Semi-annual
QII '76-QIV '76
QIV '76-QII '77
Annual
QII '76-QII '77
also at thrift institutions--will remain sizable so long as the 3-month
Treasury bill rate remains in the neighborhood of 5-1/8 per cent.
(9) Business loan demands on banks are likely to remain
sluggish over the next few weeks, although they may strengthen later
in the fall if and as the rate of business inventory accumulation once
again accelerates. Over the near-term, banks are likely to continue
utilizing large inflows of funds into time and savings deposits other than
large CD's to increase holdings of relatively high-yielding Treasury coupon
issues, including the two-year Treasury note to be auctioned on September 21
and a just announced 5-year note to be auctioned on September 28 (raising
$2 billion of new cash). Banks will also probably permit the outstanding
volume of large negotiable CD's to decline somewhat further over the
weeks immediately ahead, and the bank credit proxy over the September-
October period may rise at about a 4 per cent annual rate.
(10) Private credit demands on the open market may strengthen
a little from the summer pace. In particular, substantially more new
corporate bond offerings appear to be scheduled for October than had been
marketed during the summer months, although part of the increase is
seasonal. A sizable volume of new state and local government issues
continues to be projected for early fall. Treasury credit needs are likely
to be relatively moderate in the early fall, given the large end-of-
September cash balance now in prospect, but such needs will probably
pick up as the quarter progresses.
(11) Alternative A involves an easing of the money market,
with the funds rate range centered on 4¾ per cent. Such an easing would
probably be accompanied by a decline in the Treasury bill rate to the
rate to around 5 per cent. In response to these market rate declines, the
bank prime loan rate would probably adjust downward. Longer-term market
rates probably also would move down somewhat further, but the declines
could be limited as borrowers accelerate offerings in anticipation
of a later reversal in yields. Primary mortgage market rates--which have
changed little in recent weeks despite declines in corporate bond yields--
would probably begin to drop noticeably.
(12) The easing in short-term rates under alternative A
would likely be accompanied by a slightly stronger expansion in M1 over
the short-run--with the M1 growth range estimated to be 4 -8 per cent
for the September-October period. There would be some strengthening
in inflows of time and savings deposits other than large CD's, particularly
savings deposits. However, if credit demands on banks remain relatively
weak over the next few weeks, banks are likely to become less active in
soliciting consumer-type time deposit funds. Banks would probably continue
to run-off large money market CD's, while at the same time taking advantage
of the lower level of market rates to lengthen maturities on those new CD's
that they do issue.
(13) The tightening of money market conditions contemplated
under alternative C--with the funds rate range centered on 5¾ per cent--
might well lead to fairly sharp upward adjustments in market rates over
the next few weeks. Dealer bill positions are currently very large, and
the 3-month bill rate could move up to the 5 -6 per cent area. Holdings
of coupon issues are also fairly sizable, and strong efforts to secure
the paper profits on such positions could lead to an appreciable rise
in longer-term Treasury yields, with spill-over effects on other
longer-term markets.
(14) A little slower growth in the monetary aggregates would,
of course, be likely to develop over the September-October period under
alternative C than under either of the other two alternatives. In
particular, growth in savings deposits may well come to a halt, at least
temporarily, as depositors shift to higher-yielding market instruments.
Banks may seek to compensate for this to some extent by more aggressive
offerings of time deposits, including large CD's. On balance, under this
alternative we would expect M1 over the forthcoming two-month period to
expand in a 3½-7½ per cent annual rate range and M2 in an 8-12 per cent
(15) All of the short-run alternatives shown would be consistent
with the Committee's current longer-run growth ranges for the monetary
aggregates covering the period from QII '76 to QII '77. The staff still
believes that interest rates will probably have to rise--perhaps
beginning late in the year--to achieve a longer-run M1 growth rate of 5¾
per cent, the mid-point of the Committee's range. In view of the apparent
strengthening of time and savings deposit flows, and allowing for a some-
what lower average level of interest rates during the year ending mid-'77,
the staff now expects longer-run growth rates for M2 and M3 to be near the
tops of their ranges. The longer-run Federal funds rate patterns implied
by the alternatives are shown in appendix Table II.
Proposed directive
(16) Given below is a proposed operational paragraph for the
directive if the Committee should wish to return to language that
emphasizes desired growth in monetary aggregates. No alternatives are
presented for this formulation, in the expectation that the reference
to desired growth will be taken to apply to the longer-term targets and
that at this meeting the Committee will not reconsider those targets.
"Monetary Aggregates" Proposal
To implement this policy, while taking account of
developments in domestic and international financial markets,
the Committee seeks to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE bank reserve
and money market conditions CONSISTENT WITH MODERATE GROWTH IN
MONETARY AGGREGATES over the period [DEL: immediately] ahead [DEL: provided
that monetary aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates
currently expected].
(17) Should the Committee desire to continue placing main
emphasis on bank reserve and money market conditions, the language needed
would depend on the specific conditions sought. Three alternative "money
market" directives, intended to correspond to the similarly lettered
policy alternatives, are given below.
Alternative "Money Market" Proposals
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the Com-
mittee seeks to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE SOMEWHAT EASIER bank
reserve and money market conditions over the period immediately
ahead, provided that monetary aggregates appear to be growing at
about the rates currently expected.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the Com-
mittee seeks to maintain prevailing bank reserve and money market
conditions over the period immediately ahead, provided that mone-
tary aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates currently
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the Com-
mittee seeks to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE SOMEWHAT FIRMER bank
reserve and money market conditions over the period immediately
ahead, provided that monetary aggregates appear to be growing at
about the rates currently expected.
