Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
May 13, 1977
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC
May 13, 1977
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M 1 increased at a record 19¾ per cent annual rate in
April, and growth for the April-May period is projected at a 12¼
per cent annual rate--2¼ percentage points above the upper end of the
Committee's desired range. M 2 appears to be expanding at about a 9.1
per cent annual rate over April and May, below the mid-point of the
Committee's range, reflecting a further moderation in the growth of
the interest bearing component of this aggregate. Nonborrowed
reserves expanded substantially in April, reflecting the sharp
expansion of demand deposits early in the month, but are likely
to show little net change on balance in May, partly in lagged
response to recent declines in demand deposits.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over April-May period
(SAAR in per cent)
M1 6 to 10
M2  8 to 12
Memorandum:
Federal funds rate
(per cent per annum)
Latest Estimates
Avg. for statement
week ending
(2) In response to very rapid growth of M1 in the early weeks
of April, the Desk became somewhat less generous in its provision of non-
borrowed reserves in the statement week following the April FOMC meeting,
expecting the Federal funds rate to average 4-3/4 per cent or slightly
higher. Over following statement weeks, the Desk raised its funds rate
target first to around 5 per cent and then to around 5-1/4 per cent, as
incoming data indicated that M1 was apparently growing at rates well
above the Committee's range, while M2 growth was near the mid-point of
its range. In the latest statement week the funds rate averaged 5.31
per cent. With the rise in the funds rate, member bank borrowing at the
discount window has increased since the April FOMC meeting to averages
of $214 million and $154 million, respectively, in the last two statement
(3) Since the April FOMC meeting short-term market rates
generally have increased by around 1/2 percentage point, and most recently,
a number of major banks have raised the prime loan rate from 6-1/4 per
cent to 6-1/2 per cent. Business demands for short-term funds have been
quite strong over this period. Business loans at banks increased at a
pace--and commercial paper issued by finance companies and nonfinancial
corporations expanded more sharply than in any month since 1974. Upward
pressures on short-term rates, however, were tempered by the improved
Treasury financial position which has permitted a paydown of Treasury bills
amounting to $4.5 billion thus far in the second quarter.
(4) Long-term interest rates have increased from 10 to
long rates have been moderated by a significant cutback in publicly
offered corporate bonds--though both private placements of corporate
issues and bonds issued by municipalities have remained relatively
large. In addition, the Treasury paid down debt of around $400 million
in its mid-May refunding and has announced an additional run-off of
$500 million in the 2-year notes scheduled to be refinanced right
after the May FOMC meeting.
(5) In its May refunding the Treasury reopened securities
first issued in last February's refunding, auctioning $2.85 billion of
bonds. Bidding in the auctions for both issues was relatively aggressive
and average auction rates were set within a few basis points of levels
on outstanding issues. Dealers have distributed essentially all of
their awards, and both new offerings are currently quoted at close to
issue price.
(6) The table on the following page shows (in terms of
percentage annual rates of change) related monetary and financial
flows over various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average Apr. '76 Oct. '76 Jan. '77 Mar. '77
Concepts of Money
M 1 (currency plus demand
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(7) Summarized below for Committee consideration are
alternative short-run operating specifications for the monetary
aggregates and the Federal funds rate. (Detailed data are shown in
the tables on pp. 6 and 7).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for May-June
M1 1½-5½ 1-5 ½-4½
M2  4-8 3½-7½ 2¾-6¾
Federal funds rate 4¼-5¼ 4¾-5¾ 5¼-6¼
(intermeeting period)
(8) Under all alternatives, we expect M1 growth to slow
markedly over the next several weeks from the April pace. The
extremely large M1 expansion last month appears to have provided
the public with sufficient cash to accommodate much of their increased
transactions needs in the second quarter, when nominal GNP is pro-
jected to expand at about a 14 per cent annual rate. A growth range of
B, assuming the Federal funds rate remains around 5¼ per cent--the mid-
point of a 4¾-5¾ per cent range. For the second quarter as a whole,
M1 growth would be around a 9¼ per cent annual rate, well above the
(9) Under alternative B, we would expect M2 to expand in
a 3½-7½ per cent annual rate range in the May-June period. The time
and savings deposit component of M 2 is expected to expand somewhat
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2  M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M4  M5  Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
more rapidly over the weeks ahead than during the recent past.
In the course of April, growth in consumer-type time and savings
deposits appears to have been restrained by relatively large nonwith-
held tax payments by individuals. Still, growth in the weeks ahead
is likely to be slower than the pace during the first quarter in view
of the higher level of short- and intermediate-term market rates now
(10) It appears that market rates have largely adjusted to
a Federal funds rate of around 5¼ per cent. However, some further
minor upward adjustments in market rates could develop between now and
the next Committee meeting even if the funds rate remains unchanged.
The Treasury may not be in a position to continue paying off bills
in the weekly and monthly auctions after the end of May, and private
short-term credit demands are expected to remain generally strong.
If the upward adjustments that have already occurred in the commercial
paper rate are sustained, a further rise in the bank prime rate is
possible within the next few weeks.
(11) We would expect the funds rate and other interest
rates, particularly short-term rates, to rise substantially after mid-
year, as the demands for money and credit continue to be generally
strong and the Treasury once again becomes a sizable net borrower.
By the first quarter of 1978, the staff anticipates a funds rate of
around 7 per cent under alternative B, if M1 growth is to be near the
mid-point of the Committee's 4 -6 per cent range for the QI'77-QI'78
period. This is a somewhat higher funds rate than the funds rate
projected for the first quarter of 1976 in the previous bluebook.
This upward revision reflects the need for greater restraint in M
growth over the last three quarters of the target period in view of
the 9¼ per cent annual growth rate in M1 now expected for the second
quarter. With the somewhat higher interest rates anticipated,
inflows of interest-bearing deposits in M 2 and M3 would probably
slow, and growth in these aggregates over the QI '77-QI '78 period may
be around the lower ends of their longer run ranges.
(12) Alternative C contemplates a tightening in money
market conditions over the next few weeks while alternative A involves
an easing. Under alternative C the Federal funds rate would be expected
to rise to the mid-point of a 5¼-6¼ per cent range. This may be a
accompanied by growth in M1 in the May-June period at an annual rate
in a range of ½-4½ per cent--about ½ point slower than under alternative
B. The immediate retarding effect on M2 is expected to be somewhat
greater under alternative C. With the funds rate rising to around 5¾
per cent, the 3-month bill rate may adjust up to the 5½-5¾ per cent
area. Such a substantial further rise in short-term rates to a level
well above the ceiling rate on savings deposits is likely to trigger a
sizable outflow of savings funds to market instruments.
(13) The increases in short-term rates under alternative C
would probably also be accompanied by a fairly prompt return to ceiling
rates on time deposits at those banks and thrift institutions that
had lowered offering rates previously. Banks may also begin to
press CD offerings more consistently on the market, partly to lock
in funds at current interest costs. Depository institutions are
likely to raise their lending rates on business loans and mortgages.
Moreover--with outstanding mortgage commitments at record levels--
thrifts are likely to become considerably more cautious in making
new commitments. In bond markets, rates may show some increase, but
these increases may be limited by the continued large volume of
institutional funds seeking long-term outlets and by any effect that
a tightening of the money market may have in dampening inflationary
(14) An immediate tightening of the money market, such as
is called for under alternative C, would probably reduce somewhat the
level to which the funds rate would have to rise ultimately to restrain
monetary growth to within the FOMC's longer-run ranges. We would
expect the funds rate to peak at around 6¾ per cent in the winter of
this year.
(15) The near-term easing of the money market under
alternative A would probably stimulate a substantial rally in debt
markets, particularly in light of the sizable short position of U.S.
Government security dealers in coupon issues. The staff would not
expect any decline in the funds rate to be sustainable, given the
strong growth in nominal GNP that is projected. A subsequent rather
sharp rise in the funds rate would seem to be required under the cir-
cumstances to keep monetary growth rates within their longer-run ranges.
Directive language
(16) Given below are alternatives for the operational paragraphs
of the directive. The first formulation, like the directive adopted at
the last meeting, places main emphasis on near-term rates of growth in
monetary aggregates; it shows--in strike-through form--the specifications
adopted at the last meeting (except that the upper limit shown for the
funds rate range--5-1/2 per cent--reflects the modification agreed upon
on May 6). The second formulation places main emphasis on money market
conditions. As suggested below, the particular language needed in the
opening lines of the money market formulation would depend on the specific
conditions sought; the three alternatives shown--calling, respectively,
for somewhat easier, prevailing, and somewhat firmer money market condi-
tions--are intended to be associated with the specifications discussed
in the preceding section under alternatives A, B, and C.
"Monetary Aggregates" Formulation
The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of growth in
M-1 and M-2 on a path believed to be reasonably consistent with
the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the preced-
ing paragraph. Specifically, at present, it expects the annual
growth rates over the [DEL: April-May] MAY-JUNE period to be within the
ranges of [DEL: 6 to 10] ____ to ____ per cent for M-1 and [DEL: 8 to 12]
____ to ____ per cent for M-2. In the judgment of the Com-
mittee such growth rates are likely to be associated with a weekly
average Federal funds rate of about [DEL: 4-3/4] ____ per cent. If,
giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that
growth rates over the 2-month period will deviate significantly
from the midpoints of the indicated ranges, the operational objec-
tive for the Federal funds rate shall be modified in an orderly
fashion within a range of [DEL: 4-1/2 to 5-1/2] ____ to ____
per cent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the operating constraints specified above are proving to be signif-
icantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the Chairman
who will then decide whether the situation calls for supplementary
instructions from the Committee.
"Money Market" Formulation
At this time, the Committee seeks to maintain about the
prevailing money market conditions (or to achieve somewhat easier
or somewhat firmer money market conditions) during the period
immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates appear to be
growing at approximately the rates currently expected, which are
believed to be on a path reasonably consistent with the longer-
run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the preceding para-
graph. Specifically, the Committee seeks to maintain the weekly
average Federal funds rate at about ____ per cent, so long
as M-1 and M-2 appear to be growing over the May-June period
period at annual rates within ranges of ____ to ____ per
cent and ____ to ____ per cent, respectively. If, giving
approximately equal weight to M-l and M-2, it appears that growth
rates over the 2-month period are approaching or moving beyond the
limits of the indicated ranges, the operational objective for the
weekly average Federal funds rate shall be modified in an orderly
fashion within a range of ____ to ____ per cent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the operating constraints specified above are proving to be signif-
icantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the Chairman
who will then decide whether the situation calls for supplementary
instructions from the Committee.
