Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC February 2, 1979
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC February 2, 1979
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) February 2, 1979
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M-1 is estimated to have declined at a 5 per cent annual
rate in January, and at a 1½ per cent annual rate over the December-
January period, considerably below the range specified by the FOMC
at its December meeting,1/ as demand deposits have weakened much
more than anticipated. Over the two months, shifting of funds from
demand deposits into Automatic Transfer Service (ATS) savings
accounts and NOW accounts in New York State reduced M-1 growth by
about 3 percentage points. In addition to the impact of ATS and
NOW's, and the usual lagged effect of higher interest rates, demand
deposits may be declining as a result of greatly increased public
awareness of options for holding precautionary and transactions
balances in various interest-bearing forms in the wake of recent
June benchmark will also incorporate revised seasonal factors.
All tables on subsequent pages of the Bluebook (with the excep-
tion of the first two tables following the appendices) are based on
the revised series.
open- and closed-end--increased by about $2.5 billion per month
on average, following average increases of about $950 million a
month in the preceding two months.
Comparison of FOMC Policy Ranges for
December-January
to Latest Staff Estimates
Ranges Latest Estimates
M-1 2 to 6 -1.5
M-2 5 to 9½ 0.1
Federal funds rate 9¾ to 10½ Avg. for statement
(per cent per annum) week ending
Dec. 27 10.25
Jan. 3 10.59
(2) M-2 is estimated to have shown virtually no growth over
December and January, and it, too, was much weaker than the low end of
the range set by the FOMC in December. Growth in the interest-bearing
component of M-2 slowed over the past two months, with outstanding
deposits subject to fixed rate ceilings actually declining in continuing
adjustment to higher market rates. Net inflows of deposits to
savings and loan associations in December-January were only a shade
below the October-November pace, as these institutions continued
aggressively to offer money market certificates (MMC's). Deposit
inflows to mutual savings banks were at a considerably reduced pace
over the past two months.
(3) With the total inflows of funds to deposit accounts
subject to interest rate ceilings remaining weak in December and
January, banks issued additional large time deposits--some of which are
included in M-2--and probably increased their RP's with nonbank
investors. Growth in bank credit slowed to only a 1 per cent annual
rate in December, following rapid expansion in the two preceding
months, but partial data for large banks suggest that growth in bank
credit has picked up in January.
(4) Following the December FOMC meeting, the Account Manage-
ment immediately raised its Federal funds rate objective from 9-7/8
per cent to 10 per cent or a bit higher. Funds generally traded at
rates significantly above this level in the latter part of December
and early January, however, as the Desk encountered difficulties in
supplying reserves because of a shortage of readily available
collateral. On December 29 and on January 12, the FOMC decided
that, despite the relatively weak growth of the aggregates,
the Desk should continue to seek a funds rate of 10 per cent or a
bit higher, and the funds rate has remained around this level since
early January.
(5) With the funds rate of about 10 per cent, reserves of
the banking system changed little on balance over the December-January
period. Nonborrowed reserves contracted at about a 1½ per cent annual
rate, and total reserves increased at a 2¾ per cent rate; over the first
three quarters of 1978, when deposit growth had been strong, these aggre-
gates had grown at 7 to 8 per cent annual rates. Member bank
borrowings rose from $700 million in November to about $1 billion
in January, as the spread of the funds rate over the discount rate
widened slightly. With growth of currency remaining strong, the
monetary base continued to rise about a 9 per cent annual rate
over the past two months on average, but the rate of growth diminished
in January.
(6) After coming under renewed selling pressure in the
last half of December, the foreign exchange value of the dollar
steadied in early January, and has risen considerably in recent days.
In early February, the weighted average dollar exchange rate was
about 8 per cent above its late October level and more than 2 per cent
above its level at the time of the December FOMC meeting.
. Toward the end of the
period, the United States purchased $2 billion equivalent of foreign
currencies, net, virtually all of which was used to repay swap debt.
(7) While interest rates rose somewhat further in the
weeks immediately following the December FOMC meeting, these increases
have been generally more than offset by declines in January. Interest
rates on short-term private obligations, in particular, have fallen
considerably on balance since the December meeting--generally about
which, despite large offerings of these instruments, fell 60 basis
points in the primary market since the December FOMC meeting. CD
rates had increased sharply just before the meeting and the recent
declines bring them into more characteristic alignment with other
short-term rates. With their costs of funds falling, two large
banks have lowered their prime lending rate 1/4 of a point to 11.50
per cent.
but bond yields have dropped 10 to 20 basis points. The decline
in market interest rates reflected market perceptions of a
reduced likelihood of a further tightening of monetary policy in
light of the recent performance of the dollar in exchange markets,
the slow growth of the monetary aggregates, and the recent modest
growth of total business credit demands. An exception to the general
pattern of declining market rates has been the behavior of yields
on short-dated (3 months or less) Treasury bills, which have changed
little on balance since the December meeting. These yields did not
decline in association with falling private rates owing to large
Federal Reserve sales of bills, the continuation of larger Treasury
auctions of 3-month bills since November, and, after mid-January, a
shift by foreign official institutions from purchases to sales of
(8) The table on the next page shows percentage annual
rates of change in related monetary and financial flows over various
time periods.
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Monetary base
Concepts of Money
M-1 (Currency plus demand
deposits) 1/
M-l+ (M-l plus savings
deposits at commercial
banks, NOW accounts at
banks and thrift insti-
tutions, credit union
share draft accounts,
and demand deposits at
mutual savings banks). 11.0
M-2 (M-l plus time deposits
at commercial banks
other than large CD's)
M-3 (M-2 plus deposits at
thrift institutions)
M-4 (M-2 plus CD's)
M-5 (M-3 plus CD's)
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Month-end basis
Monthly average
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Large CD's
Nonbank commercial paper
Past
Twelve
Months
Jan.'79
over
1978 Jan.'78
:.'78.
L
Past
Six
Months
Jan.'79
over
June '78
Past
Three
Months
Jan.'79
over
Past
Months
Jan.'79
over
Prospective developments: long-run
(9) Alternative longer-run growth ranges for the monetary
aggregates and bank credit over the one-year QIV '78 to QIV '79
period are shown in the table below for Committee consideration.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Current Range
M-1 2½ to 5½ 1½ to 4½ ½ to 3½ 2 to 6
M-2 5 to 7½ 4½ to 7 4 to 6½ 6½ to 9
M-3 6½ to 9 6 to 8½ 5½ to 8 7½ to 10
Bank Credit 8 to 11 7½ to 10½ 7 to 10 8½ to 11½
(10) Alternative B is based on the FOMC's current
expectation that M-1 growth over the QIII '78 to QIII '79 period
would be around the upper limit of a 4 to 6½ per cent range in the
absence of new transactions accounts, such as ATS. At its October
meeting, the Committee expected that M-1 growth over the longer-run
would be in a 2 to 6 per cent range, which allows for a potential
downward effect on M-1 from ATS of 1/2 to 4-1/2 percentage points.
On the basis of experience gained with ATS and NOW accounts in
New York since that time, the staff believes that it is now rea-
sonable to assume that growth in such accounts will reduce M-1
growth over the QIV'78 to QIV '79 period from what it other-
1/
wise would have been by 3 to 3-1/2 percentage points. Given
that assumption, alternative B proposes a 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 per cent
range for M-1; this range assumes--unlike recent M-1 ranges--that
the more likely growth of M-1 is at the mid-point rather than near
the upper end.1/ The range is narrower than that adopted in October
but remains a little wider than earlier M-1 ranges to reflect some
continued uncertainty about ATS effects. Alternatives A and C are
more and less expansive, respectively. Proposed ranges for the
broader aggregates have been lowered, for reasons discussed in
paragraphs (13) and (14) below.
(11) Expansion of nominal GNP over the longer-run policy
period, while projected to moderate, is still expected to be around
its cash balances back into line with growing transactions needs.
However, the staff expects that the demand for M-1 will not be so
strong over the year, on average, as to require a significant change
in the prevailing Federal funds rate if M-1 growth at the midpoint of
the alternative B range is to be achieved over the year 1979. With
nominal GNP projected to expand more rapidly in the first half of
next few months and then recede later in the year. Alternative C, on the
other hand, would probably involve an increase in the funds rate from
current levels to nearly 11 per cent in the course of the year. By contrast,
alternative A would imply a reduction in the funds rate, reaching
year-end levels about ¾ of a percentage point below the current level.
The staff projection of the quarterly pattern of the funds rate for
each alternative is shown in Appendix I.
(12) The specifications imply further rapid increase
in the velocity of M-1, even abstracting from ATS effects, as shown in
Appendix II. The recent weakness in M-1 at a time of strong economic
growth is considerably larger than can be explained by standard
econometric specifications of the relationship between interest rates
and money demand and by the shift of demand balances to ATS and NOW
accounts. The shortfall in money demand apparently reflects a
wider adoption and more intensive use of techniques to economize
on cash, induced in part by the sustained high interest rate levels,
and the staff has assumed that a downward shift in money demand is
likely to continue over 1979. The shift is projected to reduce M-1
growth (and thus increase V-l) by about 2 percentage points over
the longer-run policy period.
(13) Under alternative B, M-2 growth for the year ahead
is expected to be in a 4½ to 7 per cent range and M-3 growth in a
than their current longer-run ranges for the QIII '78 to QIII '79
period. This reduction reflects the slower rate of growth in the
time and savings deposit component of these two aggregates that
is now expected on average over the course of the year, given recent
experience. The public has been diverting larger amounts of funds
than expected from deposits subject to fixed ceiling rates to market
instruments. Our projections assume a pick-up in growth of such
deposits, but not to the pace earlier expected. Growth of the
broader monetary aggregates is, of course, slower under alternative C
and more rapid under alternative A.
(14) The range for bank credit growth for alternative B
has been reduced to 7½ to 10 per cent--1 percentage point lower than
its current range, reflecting the slowing of economic activity, the
sustained higher level of interest rates, and the cumulative
reduction in bank liquidity. To sustain such credit growth in the
face of slower inflows of demand and consumer-type time and savings
deposits, banks would have to rely increasingly on large negotiable
time deposits, nondeposit borrowings, including Eurodollars, and to
reduce further their holdings of liquid assets. Thrifts are also
likely to have to rely on FHLB and other borrowings, as well as
reductions in their liquidity position, to fund their mortgage lending.
Prospective developments: short-run
(15) Three alternative short-run specifications for the
monetary aggregates and the Federal funds rate are presented below
for Committee consideration. Alternative I calls for a reduction
in the Federal funds rate by ½ percentage point from the current
level; such a decline over the intermeeting period would be most
consistent with the alternative A longer-run range. Alternative II
calls for no change in the current 9¾ to 10½ per cent funds rate range,
with a midpoint near the present Desk objective. This alternative
would be consistent with both the alternative B and C longer-run
ranges. Alternative III, which calls for increases in the funds
rate to around the midpoint of a 10¼ to 11 per cent range, is most
consistent with longer-run alternative C. (More detailed and
longer-run data are shown in tables on pages 12 and 13).
Alt. I Alt. II Alt. III
Ranges for Feb.-Mar.1/
M-1 5 to 10 4½ to 9½ 4 to 9
M-2 5½ to 9½ 5 to 9 4½ to 8½
Federal funds rate
(Intermeeting period) 9¼ to 10 9¾ to 10½ 10¼ to 11
(16) In considering short-run alternatives, the FOMC may
wish to take into account the growth rates for the aggregates from
the estimated January levels that would be required to reach levels
in March and June that are implied by the longer-run ranges. The
table on page 14 provides such information for longer-run alternative B.2/
As shown by the middle column of the table, M-1 would have to grow
at a 8-1/4 per cent annual rate from January--and M-2 by a 10-1/4
per cent annual rate--to reach the level in March that is implied
by growth along the midpoint path of the longer-run QIV '78 - QIV '79
range. Growth for M-1 would have to be about 3 percentage points
lower to reach the low end of the alternative B range of growth,
and 3 points higher to reach the upper end. Over the five months
from January to June, M-1 would have to expand at a 5 per cent annual
rate and M-2 at a 7 per cent annual rate to reach midpoint paths.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-11 /  M-2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
I/ The staff has assumed that over the longer-run policy period from QIV '78 to QIV '79
M-l growth will be reduced 3 to 3 percentage points by ATS. In projecting GNP, monetary
aggregates, and interest rates the staff has carried forward the assumption in most
recent Bluebooks that M-l, in the absence of ATS, would increase at a 6% per cent annual
rate over the longer-run. Thus, the observed growth of M-l is expected to be 3 per cent
over the QIV '78 to QIV '79 period.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit1/
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
I/ January 1979 bank credit data are not available, therefore, monthly bank credit
estimates are not
Growth Rates from January Levels Required
to Achieve Levels Implied by Alternative B
Longer-run Ranges
(Per cent annual rate)
Achieve Low End Midpoint High End
Level by: of Range of Range of Range
(17) The staff believes that if the 13-1/4 per cent annual
rate of growth of nominal GNP projected for the current quarter
develops, it will call forth a substantial increase in M-1 in
February-March. Under alternative II, M-1 is projected to increase
in a range centered on a 7 per cent annual rate, which would put M-1
just below the midpoint of the alternative B long-run path by March.
Even such a resurgence in growth would bring the growth rate of M-1
for the first quarter (quarterly average basis) to only a 3/4 per cent
annual rate, and would imply another substantial increase in V-1,
2/
at about a 12 per cent annual rate, as shown in Appendix II.
(18) Under alternative II, M-2 is expected to expand at
a 5 to 9 per cent annual rate range in February-March, considerably
more rapidly than in the previous three months, but growth at the
M-2 up to the low end of the range specified under alternative B.
The acceleration of this aggregate reflects the expected strengthening
of both M-1 and the interest-bearing component of M-2, with much of
the strength in the latter likely to result from a slowing of re-
cent unusually rapid savings account withdrawals.
(19) At thrift institutions, the rate of deposit inflows
may edge off from the recent pace. Sizable net issuance of 6-month
money market certificates (MMC's) is expected, as in recent months,
to account for all of the growth of S&L and MSB deposits, as these
certificates continue to be marketed rather aggressively in response
to relatively strong demand for mortgage loans and in order to compete with
both other depository institutions and alternative financial instruments
paying high market rates of interest. With some moderation in total
thrift deposit inflows, and a continuing shift in the deposit mix
at thrifts toward high cost MMC's, mortgage markets conditions
are expected to tighten somewhat further in the intermeeting
(20) If Federal funds continue to trade at a rate of 10
per cent or slightly higher over the intermeeting period, as con-
templated under alternative II, other short-term rates are also likely
to remain about unchanged, as recent market rate declines appear to
reflect full adjustment to the weak growth of the aggregates. Business
short-term credit demands may strengthen a bit in coming weeks, and
the Treasury is expected to offer a sizable block of cash management
bills in early March. But these short-term demands are likely to be
accommodated without significant upward pressure on rates unless a
resurgence in growth of the monetary aggregates causes adjustments in
market expectations about the future course of monetary policy.
(21) Yields on longer-term securities would also be expected
to remain at about current levels over the intermeeting period under
alternative II. Security offerings by corporations, state and local
governments, and the U.S. Treasury are expected to be moderate. In its
mid-February refunding, the Treasury has announced that it intends to
auction $2¼ billion and $2 billion of 8 and 29¾ year securities,
respectively, in order to rollover maturing debt and raise about
$1.25 billion of new money. Following this operation, the Treasury
can raise the additional $10 billion of new cash needed by the end of
the quarter through sale of cash management bills and routine offerings
of short- and intermediate-term notes.
(22) The foreign exchange value of the dollar over coming
weeks may be sustained, under money market conditions implied by
alternative II, as banks obtain more funds from abroad to meet
relatively strong credit demands in a period of modest growth in
domestic deposits. The relatively high interest rates in the U.S. and
recent evidence of strength in the dollar may also encourage investment
in the dollar-denominated assets by private market participants. Of
course, the behavior of the dollar on exchange markets will also depend
on a number of other factors, including future developments in the
Middle East.
(23) Under alternative III, the Federal funds rate would
be expected to rise to the midpoint of a 10 to 11 per cent range.
Growth in M-1 would likely be in a 4 to 9 per cent and M-2 in 4 to 8
per cent annual rate range, respectively. A tightening action at
this time is likely to come as a surprise to the market in light of
the recent weakness in the aggregates. As a result, market participants
might conclude that a further tightening could follow and thus a
comparatively sharp increase in short-term interest rates could occur.
The higher level of money market rates would further encourage out-
flows of deposits subject to fixed rate ceilings, induce even more
aggressive offerings of MMC's and large denomination time deposits,
and foster a firming of bank lending terms--with the prime rate moving
up to record levels of over 12 per cent. The dollar would tend to
move higher in foreign exchange markets. In bond markets, interest
rates would rise, but both the moderate volume of new security
offerings and strengthened market expectations that inflation will
be curbed would tend to limit such movements. In the mortgage market,
however, rates would likely move significantly higher in response to
reduced deposit inflows at thrifts and the further rise in the cost
of their MMC's.
(24) Alternative I involves a decline in the funds rate
over the intermeeting period to the midpoint of a 9¼ to 10 per cent
range. In response to the reduction of the System's funds rate
target, short-term rates would decline further, and a sizable short-
term rally is likely to develop in bond markets, as investors
come to believe that interest rates may have peaked. At the same
time, the decline in interest rates--if not accompanied by indications
of weakening economic activity--may lead to a significant drop in the
foreign exchange value of the dollar if market participants become more
concerned about the outlook for inflation in this country.
Directive language
(25) Given immediately below are suggested operational
paragraphs for the directive in the customary form. (An alternative
formulation with money market emphasis is shown in paragraph (26)).
In the short run, the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions that are broadly consistent
with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited above,
while giving due regard to the program for supporting the
foreign exchange value of the dollar, to developing conditions
in domestic financial markets, and to uncertainties associated
with the introduction of ATS. Early in the period before the
next regular meeting, System open market operations are to be
directed at attaining a weekly average Federal funds rate
(I) slightly below the current level.
(II) AT ABOUT THE CURRENT LEVEL.
(III) slightly above the current level.
Subsequently, operations shall be directed at maintaining the
weekly average Federal funds rate within the range of [DEL: 9¾ to 10½]
____ TO ____ per cent. In deciding on the specific objective
for the Federal funds rate the Manager shall be guided mainly
by the relationship between the latest estimates of annual
rates of growth in the [DEL: December-January] FEBRUARY-MARCH period
of M-1 and M-2 and the following ranges of tolerance--2 to 6
TO per cent for M-1 and [DEL: 5-to-9] ____ TO ____ per cent
for M-2. [DEL: If, giving approximatety equal weight to M-1 and M-2,
their rates of growthappear to be significantly above the
midpoints of the indicated ranges, the objective for the funds rate
shall be raised in an orderly fashion within its range, if their
rates of growth appear to be approaching the 1ower limits of the
indicated ranges, the funds rate sha11 be lowered in an orderly
fashion within its range.]
IF, WITH APPROXIMATELY EQUAL WEIGHT GIVEN TO M-1 AND M-2, THEIR
RATES OF GROWTH APPEAR TO BE
Monetary aggregates emphasis
SIGNIFICANTLY ABOVE OR BELOW THE MIDPOINTS
Money market emphasis
CLOSE TO OR BEYOND THE UPPER OR LOWER LIMITS OF THE
INDICATED RANGES, THE OBJECTIVE FOR THE FUNDS RATE IS TO BE
RAISED OR LOWERED IN AN ORDERLY FASHION WITHIN ITS RANGE.
If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear to be
falling [DEL: outside the limits] ABOVE THE UPPER LIMIT OR BELOW THE
LOWER LIMIT of the indicated ranges at a time when the objective
for the funds rate has already been moved to the corresponding
limit of its range, the Manager will promptly notify the Chairman,
who will then decide whether the situation calls for supplementary
instructions from the Committee.
(26) In view of uncertainties about interpretation of the
aggregates, presented below is an alternative formulation of the
operational paragraphs with primary emphasis on money market conditions.
The role of the aggregates in this formulation is through a proviso
clause, which permits the funds rate to move up if growth of the
aggregates is excessively strong.
In the short run, the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions that are broadly consistent
with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited above,
while giving due regard to the program for supporting the foreign
exchange value of the dollar, to developing conditions in
domestic financial markets, and to uncertainties associated with
the introduction of ATS. In the period before the next regular
meeting, System open market operations are to be directed at
attaining a weekly average Federal funds rate (A) at about the
current level of (B) slightly above the current level, provided
that over the February-March period the annual rates of growth
of M-1 and M-2, given approximately equal weight, appear to be
no higher than ____ per cent and ____ per cent, respectively.
If growth of M-1 and M-2 for the 2-month period appears to be
in excess of the indicated limits, the objective for the Federal
funds rate is to be raised in an orderly fashion up to a maximum
of ____ per cent.
If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear to be
falling above the indicated limits at a time when the objective
for the funds rate has already been moved to its limit, the
Manager will promptly notify the Chairman, who will then decide
whether the situation calls for supplementary instructions from
the Committee.
