Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
April 13, 1979
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC
April 13, 1979
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M-1 grew in March at a ¾ per cent annual rate, but data
for early April suggest an acceleration in growth. For the March-April
period, M-1 is expected to increase at a 3¾ per cent annual rate, just
below the low end of the range adopted by the FOMC. On the other hand,
M-2 over the two months appears to be growing at around the midpoint of
the range adopted by the FOMC. Recent growth of the interest-bearing
component of this aggregate has been associated with a marked slowing of
outflows of savings deposits and continued rapid expansion in Money Market
Certificates (MMCs). At S&L's and MSB's, combined deposit growth remained
at about the 9 per cent rate of the preceding four months.
Comparison of FOMC Policy Ranges for
March-April
to Latest Staff Estimates
Ranges Latest Estimates
M-1 4 to 8 3.7
M-2 3½ to 7½ 5.5
Federal funds rate Avg. for statement
(per cent per annum) 10 or a bit higher week ending
March 21 10.09
(2) Growth of commercial bank credit decelerated sharply to a
expanded at much reduced rates. With loan expansion weakening and
inflows to deposits subject to ceilings improving, managed liabilities
rose by less than one-third of the $7 billion average increase during
the first two months of the year. Banks permitted outstanding CD's to
decline in March, while continuing to rely on Eurodollars and RP's to
supplement their loanable funds.
(3) The Manager of the System Open Market Account has continued
to aim for a weekly average Federal funds rate of 10 per cent or a bit
higher. In early April, projections for the monetary aggregates indicated
growth of M-1 at the bottom of its range over the March-April period and of
M-2 at slightly below the midpoint of its range. On April 6, the FOMC
concurred in the Chairman's view that projections at that time were not
sufficiently weak to call for a change in the System's funds rate
(4) Despite the modest strengthening of the monetary aggregates,
required reserves are expected to decline at a 3 per cent annual rate
over the March-April period, reflecting the fact that deposit growth was
mostly at nonmember banks and that reserves were released by a decline
in outstanding negotiable CD's. Both nonborrowed and total reserves
also are expected to decline--by annual rates of 1 and 3 per cent,
respectively. With currency expected to grow at a 9 per cent annual
rate over the March-April period, however, the monetary base is expected
to expand at a 5 per cent rate, continuing this year's much reduced rate
of expansion.
(5) Short-term interest rates have fluctuated fairly widely
since the March FOMC meeting, and on balance have risen somewhat. Rates on
short-dated Treasury bills increased 15 to 20 basis points as foreign
official accounts sold more than $5 billion of Treasury bills in late
March and early April. CD and long maturity bill rates, in contrast,
declined considerably in late March but have risen more recently, and
are now 10 to 25 basis points above their levels at the time of the
Committee meeting. The fluctuations of short-term interest rates appeared
to be associated with shifts in market opinion on the likely response
of monetary policy to incoming data on the economy. Bond and primary
mortgage market yields have edged up since the March FOMC meeting.
(6) The dollar has shown considerable strength in the exchange
markets since the last FOMC meeting. The dollar's weighted average
exchange value rose by more than 1 per cent at a time when there were
also sales of
$2 3/4 billion by the United States. Since the first of the year,
foreign official holdings of Treasury securities have contracted by over
$15 billion.
(7) The table on the next page shows percentage annual rates
of change in related monetary and financial flows over various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average Mar. '78 Sept. '78 Dec. '78 Feb. ' 79
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of
discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(8) The table below presents for Committee consideration three
alternative specifications for the monetary aggregates and the Federal
funds rate for the April-May period. Alternative B would maintain the
Federal funds rate at about the 10 per cent level that has prevailed
since late last year, while alternatives A and C, respectively, would
ease and tighten money market conditions in coming weeks. (More detailed
and longer-term data are contained in the tables on pp. 6 and 7.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for April-May
M-1 3½ to 7½ 3 to 7 2½ to 6½
M-2 5 to 9 4½ to 8½ 4 to 8
Federal funds rate
(Intermeeting period) 9¼ to 10 9¾ to 10 10¼ to 11
(9) As noted in the last Bluebook, the staff is assuming that
the downward shift of money demand that became apparent late last year
will not last as long or be as large as that which began in late 1974.
Thus, we have projected some strengthening of M-1 growth for the policy
period immediately ahead. Under alternative B, with the funds rate
remaining at the prevailing level of about 10 per cent, we expect M-1
to increase over the April-May period in a 3 to 7 per cent annual rate
range. For the second quarter as a whole, staff projections call for M-1
expansion under alternative B at about a 3¼ per cent annual rate, following
the 2½ per cent rate of decline in the first quarter. With nominal GNP
expected to expand at an 11 per cent annual rate, the implied growth of
V-1 in the second quarter, as shown in the Appendix, would be around a 7½
per cent annual rate, as compared with a 13 per cent rate in the first
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-l 1_ M-2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
i/ The staff has assumed that over the longer-run policy period from QIV '78 to QIV '79 M-l
growth will be reduced by about 2k percentage points by ATS.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Ratep
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
quarter. About 2 to 2 percentage points of the projected second quarter
increase in V-1 reflects the prospective continued shift of demand deposits
to ATS and NOW accounts. The remaining increase in velocity is still quite
large and assumes a continued downward drift of money demand, though at a
sharply decelerated pace.
Growth Rates from March Required to Achieve Levels
Implied by FOMC Longer-run Ranges
for M-1 and M-2
Low End Midpoint High End
of Range of Range of Range
Achieve level by:
QIV '79 (end-point of
longer-run range) 3.3 5.5 7.8
QIV '79 (end-point of
longer-run range) 6.4 8.7 10.9
(10) As shown in the table above and in the chart on page 9
M-1 and M-2 under alternative B, would be unlikely by May to reach levels
implied by the lower ends of their longer-run ranges. This is also true for
alternatives A and C. The shortfall of growth in these aggregates since
late last year requires that M-1 would have to expand at about an 8 per
cent annual rate from March, and M-2 at an 11 per cent rate, to reach
levels by May that are on the low end paths of the longer-run QIV '78 to
QIV '79 ranges. Over a period as long as six months (March to September) the
Growth Ranges and Actual M-1 and M-2
Alt. B. Range- .
Billions of dollars
1385
Q4 '78-Q4 '79
-a- S4%%
V %
I I I I SI I
Q4 '78-04 '79
% S 
%
--. 5%
--- .-
II I I I I I I I I I .
I I
I I
shortfall could be made up, and the level implied by the midpoint path of
the longer-run ranges could be achieved, by M-1 growth at a 6 per cent annual
rate and M-2 growth at a 9 per cent rate. Unless the downward shift in
money demand continues to be very strong, or the economy weakens much
more than projected, the staff believes that M-1 is likely to move into the
Committee's longer-run range by late summer, given the current Federal
funds rate.
(11) Under alternative B, M-2 is expected to accelerate into
a 4 to 8 per cent annual rate range in April-May. This reflects the
expected strengthening of M-1, as well as continuation of the recent
pick-up in growth of the interest-bearing component of M-2. The
decline in outstanding savings deposits appears to be abating. And banks
are expected to continue to be more active in the MMC market, as seems
to be the case since the mid-March elimination of the rate ceiling
differential on these deposits. Thrift institutions' deposit inflows,
on the other hand, are expected to moderate in the months ahead, largely
reflecting the mid-March regulatory actions.1/ Thus, their commitment
activity is likely to remain limited over the near term, and in order to
finance mortgage takedowns thrifts will likely reduce their liquidity
and continue to borrow. Primary mortgage rates may continue to edge
upward as deposit inflows to thrift institutions diminish.
(12) Financial markets in the weeks ahead may be subject to
some of the same conflicting pressures as in recent weeks--continued high
inflation, a strengthened dollar, and increased uncertainty about the
future course of economic activity. In such an environment, even
stability in the funds rate, as contemplated under alternative B, could
be associated with relatively wide fluctuations in interest rates arising
from changing expectations. Apart from expectational factors, underlying
demand-supply forces appear in reasonable balance. A large paydown of
Treasury cash management bills in the latter part of April may exert
downward pressures on very short-term interest rates, but this could
be offset by continued sales of bills by foreign official institutions
should the dollar continue strong.
(13) Despite a seasonal budgetary surplus, the Treasury's
marketable coupon borrowing in the current quarter is expected to be
moderately higher than in the first quarter as the Treasury builds up its
cash balance and finances redemptions of nonmarketable issues by foreign
accounts. On April 25, the Treasury will announce terms on its mid-May
refunding--a routine operation to refund only $1.7 billion of maturing
publicly held debt and probably also to raise about $2 to 3 billion of
new cash. Borrowing by Federally-sponsored credit agencies this quarter
is projected to recede from the high levels of the first quarter, and the
slate of new corporate security offerings likely will remain moderate.
(14) Alternative C contemplates a rise in the Federal funds
rate to the midpoint of a 10¼ to 11 per cent range. Growth in M-1 and M-2
would likely be in an annual rate range of 2 to 6 and 4 to 8 per cent,
respectively. Short-term interest rates probably would increase in line
with the rise in the funds rate. It is less clear what might happen
to long-term rates. They may rise some in sympathy with the increase in
short rates. But it is equally likely that they may show little net change,
or perhaps even decline some, if the market comes to believe that interest
rates may peak sooner than otherwise.
(15) Alternative A calls for a decline in the funds rate over
the intermeeting period to the midpoint of a 9¼ to 10 per cent range.
Growth in M-1 and M-2 would likely be in annual rate ranges of 3 to 7
and 5 to 9 per cent, respectively. An easing action might tend to reinforce
views that a considerable weakening in economic activity is in prospect.
As a result, short-term interest rates could decline sharply. Bond yields
would be expected to decline in the short-run, as investors might feel that
interest rates had peaked. However, such strength could be short-lived
because many market participants would question the System's resolve to
restrain inflationary pressures. Reflecting this latter concern, the
dollar probably would lose strength in exchange markets.
(16) The staff would expect that maintenance of the Federal
funds rate at about 10 per cent over the remainder of the year would be
consistent with M-1 growth for the QIV '78 to QIV '79 policy period at
about the midpoint of the Committee's 1½ to 4½ per cent range.- A near-
term increase in the funds rate,as under alternative C,likely would
necessitate some decline of interest rates in the second half of the
year in order to induce strength in the aggregates as the rate of
growth of nominal GNP decelerates further. Under alternative A, however,
we would expect interest rates to rise later in the year to offset the
stimulative effect on the aggregates of the near-term easing of money market
conditions, if M-1 growth over the longer-run policy period is to be near
the midpoint of its 1½ to 4 per cent range.
Directive language
(17) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for
the directive in the customary form. Alternative language consistent
with the short-run specifications of the alternatives discussed in the
preceding section is shown for the Committee's objective for the Federal
funds rate early in the period. At a later point, alternative language
is also provided for placing main emphasis either on monetary aggregates
or on money market conditions. The specifications adopted last month are
shown in strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve
and money market conditions that are broadly consistent with the
longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited above, while giving
due regard to the program for supporting the foreign exchange value
of the dollar and to developing conditions in domestic financial
markets. Early in the period before the next regular meeting,
System open market operations are to be directed at maintaining
the (or ATTAINING A) weekly average Federal funds rate
(A) SLIGHTLY BELOW THE CURRENT LEVEL.
(B) at about the current level,
(C) SLIGHTLY ABOVE THE CURRENT LEVEL.
Subsequently, operations shall be directed at maintaining the
weekly average Federal funds rate within the range of [DEL: 9¾ to 10½]
____ TO ____ per cent. In deciding on the specific objective for
the Federal funds rate the Manager shall be guided mainly by the
relationship between the latest estimates of annual rates of growth
in the [DEL: March-April] APRIL-MAY period of M-1 and M-2 and the following
ranges of tolerance: [DEL: 4 to 8] ____ TO ____ per cent for M-1 and
[DEL: 3½ to 7½] ____ TO ____ per cent for M-2. If, with approximately
equal weight given to M-1 and M-2, their rates of growth appear
to be
Monetary aggregates emphasis
significantly above or below the midpoints
Money market emphasis
CLOSE TO OR BEYOND THE UPPER OR LOWER LIMITS
of the indicated ranges, the objective for the funds rate is
to be raised or lowered in an orderly fashion within its range.
If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear to be above
the upper limit or below the lower limit of the indicated ranges
at a time when the objective for the funds rate has already been
moved to the corresponding limit of its range, the Manager will
promptly notify the Chairman, who will then decide whether the
situation calls for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
Implied Velocity Growth Rates
Alt. A
V-2 (GNP/M-2)
(10.1)
(4.6)
(-0.5)
(1.3)
(10.1)
(5.0)
(-0.6)
(1.0)
(10.1)
(5.3)
(-0.6)
(0.7)
Alt. B Alt. C
APR. 13, 1979
Table 1
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
Bank Reserves Bank Money Stock MeasuresCredit
Total
Period Non- Monetary LoansTotal borrowed Base and M-1 M 1+ M-2 M-3 M-4 M 5 M 6 M-7
Invest-
rnents
(PER CENT ANNUAL RATES OF GROWTH)
Table 2
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
Seasonally Adjusted, Billions of Dollars
APR. 13, 1979
Bank Reserves 1 Bank Money Stock Measures
Credit
TotalPeriod Total
Total Non- Monetary Loans M M1+ M-2 M-3 M4 M-5 M-6 M
borrowed Base and M2 M M4 M M6 M
Invest-
ments
__.. i. - . - , - - -- 1 ,.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEPT.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR. 4P
lip
APR. 13, 1979
Table 3
COMPONENTS OF MONEY STOCK AND RELATED MEASURES
Time and Savings Deposits Mutual Other
Savings Credit Short Term Private
Period Currency Demand Other Than CD's Bank & Union Savings U.S.Gov't Short-term
Deposits Total a CD's S&L Shares.1 Bonds1/ Securities Assets
Total Savings Other Shares- 11 1/
Table 4
COMPONENTS OF MONEY STOCK AND RELATED MEASURES
APR. 13, 1979
Time and Savings Deposits Mutual Short- Other
Time and Savings Depots Savings Credit Term Private Non Total
Period Currency Demand Bank Union Savings U.S. Short Deposit Gov't
Deposits Other Than CD's & S&L Shares Bonds Gov't term Funds Demand
Total Totl Sai Otr CD's hare Sec Assets Deposits
Total Savings Otheraresec y
MONTHLY:
1978--MAR.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEPT.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR. 4P
MONEY MARKET MUTUAL FUND SHARES.
31 BORROWINGS BY BANKS FROM OTHER THAN COMMERCIAL BANKS IN THE FORM OF FEDERAL FUNDS PURCHASED, SECURITIES SOLO UNDER
AGREEMENTS TO REPURCHASE, AND OTHER LIABILITIES FOR BORROWED MONEY, PLUS GROSS LIABILITIES TO OWN FOREIGN BRANCHES
(EURODOLLAR BORROWINGS), LOANS SOLD TO AFFILIATES, LOAN RPS, AND OTHER MINOR ITEMS.
TABLE 5 STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
SELECTED INTEREST RATES CLASS II - FOMC
(per cent) APRIL 13, 1979
Short-Term Long-Term
T y B s CD's New Comm. U.S. Govt. Constant Corp.-Aaa Muni- Home Mortgages
Federal Issue- Paper an Maturity Yields Utility cipal r y econdary Market
Funds Market Auction NYC 90-119 prime 20-yr New Recently Bond C FNMA GNMA
3-mo 1-yr 6-mo 90-Day Day Rat 3-yr ssue Offered Buyer Auc. Sec.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16)
TABLE 6 1
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES-
($ million, not seasonally adjusted)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
APRIL 13, 1979
Treasury Coupons FedersLi AgenciesTreasury Coupons
Net Purchases 3/
Federa
Net Pu
Il Agencies
rchases 4/
LEVEL--Apr. 11
I, bllnns1
-- -- -399 -882-
S - - 625
------ -1,154
------ -2,754
---- -379 -4,647
---- -20 52
- -- - 3,713-
- -- -- - - - - - - - -128
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -278
S - - - - - - -- -- -- 641
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 1,300
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -350
Change from end-of-period to end-of-period.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts, and redemptions (-) in bill auctions.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts, and short-term notes acquired in exchange for maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity
shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury borrowing from the System.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts only. Excludes redemptions and maturity shifts.
In addition to net purchases of securities, also reflects changes in System holdings of bankers' acceptances, direct Treasury borrowings from the System,
and redemptions (-) of Agency and Treasury coupon issues.
Includes changes in both RP's (+) and matched sale-purchase transactions (-).
The Treasury sold $2,600 million of special certificates to the Federal Reserve on March 31 and redeemed the last of them on April 4.
$640 million of 2-year notes were exchanged for a like amount of cash management bills on April 1. On April 9 the bills were exchanged for new 2-year
notes.
Treasury
Bills Net
Change 2/
I-
Within
1 year
Net Change
Outright
Holdings
Total 5/
Net
RP's
L n n-)
; & UA
