Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
October 17, 1980
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) October 17, 1980
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) The growth of M-1A and M-1B continued rapid in September,
and was substantially above the pace targeted by the Committee for the
August to December period (as shown in the table below). In terms of their
September levels, M-1A was just above the midpoint and M-1B above the upper
end of their respective longer-run ranges. Despite the rapid expansion of
M-1B, a much slower growth for nontransactions accounts limited the
September rise in M-2 growth to an 8¼ percent annual rate, just below the
target pace for the last four months of the year. Nonetheless, the level
of M-2 in September remained above the upper end of its longer-run range,
reflecting the sharp growth in this aggregate over the late spring and
summer. With loan growth strong, both banks and thrifts stepped up their
issuance of managed liabilities, and M-3 grew more rapidly than M-2 in
September for the first time since the spring.
Target Growth
for August Growth from
Monetary to December QIV '79 to Target Range
Aggregates Aug. Sept. (4 months) Sept. '80 for 1980
Memo:
Bank Credit 17.4 15.3 -- 6.5 6 to 9
(2) In September, as in August, Desk operations to attain
the nonborrowed reserve target--which was adjusted downward in light of
the strength in total reserves--were accompanied by a substantial increase
Growth in Reserve
Aggregates in 1980 (SAAR)
June
over March July Aug. Sept.
Memo: ($ million)
Average level of member
bank borrowings:
by one bank in the week ended September 24 that resulted from a break-
down of computer facilities.
in member bank borrowings.1 / Although nonborrowed reserves (defined to
include special borrowing) declined slightly on average last month, total
reserves increased at the most rapid rate in ten years as banks borrowed
to obtain the reserves required by the surge of deposits. The increased
demand for reserves was associated with further upward pressure on the
federal funds rate, which was intensified by the increase in the discount
rate from 10 to 11 percent announced on September 25. Federal funds,
which were generally trading in the 10½ to 11 percent area at the time of
the September Committee meeting, most recently have been trading in the 12½
to 13 percent zone.
(3) Other short-term interest rates also moved up sharply in
late September, but these increases were pared in early October as the
growth of the monetary aggregates slowed and at least some measures of
inflation moderated. On balance, short-term rates are presently about ½
to 1½ percentage points higher than their mid-September levels, with the
largest increases in private short-term rates. At current levels, short-
term interest rates have retraced roughly half of the decline from their
spring peaks.
(4) Bond yields also fluctuated widely during recent weeks,
but on balance have shown little net change since the last Committee meeting.
At current levels they have retraced almost two-thirds to three-quarters of
their declines during the spring. The high level of bond yields has continued
to deter new corporate offerings and to encourage a shift into shorter
maturity borrowing by businesses. The Treasury sold a $1.5 billion 15-year
bond in early October, all for new money, and raised another $2.4 billion
in coupon offerings with additions to its regular 2- and 4-year notes
auctioned in late September.
(5) Following several months of weakness, business loans at
banks expanded rapidly in August and again in September. Even with
another contraction in outstanding nonfinancial commercial paper last month,
owing in part to more competitive pricing of short-term loans by banks,
total short- and intermediate-term business borrowing was much larger in
August and September than in earlier months. This apparently reflects both
the strengthening in economic activity and some rate-induced shift in
borrowing out of capital markets. Other lending at commercial banks about
maintained its August pace. At thrift institutions it is reported that
the demand for mortgage commitments has fallen off in recent weeks as mort-
gage rates increased sharply.
(6) The foreign exchange value of the dollar has risen by about
reflecting a relative increase in short-term U.S. interest rates over this
period, and the further indication of a strengthening of the U.S. trade
balance. The dollar's strength against the DM and other Continental
currencies was partially offset by a decline against the yen and a small
decline against sterling, currencies that have been quite strong generally.
. The United States sold about $1 billion, mainly
to acquire DM used to repay swap drawings and to add to balances.
(7) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for selected monetary and financial flows over
various time periods.
Past
Three
Months
Past
Month
QIII '80 Sept. '80 Sept. '80
over over over
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Managed Liabilities of Banks
(Monthly average change in
billions)
measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities
from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(8) Shown below for Committee consideration are alternative
sets of monetary aggregate targets for the fourth quarter. Alternative A
retains the Committee's September target of a 4 percent annual growth rate
for M-1A over the last four months of the year. Given September growth,
this implies M-1A expansion from September to December at an annual rate
of 1¼ percent, as shown in the upper panel of the table. Alternative B
is designed to achieve the 4¾ percent midpoint of the Committee's QIV '79
to QIV '80 range for M-1A, which implies growth over the last three months
of 1980 of this aggregate at an annual rate more than 2 percentage points
faster than under alternative A. The lower panel of the table shows growth
for the two alternatives on a quarterly average basis. Associated federal
funds rate ranges for the intermeeting period are also shown. (Detailed
and longer-run data for the monetary aggregates--including implied growth
for the one year QIV '79 to QIV '80 period--are contained in the tables on
the following two pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B
Growth from September
to December:
M-1A 1¼ 3½
M-1B 4 6
M-2 7 7¾
Growth from QIII to QIV
M-1A 6¼ 7¼
M-1B 9 10
M-2 8¼ 8½
Intermeeting range for
federal funds 8½ to 15 8 to 14
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1A M-1B
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-2 M-3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
(9) The relationships of the September-to-December targets to
the Committee's longer-run ranges are depicted in the charts on the following
pages. Under alternative A, M-1A growth would be somewhat below the mid-
point of its longer-run range, but the staff believes that in the fourth
quarter M-1B would be at, and M-2 slightly above, their respective longer-
run upper bounds. Under alternative B, both M-1B and M-2 would exceed their
longer-run upper bounds, though differences from the one-year growth rates
implied by alternative A are slight because of the short time period
remaining in the year. Under both alternatives, M-3 is expected to be a
shade below the upper end of its longer-run range.
(10) Under either of the alternatives, the monthly growth rates
in M-1A over the last three months of the year would represent a substantial
slowing from the third quarter pace. There are reasons to believe that
considerably slower growth could be achieved without strong upward interest
rate pressures. Even with the staff's projection of rapid growth in
nominal GNP for the current quarter, much of the money needed to conduct
the expanded transactions of this quarter may already be in the hands of
the public due to rapid growth of money late in the third quarter. In
addition, the 4½ to 5½ percentage point increase in short-term interest
rates that has occurred since June is likely to be restraining the quantity
of money demanded relative to income in the fourth quarter.
(11) The growth of M-1A for September to December under
alternative A is so low, however, that it may be expected to be associated
with further, relatively moderate,upward interest rate pressures in the
fourth quarter.1/ To achieve the specifications for the aggregates of
alternative A, total reserves would probably have to remain about unchanged
from September to December and, given the near-term pattern of growth,
expand at only about a 1 percent rate from September to November.2/ Assuming
adjustment borrowing of about $1½ billion, nonborrowed reserves would be
expected to decline at about a 3 percent annual rate from September to
November. Such borrowing is likely to be reflected in a federal funds rate
in the 13 to 14 percent area, given the present 11 percent discount rate.
(12) The higher federal funds rate and increased member bank
borrowing likely to be associated with alternative A would probably be
accompanied by an upward adjustment in both short- and long-term market
interest rates. Upward rate pressures would be intensified by the need to
finance a substantial Treasury deficit in prospect for the fourth quarter.
However, the pressures on rates could abate as the quarter progresses. A
rising level of long-term yields is likely to inhibit further the pace of
new corporate and municipal bond offerings. And if signs of a weakening
in economic activity emerge, as would be consistent with the staff's GNP
projections, expectations of future rate declines would become more prevalent
and influence the actual market rate structure.
(13) Under alternative B there is less chance that interest
rates will rise in the near term. To achieve the aggregates specified
of the forthcoming intermeeting period--the phase-down of required reserves
will begin for member banks, as will the phase-in for nonmember depository
institutions. The targeted reserve growth rates in the text are cal-
culated so as to eliminate the discontinuity from the change in reserve
for this alternative, total reserves would have to expand at a 2¼ percent
annual rate from September to November. Assuming adjustment borrowing
of $1¼ billion, about the same as the September average, nonborrowed
reserves would expand at only about a 1¾ percent rate. The federal funds
rate is likely to remain within its recent 12½ to 13 percent zone. Under
such circumstances, other market rates would likely fluctuate around current
(14) Even with no further rise in most market rates, the rate
on new home mortgage commitments, now about 13¾ percent, would be expected
to edge up further in the weeks ahead as such rates continue to adjust with
a lag to the higher level of interest rates generally. Owing in part to
the adjustment in MMC and SSC ceiling rates last spring, disintermediation
pressures at depository institutions are likely to be less than at similar
interest rates last winter. Even so, the expected level of mortgage
rates is likely to damp housing demand and mortgage borrowing. While
borrowers may have grown more accustomed to the higher nominal mortgage
rates, monthly housing payments represent a substantial barrier to many
potential home buyers.
(15) Under both alternatives A and B the non-transaction component
of M-2 is expected to continue increasing at a moderate rate. A turn-
around in MMMF growth is expected as their portfolio yields catch up with
short-term market rates. However, flows into small denomination time
and savings deposits may be somewhat weaker as an acceleration of time
deposits might not fully offset the slower growth, and possible outflows,
of savings accounts that is expected at the sustained higher level of market
rates in the fourth quarter. With slower demand and small denomination
time and savings deposit growth, both banks and thrifts are expected to
continue to place reliance on managed liabilities--especially large CD's--
to finance their portfolio growth. Bank credit growth is expected to
remain relatively large over the balance of the year, though slowing from
the unusually rapid pace of the past two months. The projected increase
in bank credit will place this aggregate in the fourth quarter at a level
in the lower half of its longer-run range.
Directive language
(16) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for
the directive consistent with the form of the directive adopted at
recent meetings. The language calls for expansion of reserve aggregates
at a pace consistent with the desired rate of monetary growth over the
last three months of the year, provided that the weekly average federal
funds rate remains within a specified range. The specifications adopted
at the September meeting are shown in strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks expansion of reserve
aggregates consistent with growth of M-1A, M-1B, and M-2 over the
[DEL: August] SEPTEMBER to December period at annual rates of about [DEL: 4]
percent, [DEL: 6½] ____ percent, and [DEL: 8½] ____ percent respectively, provided
that in the period before the next regular meeting the weekly average
federal funds rate remains within a range of [DEL: 8-to-14] ____ TO ____
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the constraint on the federal funds rate is inconsistent with the
objective for the expansion of reserves, the Manager for Domestic
Operations is promptly to notify the Chairman, who will then decide
whether the situation calls for supplementary instructions from the
