Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
November 13, 1981
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) November 13, 1981
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) M1-B, adjusted for shifts into NOW accounts, expanded in
October at a 3¾ percent annual rate--about half the pace of the Committee's
September to December target. With expansion in the narrow money aggre-
gate remaining weak, year-to-date growth in adjusted M1-B has been only
at a 1 percent annual rate, continuing well below the lower limit of the
Committee's 3 to 6 percent longer-run range. M2 growth picked up to a 9¼
percent annual rate in October,1/ putting this aggregate just at the upper
end of the Committee's 6 to 9 percent longer-run range. (Recent monetary
and reserves data are shown in the table on the next page).
(2) Bank credit expansion slowed in October to an 8 percent
annual rate, reflecting in part moderation in business loan growth. With
bank credit growth weaker, large time deposits contracted in October,
slowing M3 growth to a 6½ percent annual rate. Nevertheless, year-to-date
expansion in M3 remains 1 percentage points above the upper end of the
Committee's longer-run range for this aggregate.
(3) Growth in nonborrowed reserves slowed markedly in October,
largely reflecting reductions in required reserves behind deposits not
included in M1 and M2, such as large time and interbank deposits. With
borrowing declining markedly further, total reserves contracted at a 9
other non-M2 assets. On a monthly average basis, ASCs in October are
estimated to have increased by nearly $22 billion. The staff esti-
mates that about $3 billion came from non-M2 assets, such as retail
RPs and market securities.
Key Monetary Policy Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIII '81 Oct. '81
over over
Aug. Sept. Oct. QI '80 QIv '80
Money and Credit Aggregates
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment Borrowing 1,339 1,155 743
Excess Reserves 202 324 214
_/ The quantity of retail RPs are staff estimates based on an August 31, 1981 universe
survey and subsequent partial FRB and FHLBB samples.
Federal Reserve.
MEMO: FOMC Long-run Targets
(percent increase)
QIV '81
over
QIV '80
Ml-B (shift adjusted) 3k to 6
M2 6 to 9
M3 6k to 94
Bank Credit 6 to 9
percent annual rate. The monetary base was essentially unchanged as currency
expansion about offset the decline in total reserves. Given the weakness
in money growth and associated required reserves, adjustment borrowing
generally remained below the $850 million assumed in the initial reserves
path. In the current statement week borrowing is expected to average around
$400 million, partly reflecting an upward adjustment in the nonborrowed
reserves path to help counter the evolving weakness in M1-B and total
point in both the discount and surcharge rates--was associated with a
further easing in the federal funds rate to the 13 to 14 percent area,
from around 15½ percent at the time of the October meeting.
(4) In response to the easing in bank reserve positions and a
further slackening in economic activity, other short-term market interest
rates have declined about 2½ to 3 percentage points since the last meeting,
bringing them under the earlier lows for the year (reached in late winter).
The bank prime rate was lowered by 2 percentage points to 17 percent, with
a few banks currently at 16½ percent. Bond yields approached record levels
in October, as market participants focused on the current and prospective
amount of Treasury borrowing and on disappointing consumer price data.
More recently, bond yields have fallen as much as 2 percentage points in
reaction to further evidence of weakness in economic activity and the
reduced pressures in the money market. However, bond yields still remain
about 1½ percentage points above earlier lows for the year. Primary mort-
gage rates have eased a bit from their historic highs. The Treasury
raised about $4 billion of new money in its recently completed three-part
meeting period.
mid-quarter refunding, bringing to nearly $18 billion the amount raised
thus far in the quarter. Over the next seven weeks, the Treasury will
have to raise another $18 billion. Sponsored agency financing has
slowed recently from the advanced pace in the third quarter, due mainly
to reduced borrowing by the FHLBs. Corporate bond offerings continued
moderate in October, but the decline in bond yields has induced a sub-
stantial pick-up in offerings this month.
(5) Since the October meeting, the dollar has fluctuated rather
widely in exchange markets. On balance, the dollar has declined only
slightly on a weighted average basis, despite the considerable drop in
short-term rates here relative to those abroad.
Prospective Developments
(6) The upper panel of the table below presents three alternative
specifications for the monetary aggregates for the current quarter, while
implied growth rates for the last two months of the year are shown in the
second panel. Possible ranges for the intermeeting federal funds rate are
indicated in the last line of the table. (More detailed data on these
and other aggregates, including implied growth rates for the year 1981, may
be found on the following two pages, and charts indicating the relationship
of the alternative targets to the Committee's existing longer-run ranges
for 1981 may be found on the next three pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from September
to December
M1-B 7 6 5
M2 11 10½ 10
Implied Growth from
October to December
M1-B 8¾ 7 5¾
M2 12 11¼ 10½
Federal funds rate range 8 to 13 10 to 15 11 to 16
(7) Alternative A maintains the September to December target
for M1-B adopted by the Committee at its last meeting, while alternatives
B and C reduce that target by one and two percentage points, respectively.
All of the alternatives would imply faster M1-B growth over the two month
October to December period than has occurred in any two-month period since
last spring. Still, all would imply growth in M1-B over the year 1981
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Growth Rates
Monthly
September 1981 - December 1981
October 1981 - December 1981
Quarterly Average
Annual Average
MOTE: Growth rates shown in parentheses are
Alt. A
(3.0)
10.7
(10.0)
Alt. B
(2.7)
5.2
(2.3)
8.2
Alt. C
( 1.7)
5.8
Alt. A
(3.9)
6.3
(7.8)
11.0
Alt. B
Alt. C
for the observed levels of the aggregates.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
Annual Average
_w __
below the lower-end of the Committee's longer-run range. Growth in M2 for
the year may be a little over the upper limit of its 6 to 9 percent annual
range under any of the alternatives, but at this point growth seems unlikely
to be much more than at a 9¼ percent rate.1/
(8) While the sharp decline in short-term interest rates since
mid-summer should tend to stimulate growth of M1-B, the stimulative effect
may in practice be offset, at least in part, by any continued downward
shift in money demand relative to GNP and interest rates. Such a downward
shift was quite marked over the first three quarters of the year, at least
as judged from the money demand equation in the Board's quarterly model.
Moreover, transactions demand for money in the latter part of the year
may be relatively weak in any event if the significant contraction in
economic activity now projected by the staff for the fourth quarter develops--
with real GNP projected to decline at a 4¾ percent annual rate and nominal
GNP to rise at no more than a 5 percent annual rate. Thus, unless the
downward shift in money demand halts, or is reversed, the odds are that
the proposed alternatives, particularly alternatives A and B, may involve
further downward pressures on short-term interest rates.
(9) Alternative A--which calls for maintaining the Committee's
foreign IPC demand deposits are shifted to 2-day notice accounts in
IBFs. Such shifts are expected to be small, however; they may have
some impact on annual growth rates for the month of December, but
would probably have no significant effect on growth for the year.
The great bulk of the money shifted into IBFs will be from large time
deposits or other interest-bearing liabilities, so that the principal
impact potentially would be on M3.
year--would entail growth in total reserves at a 7½ percent annual rate
rate over the next few weeks to the 9 to 10 percent area. Under such
conditions other short-term interest rates would of course also decline
substantially, with the 3-month bill rate perhaps falling to around the 9
percent area. Such declines would occur against a back-drop of continued
sizable Treasury cash borrowings over the balance of the year ($13 billion
in the bill market and $6 billion in the coupon market) but reduced short-
term credit demands by businesses, as their financing gap narrows, largely
in reflection of reduced inventory accumulation, and as credit demands
are shifted to longer-term markets.
(10) A further sharp decline in short-term interest rates, should
it develop, would be transmitted to bond markets, leading to continuation
of the recent rally. If such a decline in short rates were interpreted as
reflecting a weakening in the System's resolve to combat inflation, the
drop in bond yields would tend to be limited. Given the current weak
economic outlook, however, high-grade corporate bond yields could drop
into the 14 to 15 percent area which may well induce substantial corporate
bond offerings to refund sizable short-term debts at banks and in the
commercial paper market. Tax-exempt offerings, which have been better
sustained than corporate offerings, are also likely to rise as previously
postponed issues re-enter the market. Mortgage rates, while stickier than
bond yields, could also be expected to decline as thrift deposit costs
moderate and deposit flows pick up. Improvement in mortgage market
conditions, and in thrift mortgage commitments, may lag somewhat more than
usual, however, because of uncertainties about the permanence of any
substantial decline in short-term market rates. M2 would tend to strengthen
from shifts out of market securities into deposits and also from shifting by
institutional investors to MMMFs in order to take advantage of the usual lag
in money fund yields.
(11) A further considerable decline in short-term interest rates
might lead to a marked weakening of the dollar on exchange markets. How-
ever, any tendency for the dollar to fall substantially on exchange markets
could be limited in the degree that declining interest rates here and/or
the tendency for foreign currencies to appreciate leads foreign authorities
to ease their monetary policies, given continued weak economic performance
(12) The more rapidly short-term interest rates decline over
the weeks ahead, the greater the odds that rates will rebound in early
tentatively set, with the degree of rebound, if any, depending in part
on the underlying resilience of the economy. Alternatives B and C, which
involve reducing the Committee's fourth quarter target for M1-B set at
the last meeting, would tend to limit downward pressures on interest rates
between now and year-end and possibly work toward a smoother transition
to targets for 1982. Because it is so late in 1981, the impact on annual
growth of the aggregates this year from adoption of either of these
alternatives rather than continuing with alternative A would be relatively
small, as may be noted from the detailed tables on pp. 6 and 7.
(13) Alternative B would require expansion in total reserves
at a 6 percent annual rate over the last two months of the year, while
growth in reserves under alternative C would be at a 4½ percent annual
rate. The staff believes short-term rate declines under alternative B
could carry the funds rate into the 10 to 12 percent range. The aggre-
gates specifications of alternative C are likely to be associated with a
funds rate in a 12 to 14 percent range, implying the that the funds rate
could drop below the current discount rate.
(14) Declines in market interest rates, both short- and long-term,
generally would be more modest under alternatives B and C than under alter-
native A, and potential downward pressure on the dollar in exchange markets
would be reduced. Under B, Treasury bill rates would still likely reach
levels which, if sustained, would make thrift institutions generally pro-
fitable. Under alternative C, that might also develop, but it would be
less certain as the weight of Treasury financings and possible market
disappointment about the likely course of the funds rate (and hence of
dealer financing costs) would work to hold bill and other short-term
rates up. Thus, under C an easing in mortgage market conditions would be
relatively more delayed, both because of institutional uncertainty about
positive earnings and because long-term market rates may remain higher
than otherwise.
(15) The possibility of the funds rate dropping significantly
below the current 13 percent discount rate introduces complications in the
design of reserve paths, particularly for alternatives A and B. The
complications arise if reserve paths do not involve sufficient levels
of borrowing at the discount window to permit weakness in demands for
money (and for required reserves) to be cushioned by commensurate declines
in borrowings. The funds rate could then be subject to sharp downward
pressures as the reserves provided led to sizable excess reserves. An
initial borrowing level around the $400 million expected in the current
statement week would provide some borrowing cushion. Frictional levels
of borrowing that would provide virtually no cushion appear to be in the
$50 to $150 million range. The nonborrowed reserve path for alternative C,
the alternative involving the least expansion in reserves, might be initially
constructed on the basis of $400 million in borrowing. The more
reserve expansion of alternatives A and B logically should be based
on lower levels of borrowing, but whether set at frictional levels or
higher, we would expect the demand for reserves soon to fall well short
of supply. In such cases, to avoid an undue build-up in excess reserves,
adjustments in the nonborrowed reserve path might need to be considered
in conjunction with discount rate strategy.
Directive language
(16) Given below is a suggested operational paragraph for the
directive. The specifications adopted at the meeting on October 5-6 are
shown in strike-through form.
In the short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve
aggregates consistent with growth of M1-B from September to December
at an annual rate of [DEL: 7] ____ percent after allowance for the impact
of flows into NOW accounts and with growth in M2 at an annual rate
around [DEL: 10] ____ percent [DEL: or slightly higher, recognizing that the
behavior of M2 will be affected-by-recent-regulatory-and-legislative
changes, particularly the public's response to the availability of
the all savers certificate]. The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations
that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths
during the period before the next meeting is likely to be associated
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 12 to 17]
____ TO ____ percent.
