Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
March 27, 1981Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
CLASS I - FOMC March 27, 1981
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Abstracting from the effect of nationwide NOW accounts, the
decline of transactions balances that characterized the November to February
period appears to have been reversed most recently, with adjusted M-1B
estimated to increase at about an 8-3/4 percent annual rate in March,
as shown in the table below. Nonetheless, M-1B's growth over the first
three months of the year remains about 2-1/4 percentage points below the
Committee's target for that period. The weakness in M-1B is significantly
greater than predicted by the Board's quarterly econometric model as
well as other models, given actual interest rates and nominal GNP. On a
quarterly average basis, adjusted M-1B increasedat only about a 1/2 percent
annual rate, and the income velocity of this aggregate rose at an annual
rate of almost 14-1/2 percent--a record for the period since the Korean war.
Monetary Aggregates
Seasonally Adjusted Annual Growth Rates
First Quarter 1981
Dec.- QIV '80-
Jan. Feb. March * March * QI '81
* Partially projected.
1/ Abstracting from the estimated impact of shifts from savings accounts
and assets other than demand deposits to NOW accounts.
It is possible that the demand for money shifted downwards in response to
extraordinarily high levels of interest rates in the fourth quarter and the
introduction of nationwide NOW accounts in the first, both of which could have
induced the public to review more intensively its cash management techniques.
(2) In contrast to adjusted M-1B, the growth of M-2 is expected
to expand about 2 percentage points above the Committee's December to
March short-run target. The nontransactions component of M-2 was buoyed by
record growth in money market mutual funds (MMMFs), more than offsetting
the greater than expected weakness in small time and savings deposits. In
March, the level of M-2 was at the upper end of the Committee's longer-run
(3) Banks' issuance of large CDs slowed in February and amounts
outstanding have been declining in March as business short-term credit demands
at domestic offices of U.S. banks ebbed. The expansion in total commercial
bank credit moderated considerably in February, and available data suggest
further weakening in March. Growth of large CDs at S&Ls also slowed in the
early months of 1981, even as other deposits weakened, probably reflecting
adverse publicity regarding their earnings problems 1/ Despite the recent
weakness in CDs, M-3 expanded at about a 10-1/4 percent annual rate over the
first three months of the year, placing the level of M-3 in March just above
the upper end of the Committee's longer-run range.
(4) Demand for total reserves weakened in February and the first
weeks of March in response to slow growth in reservable deposits and a drop
in excess reserves to more normal levels following a sustained period in
uninsured liabilities of thrifts.
which they had been unusually high, presumably in response to the Monetary
Control Act. Borrowing in the first two full weeks in February dropped
to $1.1 billion, below the initial assumption of $1.3 billion used in con-
structing the nonborrowed path, and the funds rate began declining from
the over 17 percent level of early February. By the latter part of February
the funds rate had moved to around the lower end of the 15 to 20 percent
range specified by the Committee. In a telephone conference on February 24,
the Committee agreed to accept some shortfall in the narrow aggregates as
consistent with its objectives for the year, resulting in a reduction in
nonborrowed reserve targets in the latter part of February and early March
that was expected to keep borrowing at the discount window from declining.1/
This path adjustment contributed to a decline in nonborrowed reserves in
February roughly in line with the decline in total reserves, as shown in the
table below. In March nonborrowed reserve growth surged, and borrowings and
Reserve Aggregates
(Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rate of Growth)
Jan. Feb. March 2/
Nonborrowed Reserves 8.2 -12.4 22.6
Total Reserves -1.0 -14.7 10.9
Monetary Base 2.7 2.3 7.2
Memo: ($ mils., n.s.a.)
Average level of:
Adjustment borrowing 1,347 1,303 941
Excess reserves 544 183 299
intermeeting period.
2/ March data are estimated for the period after March 25.
the funds rate declined on average from February levels. The federal funds
rate averaged around 13-3/4 percent over the past two statement weeks, but
trading most recently has been in a 14-1/2 to 15-1/2 percent range.
(5) Private short-term interest rates have fallen 2 to 3-1/2
percentage points on balance since the early February Committee meeting, and
with these further declines some are more than 7 percentage points below their
December peaks. In the Treasury bill market, yields have fallen less--3/4 to
December-as the Treasury has continued to borrow heavily in the bill market.
In February and March, the Treasury raised more than $20 billion in new
money in bill auctions, including $13 billion in cash management bills
maturing in the second quarter. The bank prime rate was lowered in steps
from 19-1/2 percent at the beginning of February to 17 to 17-1/2 percent.
(6) In contrast to short-term rates, bond yields have risen on
balance since early February-by roughly 30 basis points in the case of
Treasury securities. The Treasury has raised almost $11 billion in note
and bond sales since the mid-quarter financing and next week will auction a
$2-3/4 billion 7-year note. Public issuance of corporate bonds has remained
relatively large. During the intermeeting period, the average commitment
rate on new fixed-rate mortgages at S&Ls rose further to 15.40 percent.
(7) The dollar has fluctuated over a wide range on exchange
markets during the past several weeks, responding primarily to the relative
movement of U.S. and foreign interest rates and to tensions in Eastern
Europe. On balance, the weighted average exchange value of the dollar
has risen 2 percent since the February Committee meeting.
The U.S. authorities have purchased about $3/4 billion equivalent of
foreign currencies.
(8) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for selected monetary and financial flows over
various time periods. M-1A and M-1B data in parentheses are adjusted for
the estimated impact of nationwide NOW accounts.
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Monetary base
Concepts of Money
M-1A (Currency plus demand
deposits) 2/
M-1B (M-lA plus other checkable
deposits)
M-2 (M-1B plus small time and
savings deposits, money market
mutual fund shares and over-
night RP's and Eurodollars)
M-3 (M-2 plus large time deposits
and term RP's)
Mar. '81
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 3/
Managed Liabilities of Banks
(Monthly average change in
billions)
Large time deposits
Net borrowing from own foreign
branches
Other borrowins 4 /
Mar. '81
over
Feb. '81
---- --- -- ---
Prospective developments
(9) Shown below for Committee consideration are three alternative
policy strategies for the second quarter. Since March data for the aggregates
are still partially estimated, the alternatives are specified in terms of the
four-month February to June period (with implied growth rates for March to June
also shown based on the currently projected March levels). The M-1B growth
targets abstract from the estimated impact of nationwide NOW accounts, as does
the Committee's longer-run target. (More detailed and longer-run data for
the aggregates, on both an adjusted and unadjusted basis, including those for
M-1A, are shown in the tables on pp. 8 and 9.) The last line of the table
indicates federal funds rate ranges thought by the staff to be consistent
with the three alternatives.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from February to June
M-1B 8-3/4 6-3/4 5-1/2
M-2 12-3/4 12-1/4 12
Implied growth from
March to June
M-1B 8-3/4 6 4-1/2
M-2 11-1/2 10-3/4 10-1/4
Intermeeting federal funds
rate range 13 to 19 14 to 20 15 to 21
(10) As shown in the first chart on the following pages, the
alternative A target specifications are designed to return adjusted M-1B by
June to the midpoint growth path of the Committee's QIV '80 to QIV '81
longer-run range of 3-1/2 to 6 percent. Alternative B specifies slower
growth in M-1B that would carry it only to the lower end of the Committee's
longer-run range by June but, assuming a continuation of that growth rate,
to the midpoint of the longer-run range by September. Under either of these
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Class II-FOMCM-3 and Bank Credit
M-3 Billions of dollars
- Actual Level
S* Short-Run Alternatives
' ,00010
-- 2100
* Note: A.8, and C alternatives are indistinguisnable on this scale.
BANK CREDIT
j I I I I I I I 1 I I I I 1
D J F M A M J J A S O N 0
Billions of dollars
-1350
- Actual Level
-- 11300
SI I IL I I I I I I I
O N 0 J F M A M
A S 0 N 0
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1A M-IB
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
February '81 -
June '81
(5.2)
8.9
March '81 -
June '81
Quarterly Average
(10.2)
8.8
(7.4)
6.0
(5.9)
4.6
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
March
April
May
June
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
February '81 -
June '81
March '81 -
June '81
Quarterly Average
alternatives M-2 would probably be above the upper end of its range in June,
and might well remain above the range over the balance of the year (assuming
M-1B growth at its midpoint rate for the year as a whole). Alternative C is
designed to increase the odds of constraining M-2 growth to within its
longer-run range for 1981. This would appear to involve growth in M-1B.
for the year at the lower end of its longer-run range, and alternative
C specifies such a trajectory for M-1B. The three strategies thus not only
imply options for how rapidly the Committee wishes to target a return of
M-1B to within its longer-run range, but also for the weight it wishes to
place on obtaining an M-2 growth within its own longer-run range.
(11) Demands for transactions balances are likely to expand rapidly
over the second quarter as a whole. Although real GNP in that quarter is
projected to show no change, nominal spending is expected to increase
rather rapidly, and the staff does not anticipate that the sharp downward
shift in money demand of the first quarter will be repeated in the second.
The resulting anticipated strengthening of M-1B will contribute to a rapid
growth in M-2. Though the expansion of the nontransaction component of
M-2 is expected to slow from its exceptionally strong March pace, it will
probably be faster on average over the next three months than in the first
(12) The projected strengthening of demand for transactions
balances implies that interest rates will probably be under upward pressure
over the coming quarter, particularly under the alternative B and C speci-
fications, but also possibly to a degree under alternative A. Under
alternative A--which involves growth in total reserves from March to June
at a 9-3/4 percent annual rate-we would expect the funds rate to be
in a 14 to 16 percent range over the next few-weeks, with borrowing at the
discount window ranging around $1 billion, given the current discount rate
structure. Many market participants appear to be expecting rate declines in
the months ahead. For example, in the futures market, 3-month bills for
June delivery are quoted at 11-7/8 percent, as compared to the current cash
market quote of around 13 percent. Against this backdrop, a failure of the
funds rate to decline from current levels would tend to exert upward pressure
on short-term interest rates generally. Of course, if money demand tends to
be on the weak side this spring-as could well develop if the economy is even
less strong than projected-lower funds rates, borrowing, and market rates
generally would occur.
(13) Whatever upward interest pressures develop over the months
ahead are likely to be mainly the product of constraints on money growth
relative to demand. In the credit markets themselves, funds raised are
expected to drop in the second quarter. This reflects a greater than
seasonal decline in Treasury borrowing, as the combined Federal budget
moves from a $37 billion deficit in the first quarter to an $11 billion
surplus in the second. In the projected interest rate environment, corporate
and tax-exempt bond offerings are unlikely to rise further over the spring
months, although business demands on banks will probably pick up from the
recent depressed pace.
(14) Greater restraint on money growth relative to demand would
be imposed under alternatives B and C, which involve limiting growth in
adjusted M-1B to rates of 6 and 4-1/2 percent, respectively, over the next
three months-substantially lower rates than the 8-3/4 percent of alternative
A. Growth in total reserves over the period would be at annual rates of
rate in the area of 15 to 17 percent, or somewhat higher, might emerge over
the next few weeks under alternative B1/. Still greater rate pressures
would develop under alternative C. Borrowing at the discount window might
be around $1-1/2 billion under B and, of course, higher under C. The upward
response of market interest rates, particularly short-term rates, to the
increased pressures on bank reserve positions of alternatives B and C may be
quite marked over the period ahead. Any rise in long-term rates, though,
might be muted as corporate borrowers back away from the market in anticipa-
tion of lower rates later.
(15) From the perspective of the year as a whole, the degree of
rate pressure we would foresee over the next several months under alternative
C, which is consistent with a strategy of lowering M-1B growth for the year
to the bottom of its range, would be likely to weaken the outlook for GNP
relative to the current staff forecast (which is based on alternative B).
As a result, this alternative carries with it a potential for a drop-off of
interest rates from peak levels later in the year, in response to a pro-
nounced cyclical weakening of the economy. By year-end interest rates
under alternative C thus could be lower than under alternative B.
(16) Under any of the alternatives presented, the interest
rate outlook suggests continued substantial earnings pressures on thrift
institutions over the next few months. Thrifts are likely to continue
employing funds to a great extent to acquire short-term assets both to
bolster liquidity and to add to the average return on their assets. They
probably would continue to be reluctant lenders in the mortgage market.
Directive language
(17) Given below is a suggested operational paragraph for the
directive consistent with the form of the directive adopted at the meeting
in early February. Because monetary aggregates data for the second half
of March are projected, the language calls for expansion of reserve aggre-
gates at a pace consistent with the desired rates of monetary growth over
the four months from February to June. The associated monetary growth
rates on a quarterly average basis are from the fourth quarter of 1980 to
the second quarter of 1981. The specifications adopted at the early
February meeting are shown in strike-through form. For simplification,
the Committee may wish to consider not including M-1A in the directive,
as is shown with strike-through in the paragraph below.
In the short-run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve
aggregates consistent with growth in [DEL: M-1A and] M-1B AND M-2 from
[DEL: December] FEBRUARY to [DEL: March] JUNE at annual rates of ABOUT [DE: 5-to-6]
____ percent and [DEL: in M-2 at a rate of about 8] ____ percent, RESPECT-
IVELY, [DEL: abstracting from] AFTER ALLOWANCE FOR the impact of flows into
NOW accounts. These rates are associated with growth of [DEL: M-1A,] M-1B,
and M-2 from the fourth quarter of 1980 to [DEL: the first quarter] THE
SECOND QUARTER OF 1981 at annual rates of about [DEL: 2 percent 2-3/4]
____ percent, and [DEL: 7] ____ percent, respectively. It is recognized that
shifts into NOW accounts will continue to distort measured growth
in [DEL: M-1A-and] M-1B to an unpredictable extent, and operational reserve
paths will be developed in the light of evaluation of those dis-
tortions. If it appears during the period before the next meeting
that fluctuations in the federal funds rate, taken over a period
of time, within a range of [DEL: 15 to 20] ____ TO ____ percent are likely
to be inconsistent with the monetary and related reserve paths,
the Manager for Domestic Operations is promptly to notify the
Chairman, who will then decide whether the situation calls for
supplementary instructions from the Committee.
