Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
December 18, 1981
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 18, 1981
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) M1-B growth, adjusted for shifts into NOW accounts, rose to
an 81 percent annual rate in November, and continued rapid in early December.
The strength in M1-B reflected a marked pickup in other checkable deposits,
while demand deposits also rose a little (in contrast to marked declines over
the first three quarters of the year). The exceptional strength in OCDs
growth may be associated with the public's desire to accumulate passbook
savings type assets in light of uncertainty about the near-term course of
economic activity and interest rates. Growth in M-B over the October to
December period probably will be at about a 7¾ percent annual rate (assuming
an appreciable decline in the level of M1-B over the last half of December).
Despite the recent pickup, QIV '80 to QIV '81 growth in adjusted M1-B will
be only about 2 percent, well below the Committee's 3½ to 6 percent longer-
run range. (Recent monetary and reserves data are shown in the table on the
next page.)
(2) M2 expansion surged to a 16½ percent annual rate in November,
and is estimated at a 14½ percent annual rate over the two-month October to
December period--considerably more than expected at the time of the last
meeting. M2 growth was buoyed by continued brisk inflows to money market
funds and by a turnaround in savings deposit flows to a modest increase
following a steady decline for more than a year. For the QIV '80 to QIV '81
period, M2 is expected to grow at a 9½ percent rate, above the Committee's
Key Monetary Policy Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Dec. '81 Dec. '81 QIV '81
S over over over
Oct. Nov. Dec.- Oct. '81 Sept. '81 QIV '80
Money and Credit AgZregates
Bank Credit 8.5 3.2 n.a. n.a. n.a. .a.
sequent partial FRB and FHLBB samples.
3/ Growth rates for reserve measures are adjusted to remove the effects of discontinuities
resulting from phased changes in reserve ratios under the Monetary Control Act. In
addition, reserve data for QIV '80 have been adjusted to remove the distorting effects
of the reduction in weekend reserve avoidance activities that occurred in late 1980.
MEMO: FOMC long-run targets
(Percent increase)
MI-B (shift adjusted)
M2
M3
Bank Credit
QIV '81
over
QIV '80
3k to 6
also has accelerated recently, and remains well above the upper end of the
Committee's longer-run range.
(3) Bank credit expansion slowed in November to a 3 percent
annual rate, due mainly to a continued reduction in holdings of U.S. govern-
ment securities and a further moderation in the growth of business loans.
The weak loan growth, coupled with stronger inflows to core deposits,
allowed commercial banks to run off large time deposits for the second con-
secutive month in November. S&Ls, however, continued to issue such deposits
at the appreciable pace of other recent months, with the premium over
offering rates of commercial banks reduced from the unusually high spread
of last summer.
(4) Total reserves are expected to grow at a 6 percent annual
rate over the last two months of the year, reflecting the increase in
required reserves associated with the strength in the aggregates. Non-
borrowed reserves are likely to expand at about an 11 percent rate over
this interval as adjustment borrowing in December will be down from its
October level. In the first two weeks of the intermeeting period, adjust-
ment borrowing averaged only about $200 million. As M1 and M2 strengthened,
the increase in required reserves was accompanied by a rise in adjustment
borrowings. During the past two statement weeks, borrowing averaged $380
million; this was less than the $450-500 million implied by the reserve
path, as banks economized on excess reserves.1/ The reduced level of
borrowing early in the period, and the one percentage point decline in the
discount rate to 12 percent on December 3, contributed to a further easing
in the federal funds rate to the 11 to 12 percent area in early December
from 13 to 13 1/2 percent at the time of the November meeting. Most recently
federal funds have been trading in a 12 to 12 1/2 percent range.
(5) Both short- and long-term interest rates continued to decline
early in the intermeeting period, responding to the further easing in money
market conditions and the weakness of economic activity. Rates subsequently
backed up, however, owing to strength in the monetary aggregates, reports of
Administration estimates of a greatly enlarged budget deficit, and a rise
in the funds rate to levels above the discount rate. At present, market
rates are generally above levels prevailing at the time of the previous
Committee meeting, but the prime loan rate is down one percentage point
and primary mortgage rates have dropped about 3/4 of a point.
(6) After declining through late November, the dollar rebounded
with the recent rise in U.S. short-term interest rates to post a small
net advance on a weighted average basis since the last Committee meeting.
Political developments abroad and more favorable inflation expectations
for the United States also contributed to the strength of the dollar.
Background for preliminary consideration of target ranges for 1982
(7) The growth ranges for the aggregates in 1982 tentatively set
by the FOMC in July are 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent for M1, 6 to 9 percent for M2,
exception of M1, these are the same ranges that were set for 1981. The M1
range is a reduction from the 1981 range of 3-1/2 to 6 percent for M-B,
shift adjusted.1/
(8) As statistical background for consideration of the annual
targets for 1982, the table on the next page shows actual growth of money
supply measures for the years 1977 through 1981. Annual growth in M-B
measured from QIV to QIV decelerated gradually over the last few years,
followed by a sharper drop-off in 1981, particularly on a shift-adjusted
basis. But whether the marked deceleration in shift-adjusted M1-B this year
accurately measures the degree of greater restraint depends in part on
whether there was a downward shift in money demand (relative to nominal income
and interest rates). In the degree that there was such a shift, slower growth
M-B (1)
(2)
M2 (1)
(2)
M3 (1)
(2)
Annual Growth in Monetary Aggregates
1977 - 1981
[(1) - measured QIV over QIV; (2) - measured year over year]
would not indicate more restraint but would represent an accommodation to the
shift in public preference away from narrow money assets to other assets. It
is difficult to judge the extent of sach hifts in practice. Econometric
results, supported by more direct evidence of changing cash management
practices, suggest a fairly substantial downward shift in desired M1 balances
this year. This would indicate that the "effective" deceleration in money
could be considerably less than measured.
(9) With regard to the broader aggregates, there has been no
measured deceleration over recent years .M And this year, their growth
has been above the upper limits of the ranges set for them, markedly so in
the case of M3. However, the broader aggregates, like Ml, have also been
subject to demand shifts. If, for instance, allowance were made for shifts
from market assets to money market funds, the growth in the broader Ms would
be reduced, particularly in the past two years.1/ In addition, broader
Ms have been subject to other structural changes this year, such as the
further deregulation of time deposit accounts by removing the cap on the
SSC ceiling rate effective at the beginning of August, a more active use
of retail RPs by depository institutions, and the introduction of ASCs at
the beginning of October.
(10) Among the considerations entering into the Committee's
decision about ranges for the aggregates in 1982 would be the need to con-
tinue to show determination to slow money growth over time. In that context,
the Committee's intention to continue a policy of gradually reducing growth
over time would be signalled by a lower target range for 1982 than for 1981,
even if actual growth in M1 next year were to be more rapid than the rela-
tively low rate of this year (on a QIV to QIV basis). Following past
Committee practice, the range for M1 next year would take off from its level
in the fourth quarter of 1981, which is given by the actual level of M1-B,
targeted level for 1981 (say, either the bottom or the midpoint of the
shift in money demand in 1981, such an approach would lead to a higher
level of money in 1982 than was warranted by the Committee's basic policy
(11) From another viewpoint, though, a higher range for M1
(taking off from the actual QIV '81 level) or perhaps a further widening
by raising the upper end, might be considered on the grounds that it may be
needed to encourage satisfactory economic recovery, especially if the view
is also taken that there may be no, or only a minor, downward shift in
money demand relative to income and interest rates next year. An increase
in the upper end of the range might also be considered to allow for the
possibility that either significantly lower market interest rates (a
possibility, for example, if inflation improves more than anticipated) or
actions by DIDC to make NOW accounts significantly more attractive would
occasion a surge in such deposits and substantial upward pressures on M1.
The offsetting risk to such an approach, however, is the possibility that
public would construe an increase in the tentative range as reflecting
a diminution in the Federal Reserve's determination to curb money growth,
given the need to finance large budgetary deficits.
(12) Reductions, rather than increases, in the tentative M1
range, or at least in the lower end of it, might be considered if a
continued sizable downward shift in money demand (given income and interest
rates) is anticipated next year. The staff's GNP projection, based on
points on the basis of our conventional quarterly money demand equation.
The low end of the tentative range provides scope for a larger shift. If
market interest rates remain high next year-and we are projecting that
rates will, on average, exceed current levels-there will be continued
incentive for financial innovations, such as the proposed sweeps of NOW and
demand deposit accounts into money market funds, that may work to reduce
M1 balances considerably.
(13) Attainment of the tentative 1982 ranges for the broader Ms
would represent a deceleration in their measured growth. From that view-
point, there may be little need to consider a further lowering of those
ranges at this time. While some little lowering might not be inconsistent
with a view that price increases will be lower in 1982 and that real income
growth will be weak (particularly if one held the view that such a combi-
nation would lead to weaker nominal income growth than the 8-1/2 percent
projected by the staff), the credibility of a reduced range might be in
doubt given this year's results. Moreover, with more deregulation possibly
in prospect for next year, a case might also be made for adjusting the
ranges upward, at least for M2, to accommodate a more favorable competitive
position for depository institutions relative to market instruments. A
more particular question may also be raised about the interpretation for
purposes of monetary policy of a possible increase in M2 from a liberali-
zation of tax and deposit ceiling rate regulations on IRAs; indeed, whether
these accounts should be included in M2 is uncertain given their role as a
vehicle for long-term savings. The staff currently projects in 1982 M2
would grow by 8-1/2 percent, and M3 just a shade faster, given M1 growth of
our nominal GNP projection.
(14) Uncertainties about the impact of ongoing changes in
financial technology on the public's holdings of deposits and closely related
assets argue for retaining long-run target ranges for money as wide as 3
percentage points. Indeed, given the particular uncertainties about M1
at this juncture in the development of financial services and markets, one
might even argue that its range should be somewhat wider. In addition to
the issues noted in paragraphs (11) and (12), the interpretation of M1, and
its proper setting as a target, could be affected by its changing composition.
With relatively more of the aggregate held by consumers in NOW accounts,
which behave in part like savings accounts, the sensitivity of M1 demand to
both interest rates and income-and in turn the impact of M1 supply on
income-could be affected. However, we estimate that no more than roughly
Near-term Targets
(15) The upper panel of thetable below presents three alternative
specifications for the monetary aggregates during the first quarter of 1982.
Growth rates are measured from a QIV '81 average base-in part because of the
very preliminary nature of the December estimates of the aggregates-with the
alternatives designed to achieve growth of M1 by March consistent with the
upper, middle, and lower ends, respectively, of the FOMC's tentative long-
run range for that aggregate in 1982. Implied growth rates over the three
month December-to-March period, based on the staff's current December
estimates, are shown in the second panel. Possible ranges for the inter-
meeting federal funds rate are indicated in the last line of the table.
(More detailed and longer-run data for the monetary aggregates may be found
on the following page, and charts indicating the relationships of the alter-
native targets to the Committee's tentative longer-run ranges for 1982
may be found on the next three pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from QIV '81
to March '82
Implied growth from
December '81p/ to
March '82
M1 4¼. 2¼ ¾
M2 8¾ 7½ 6½
Federal funds rate
range 10 to 14 11 to 15 12 to 16
p/ preliminary
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
Annual Average
(16) Alternative B calls for M1 growth from QIV '81 to March
at a 4 percent annual rate, but probably involves M2 growth slightly above
the upper end of its range. Growth of M1 from the estimated December level
to March would be at a slower 2¼ percent rate since the level of December is
high relative to the fourth quarter average. Growth of M2 over that period
would also be relatively moderate-at a 7-1/2 percent annual rate--for the
same reason.
(17) Assuming a continued downward shift in M1 demand, though at
a slower pace than last year, and a small increase in nominal GNP in the
first quarter, such a slowing in M1 growth from the recent pace may be
accompanied by little net change in short-term interest rates over the
next several weeks. However, both the economic outlook and the state of
money demand (given income and interest rates) are highly uncertain at
this juncture, so that an even wider range than usual should be placed around,
interest rate projections. For instance, strong downward pressures could
develop--more consistent with a normal cyclical pattern of short-term rates-
if the economic recession does not tend to abate early next year as assumed
in the GNP projection. On the other hand, upward pressures could emerge,
even with a weak GNP, if the demand for money were relatively strong either
because of a return to historical relationships or because economic uncer-
tainties caused the public to continue to save more than earlier in the year
and to hold part of this saving in NOW accounts.
(18) The alternative B specifications would require expansion in
total reserves at a 2 percent pace from December to March.1 / Assuming
adjustment borrowing in the $450 million area, nonborrowed reserves would
increase at a 1-1/2 percent rate and, at the present discount rate, the
federal funds rate in the intermeeting period would likely fluctuate up
in a 12 to 13 percent range. The 3-month Treasury bill could be expected
to trade in the 11 to 11-1/2 percent area, as sizable first quarter
Treasury financing demands make themselves felt in an environment in which
the money market shows no sign of easing.
(19) Private short-term credit demands are likely to remain weak,
partly as borrowing is fairly strong in bond markets and partly in connection
with projected inventory liquidation. Corporate borrowers who had postponed
bond issues in December because of the rebound in long-term rates, may
come back into the market early next year if they come to believe that the
cost of staying out will be higher than expected-especially with enlarged
Treasury offerings in prospect later in the year. Should corporate bond
yields remain near current levels, there may be some scope for a further
drop in interest rates on home mortgage commitments given the relatively
wide spread existing between bond and mortgage rates. Even though thrift
operating losses can be expected to moderate further at the projected short-
term interest rate level as high cost deposits are rolled over, their deposit
growth is not expected to be robust; this, together with continuing uncer-
tainties about future rate developments, is likely to discourage them from
aggressively offering mortgages.
(20) Alternative A calls for a 5-1/2 percent growth target for
M1 from the fourth quarter to March and 4-1/4 percent from the estimated
December level to March, and involves a greater risk that the level of M2
in the first quarter will be above the upper limit of its tentative
long-run range. This alternative would entail growth in total reserves at
a 4 percent annual rate over the first three months of the year. Assuming
a level of adjustment borrowing of around $250 million, nonborrowed
reserves would grow at a 6 percent rate. Such a pace of reserve provision
would likely be associated with a federal funds rate near or a little below
the current 12 percent discount rate. That probably would be accompanied
by a decline in short-term rates from recent levels, with the 3-month bill
perhaps around 10 to 10-1/2 percent. Bond yields are likely to decline some,
but declines might be limited by a sizable pickup in bond offerings as the
market viewed the decline as opening another "window". With an indication
of lower borrowing costs, thrift institutions would be somewhat more willing
to cut mortgage rates further and increase commitment activity.
(21) The contemplated modest decline in short-term interest
rates under alternative A might be accompanied by a tendency for the dollar
to decline on exchange markets. However, any decline could be short-lived,
or limited, as foreign central banks take advantage of any strengthening
in their currencies to lower their own interest rates further in light
of continued weak performance of their economies.
(22) Alternative C--which calls for virtually no growth in M1
between December and March--may be expected to bring M2 into the upper part
of its tentative long-run range by March. Essentially no growth in total
reserves would be involved, and assuming adjustment borrowing of $650 million,
nonborrowed reserves would decline at about a 2-1/2 percent rate in the first
quarter. A federal funds rate of perhaps 13 to 14 percent in the inter-
meeting period would be implied. Such a move in the funds rate would surprise
market participants, and a fairly substantial rise in other market interest
rates, at least temporarily, would tend to develop. The 3-month bill rate
would probably move to near 12-1/2 percent, the corporate bond rate might
approach 16 percent, and new issue volume would probably drop significantly
as firms return to short-term credit markets. Residential mortgage rates
would retrace part of their recent decline. The higher than expected level
of interest rates would tend to strengthen the dollar further in foreign
exchange markets and limit reductions in foreign interest rates.
(23) As 1982 progresses, short-term interest rates likely will
rise to levels above those currently prevailing, assuming M1 grows at the
midpoint of the FOMC's tentative range. The table below shows interest
rate forecasts for the year, assuming alternative B for the first quarter
and midpoint growth of M1 thereafter. These assumptions lie behind the
Greenbook GNP projection. Selection of alternative A might involve a
larger rise in rates later in the year to compensate for the greater near-
term monetary stimulus associated with this approach if the Committee desires
to slow money growth later in an effort to achieve midpoint growth for the
year. Alternative C, on the other hand, by exerting near-term restraint
would probably be associated with lower rate levels later in the year,
reflecting not only the greater scope for faster money growth at that time
but also possibly weaker economic activity.
Recently
3-month Offered Fixed
Federal Treasury Aaa Corporate Rate Mortgage
Funds Bill Bond Commitments
III 15 13 15¼ 16¼
IV 15½ 13½ 15¼ 16¼
Directive language
(24) Given below is a suggested operational paragraph for the
directive. The specifications adopted at the meeting on November 17 are
shown in strike-through form.
IN THE SHORT RUN, THE COMMITTEE [DEL: , after noting a moderate
shortfall in growth of M1-B in October from the target path set
at the last meeting,] seeks behavior of reserve aggregates con-
sistent with growth of [DEL: M1-B] M1 AND M2 [DEL: from October to December]
FROM THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1981 TO MARCH at [DEL: an] annual [DEL: rate] RATES
of about [DEL: 7] ____ percent [DEL: (after allowance for the impact of flows
into NOW accounts)] and [DEL: with growth of M2 at an annual rate around
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations
that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths
during the period before the next meeting is likely to be asso-
ciated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of
[DEL:11 to 15] ____ TO ____ percent.
