Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
March 25, 1983
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) March 25, 1983
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) M2 grew at around a 24½ percent annual rate in February,
but is estimated to have decelerated considerably to about an 11½ percent
annual rate in March. To a degree, the reduced growth of M2 appears to
reflect a slowing in funds shifted into money market deposit accounts
(MMDAs) from sources outside M2.1/ In addition, however, growth of M2
appears to be "basically" slowing in March, as its nontransactions
component, abstracting from shifts, seems to be decelerating markedly.
(2) M3 grew at about a 13½ percent annual rate in February;
its growth, too, is estimated to have slowed markedly in March--to about
a 6½ percent annual rate. The level of M3 in March places it near the
upper end of the FOMC's annual target range of 6½ to 9½ percent. Because
depository institutions have responded to the strong net inflows into core
deposits in part by running off large CDs, this aggregate has been much
less affected by the introduction of the new instruments than M2.
(3) M1 advanced at a record annual rate of just above 22 percent
in February. Preliminary data indicate that growth in March remained
strong--at about a 16 percent annual rate--bringing this aggregate even
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Jan. Feb. Mar.: 01 '83 Mar. '83
Money and Credit Aggregates
Reserve Measures2
Nonborrowed reserves3
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment borrowing4
Excess reserves
remove the effects
reserve ratios under
further above its 4 to 8 percent longer-term range. With shifts into
super NOW accounts from outside of M1 in February and March estimated
to be comparatively small and roughly offset by transfers of funds
from M1 to MMDAs, the underlying strength in transactions deposits
apparently continues to be considerable. In addition, M1 growth has
been bolstered by unusually strong increases in currency throughout
the first quarter. The large increase in M1 during the first quarter
as a whole--14 percent at an annual rate on a quarter-over-quarter
basis--appears to represent a continuation of the upward shift in M1
demand (given income and interest rates) that developed last year. In
the first quarter, the velocity of M1 dropped by about 6 percent at an
annual rate.
(4) The debt of nonfinancial sectors is projected to have
increased over the first quarter at a rate near the lower end of FOMC's
fourth quarter. Private borrowing is estimated to have remained close
to the reduced fourth-quarter pace; although funds raised in credit
markets by the federal government declined a little, they continued
to account for nearly half of the total of such borrowing. Bolstered
by a sharp increase in inflows of funds as a result of aggressive
offerings of MMDAs, depository institutions are estimated to have
accounted for around 60 percent of net credit extended to domestic non-
financial sectors in the first quarter, up from an average of a little
over 30 percent in the last three years. Bank credit growth rose from
first, and loans and investments at thrift institutions apparently have
picked up as well. At banks, acquisition of Treasury securities is
estimated to have accounted for about half of the increase in their
assets. The greatly enlarged intermediation through depository institu-
tions last quarter was accompanied by substantial disinvestment of money
market mutual fund shares and a considerable slowing in direct acquisitions
of credit market instruments by private domestic nonfinancial sectors.
(5) Total and nonborrowed reserves declined at 14¼ and 12½
percent annual rates, respectively, in February after growing slowly in
January. Preliminary data indicate a modest rebound in growth for these
measures in March. The declines in total and nonborrowed reserves since
December mainly reflect reductions in required reserves because of
shifts out of savings and small time deposits into MMDAs and the run-
off of large CDs. The monetary base has grown much more strongly than
these reserve measures in each of the past three months, owing to the
rapid growth in currency. The level of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
implied by the reserve paths was kept at $200 million throughout the
intermeeting period. Actual borrowing, however, has averaged about $390
million per week, reflecting such influences as unexpectedly strong
demands for excess reserves (apparently related at times to unusually
slow responses by banks to reserve requirement reductions) and misses
in projections of factors affecting reserves at the end of a statement
week (caused at times by computer and wire transfer problems).1/
(6) While borrowing ran higher than anticipated, free reserves
were generally positive, and the federal funds rate continued to fluctuate
around the 8 percent discount rate over most of the intermeeting period,
though trading was around 8 1/4 percent in the most recent statement week.
After declining in the weeks immediately following the FOMC meeting,
other short-term interest rates began rising in early March, reflecting
concerns that sustained rapid growth of the monetary aggregates had, at a
minimum, made a near-term discount rate cut much less likely. On balance,
short-term rates have risen as much as 35 basis points since the February
meeting. Long-term rates, on the other hand, have declined about 45 to
increased further, partly in response to continued moderation in inflation
and favorable implications for the economy of the break in oil prices.
(7) The dollar has appreciated by about 1 1/2 percent on a weighted
average basis since the last Committee meeting. The dollar has declined
by 3/4 percent against the mark as the latter currency benefited from a
solid conservative party victory in the March general election, and has
remained about unchanged against the yen. However, it has risen by
about 5 percent against the French franc and a similar amount against the
. Short-term interest rates abroad declined
somewhat, on average, reflecting cuts in German, Swiss, and Dutch official
lending rates.
Prospective developments
(8) Alternative short-run specifications of the monetary
aggregates for the March to June period are shown in the table below,
along with federal funds rate ranges. (More detailed data for the
alternatives are shown in the charts and table on the following pages.
The quarterly interest rate path consistent with the staff's GNP pro-
jection is contained in Appendix II.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from March
to June
M1 7-1/2 6 4-1/2
Federal funds rate
range 5 to 9 6 to 10 7 to 11
(9) The alternatives are designed so that M2 over the second
quarter stays around or below the upper bound of the FOMC's 7 to 10 per-
cent target range (based on February-March). M2 under alternative A
would be just a bit above the upper end of the range by June, and
would be down within the range under alternatives B and C, as shown in
Chart 1. Under all three alternatives M3 would be at the top of, or
within, its longer-run range, but M1, though its growth is expected to
diminish in the months ahead, would remain well above its range by
June--as shown in Charts 2 and 3.
Chart 1
Actual and Targeted M2
Billions of dollars
S2240
ACTUAL LEVEL*
SHORT-RUN ALTERNATIVES
CONROENAL F)
CaMs FOMC
March 1983 lve IS proctd.
Chart 3
Actual and Targeted M1
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Class II - FOMC
- ACTUAL LEVEL*
*** SHORT-RUN ALTERNATIVES
Billions of dollars
1550
-- 530
-- 490
-- 470
I I I I I I
N D J
I I I I I i
March 1983 level is projected.
F M A M J J A S O N D J F M
1983 1984
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
April
May
June
Growth Rates
Monthly
April
May
June
Dec. to March
March to June
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
(10) The staff expects a further slowing of M2 growth as the
shifts to MMDAs from non-M2 assets moderate with the ebbing of the
initial stock adjustment to the new accounts and with the decline in
MMDA offering rates. We have assumed that M2 growth will be increased
by about 1 percentage point or a little more over the the March to June
less distorted than M2 by new deposit instruments, is expected to
expand at a pace only somewhat slower than in the first quarter; CDs
are expected to stop running off, as depository institutions continue
to finance moderate expansion in credit demands and also further build
up holdings of U.S. Government securities, though at a slower pace than
in the first quarter.
(11) Partly because lagged effects of earlier market rate
declines have dissipated, we expect broad money growth to slow over the
months ahead (even abstracting from MMDA shifts). Nonetheless, judging
from recent behavior, we would expect demand to be sufficiently strong
so that an effort to bring M2 growth down to the pace of alternative C
might be associated with rising interest rates. However, a deceleration
to the pace of B or A might be accomplished with stable or declining
(12) More clearly than in the case of M2, M1 growth basically
appears to be running strong (given income and interest rates). However,
all the alternatives assume a considerable slowing in M1 expansion over
the March to June period, as our models suggest. Even with the assumed
slowing, the velocity of M1 in the second quarter would still decline,
though by much less than in earlier quarters, rather than rise sub-
stantially as is typical of the early stages of a cyclical recovery.
(13) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors in the second
quarter is expected to grow at a 9 percent annual rate, remaining some-
what above the growth of GNP. Borrowing, seasonally adjusted, by both
the federal government and by private sectors is projected to strengthen
in the second quarter. The federal government will have to raise a sub-
stantial volume of funds in credit markets in a quarter when seasonal
tax inflows have frequently in the past allowed it to repay debt. The
increase in household borrowing is expected to be concentrated in the
mortgage area. In the business sector, with inventories no longer running
off, borrowing needs also will rise. With the shift to MMDAs largely
completed, the bank and thrift share of lending to nonfinancial sectors
is expected to decline from the extraordinary level of the first quarter,
but to remain above the average of the last few years.
(14) Alternative B contemplates a federal funds rate fluctuating
around the current 8-1/2 percent discount rate, assuming adjustment (includ-
ing seasonal) borrowing at the discount window of around $200 million. Total
and nonborrowed reserves can be expected to rise from March to June at
annual rates of 6 and 7-1/2 percent, respectively, after declining on
balance over the previous three-month period largely because of deposit
mix changes related to introduction of MMDAs. The monetary base is
expected to grow about as rapidly as in the first quarter.
(15) Other short-term interest rates may decline moderately
from current levels as the stability of the funds rate around the present
discount rate and slowing of growth in the aggregates reduce fears of a
near-term tightening of monetary policy. This also seems consistent
with greatly reduced net issuance of Treasury bills in the second quarter,
reflecting a seasonal reduction in cash needs. Longer-term interest rates
might also decline, if favorable market expectations generated by slower
money growth and incoming evidence of moderate economic activity over-
come continuing supply pressures. Treasury coupon offerings are expected
to remain about as large as in the first three months of 1983, and
businesses also can be expected to offer a fairly large volume of inter-
mediate- and long-term securities in an ongoing effort to improve balance
sheet structures.
(16) Alternative A, which calls for 10 percent M2 growth from
March to June, would probably be associated with a drop in the federal
funds rate to the 7 to 8 percent area. Adjustment borrowing of around
$150 to $200 million would be consistent with such a funds rate range if
the discount rate were cut to 8 percent. Or such a funds rate might
emerge, or be approached, if borrowing were dropped to the $50-100
million range at the current discount rate.
(17) Short-term interest rates may decline considerably under
alternative A, as market fears of any near-term tightening are allayed
and current dealer financing costs drop along with the funds rate. The
short-term rates would lead to a further decline in the bank prime rate.
Longer-term rates may also decline, but the declines may be limited by
a resultant step-up in corporate bond offerings.
(18) Alternative C is assumed to involve a rise in the federal
funds rate to the 9 to 9½ percent area, and an increase in the level of
borrowing to the $500 to $700 million range. Short-term interest rates
would rise somewhat further, since the market would not appear to have
fully discounted such a tightening. The 3-month bill rate could rise to
around 9 percent and large CDs would probably be offered at 9½ percent
or higher, exerting upward pressure on the prime rate. Longer-term rates
would also rise, and the spread of the mortgage rate over the bond rate
may also widen, as lenders contemplated the cost impacts of rising deposit
rates, especially with such a large proportion of their deposits in the
form of MMDAs and MMCs. Higher U.S. interest rates would probably lead
to further upward pressure on dollar exchange rates.
Directive language
(19) Given below are two alternative drafts for the operational
paragraph of the directive. The first retains the general approach adopted
at the February meeting, but with the language updated to take account of
developments since that time, with M3 now apparently just above the upper
limit of its long-run range, and M2 starting just above its range. The
second is proposed in the event the Committee decides to return to specifi-
cation of numerical objectives for the monetary aggregates. This alternative
also includes language in brackets that might be considered, depending
on how or whether the Committee wishes to condition the Desk's response
to incoming data on the aggregates.
Alternative I - Existing Language
For the more immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain
the existing degree of restraint on reserve positions. Lesser re-
straint would be acceptable in the context of appreciable slowing of
growth in the monetary aggregates [DEL: to or below] RELATIVE TO the paths
implied by the long-term ranges, taking account of the distortions
relating to the introduction of new accounts. The Chairman may call
for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic
Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve
paths during the period before the next meeting is likely to be
associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range
of [DEL: 6 to 10] ____ TO ____ percent.
Alternative II - Language Incorporating Numerical Objectives for Second
In the short run, the Committee seeks restraint on reserves
consistent with a slowing from March to June in growth of M2 and M3
to annual rates of about ____ and ____ percent respectively. The
Committee anticipates that M1 growth at an annual rate of about
____ percent would be consistent with its objectives for the broader
aggregates. [The Committee agreed that somewhat faster monetary
growth would be tolerated if it appeared to be associated with
continuing distortions from growth of the new deposit accounts or
unusual demands for liquidity.] [Lesser restraint on reserves would
be acceptable in the context of a more pronounced slowing in the
growth of the aggregates.] The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations
that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths
during the period before the next meeting is likely to be associated
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of ____ to
____ percent.
