Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
November 10, 1983Strictly Confidential (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
_ ____
Class I FOMC
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) November 10, 1983
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) M2 is estimated to have expanded at about a 9 percent annual
rate in October, near the 8-1/2 percent pace specified by the FOMC for the
September-to-December period. The acceleration of M2 from its 4-1/2 per-
cent rate of September was attributable to faster growth in its nontransactions
components, other than savings deposits and MMDAs; small time deposits, which
have been growing rapidly since midsummer, were probably boosted a little by
the October 1 deregulation of interest rates. From its February-March base,
M2 had increased at a 7-3/4 percent annual rate by October, in the lower half
of its 7 to 10 percent longer-run range.
(2) M3 growth in October, at around an 8-1/4 percent annual rate,
also was close to the 8-1/2 percent pace sought by the FOMC for the September-
to-December period. While issuance of large CDs by thrift institutions
continued heavy, banks allowed large certificates to run off more rapidly in
October in the face of large inflows of other deposits. For the year-to-date,
M3 has increased at a 9 percent annual rate, somewhat below the upper end of
its 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent longer-term range.
(3) Expansion in M1, at about a 1-1/2 percent annual rate, re-
mained low in October for the third month in a row. Currency grew at about
a 10 percent annual rate, but other checkable deposits were about flat for the
second straight month, and demand deposits registered their third consecutive
monthly decline. By October, M1 was in the lower half of its longer-run
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Long-run base
1983 to
July Aug. Sept. Oct. October1
Money and Credit Aggregates
Reserves Measures 2
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing 875 1,055 926 5894
/ Growth rates of reserve measures are adjusted to remove the effects of discon-
tinuities resulting from phased changes in reserve ratios under the Monetary
Control Act.
$740 million and excess reserves $456 million.
monitoring range of 5 to 9 percent, having increased at almost a 6 percent
annual rate since the second quarter.
(4) Growth in the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is esti-
mated to have slowed last month, dropping to about a 7 percent annual rate,
as funds raised by private sectors apparently moderated further. Growth
of debt from year end 1982 through October is now estimated at almost a
monitoring range. Household credit demands continued fairly large last
month, and business credit demands were again relatively light, probably
reflecting strong internal cash flows. Business borrowing recently has
shifted even more toward short-term sources. Commercial paper issuance
remained strong in October and business borrowing from commercial banks
picked up; business loans at large banks declined further, but sizable in-
creases were recorded at small banks and foreign branches of U.S. banks.
(5) Total reserves contracted in October at nearly a 4 percent
annual rate, reflecting a decline in required reserves associated partly
with weakness in interbank deposits at member banks. The monetary base, by
contrast, expanded at a 7 percent annual rate owing to the rapid growth of
currency. Over the intermeeting period, regular plus seasonal borrowing
at the discount window averaged close to the $650 million level assumed in
constructing the weekly nonborrowed reserve paths, as substantial borrowing
late in the period offset previous shortfalls. The variations in borrowing
resulted in part from unexpected changes on the last day of the statement
week in market factors affecting reserves.
(6) Federal funds have traded primarily in a 9-1/4 to 9-1/2 per-
cent range since the last FOMC meeting. Other market interest rates generally
have moved higher, however, in response to incoming data indicating continued
strength in economic activity and, most recently, to uncertainty about the
pattern of Treasury financing pending resolution of difficulties in raising the
debt ceiling. The largest rate increases have been in the bond area, where
yields have risen 25 to 35 basis points over the intermeeting period, while
short-term rates have moved up 5 to 15 basis points. In contrast, primary
conventional mortgage rates declined about 20 basis points since the early
October meeting, and the ceiling rate on FHA/VA mortgages was trimmed 1/2 of
a percentage point to 12-1/2 percent. Most broad-based stock price indexes
have fallen since early October, with some bank stocks registering sizable
declines amid intensified concerns about loans to developing countries; such
concerns are not evident in the CD market, however.
(7) The dollar has appreciated by about one percent, on a weighted
average basis, since the last FOMC meeting. The dollar's rise was associ-
ated with changing expectations about the likely course of U.S. interest
rates and with an intensification of geopolitical tensions. The German mark
was also affected by the revelation in early November of difficulties in a
German commercial bank.
. Gold declined by a further 3 percent
and silver by 15 percent since the last FOMC meeting. These declines
probably reflected in small part the recent rise in long-term U.S. interest
rates but, more importantly, sales from official silver stocks by Peru and
the associated increase in expected possible sales of precious metals by
other hard-pressed developing country borrowers.
Prospective developments
(8) The table below shows alternative specifications for the
monetary aggregates over the September-to-December period, together with
the federal funds rate range for the upcoming intermeeting period and
implied growth rates for the two-month October-to-December period associated
with each alternative. (More detailed data for these alternatives are
shown on the charts and table on the following pages.)
Current
FOMC
Specifi-
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C cations
Growth from
Sept. to Dec.
M2 9-1/4 8-1/2 7-3/4 8-1/2
M3 9 8-1/2 8 8-1/2
Ml 6-1/2 5-1/2 4-1/2 7
Federal funds
rate range 6 to 9-1/2 6 to 10 7 to 11
Implied growth from
Oct. to Dec.
M2 9-1/4 8-1/4 7-1/4
M3 9-1/4 8-1/2 7-3/4
Ml 9 7-1/2 6
(9) Alternative B involves the same growth in the broader
aggregates than is currently specified for the September-to-December
period; alternatives A and C call for somewhat faster and slower growth
in the broader aggregates. However, in all cases, expected M1 growth is
lower than the Committee's current short-run specifications, given the
unexpectedly slow growth of this aggregate in October. Under all of the
alternatives, the monetary aggregates would be expected to remain comfort-
ably within their longer-run ranges for 1983, with M1 and M2 in the lower
halves of their respective ranges and M3 in the upper part of its range;
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
October
November
December
Growth Rates
Monthly
October
November
December
September-December
October-December
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
Memo:
Growth Rate
Base period to
1983041
growth rates from longer-run bases to the fourth quarter under each
alternative are shown in the detailed table.
(10) The specifications of alternative B are expected to be
consistent with little change in bank reserve positions and money market
conditions from those recently prevailing. Borrowing at the discount
window would be anticipated to be around $650 million and the funds rate
between 9-1/4 and 9-1/2 percent, perhaps closer to the latter rate. De-
spite a pickup in growth of transactions deposits, nonborrowed reserves
would probably change little under this alternative over the two-month
November-December period, owing primarily to the impact of lagged reserve
accounting and changes in the deposit mix.
(11) M2 growth is expected to slow a little in November and
December under alternative B from its rate in October, when its nontrans-
actions component was probably boosted slightly by the October 1 deregula-
tion. Although growth of 8-1/2 percent over the final three months of
the year would represent a considerable pickup from the pace of the
previous three months, on a quarterly average basis the expansion of
M2 would fall well short of projected nominal GNP growth for the second
consecutive quarter; nonetheless, the resulting increase in M2 velocity
of 3 to 4 percent would not be atypical for this stage of an economic
recovery. M3 growth is expected to be sustained at, or a little above,
its October pace. Should the decline in the Treasury cash balance be
exaggerated because of debt ceiling problems, growth in M2 and M3 may be
somewhat stronger as banks seek additional deposit funds to support
credit expansion in the absence of their usual Treasury balances.
(12) M1 is expected to accelerate over November and December
to about a 7-1/2 percent annual rate from its very low growth rates of
the past few months, primarily in response to the underlying strength
in transactions needs. We would not expect any very substantial effect
on M1--certainly not a lingering effect and perhaps not even a transitory
one--from a drop in Treasury cash balances because of debt ceiling problems;
some investors may leave funds in cash for a time while awaiting Treasury
issues delayed by the debt ceiling but for the most part such funds would
probably be invested in other instruments.
(13) Even with the substantial pickup in M1 growth expected
between now and year-end (with the largest increase anticipated for Dec-
ember on a monthly average basis) M1 growth from the third to the fourth
quarter would be only around 3-1/4 percent at an annual rate. Assuming
nominal GNP grows at the 11-1/2 percent annual rate forecast by the
staff, velocity growth would be by far the largest of the current recovery.
Such an increase in velocity is larger than is implicit in many econometric
equations predicting money demand-suggesting some unwinding of the
unusually large build-up in cash balances seen since late 1982. In the
absence of any further such unwinding, however, continuation of money
market rates around current levels could be associated with a tendency
for M1 in the first quarter to be in the upper part of the FOMC's tenta-
tive longer-term range for 1984.
(14) Market interest rates might tend to rise a bit under
alternative B, although the likelihood or extent of any such upward
pressure would depend in part on whether reserve paths led to federal
funds trading more consistently near 9-1/2 percent than has been the
case recently. In any event, credit markets will have to absorb a
large volume of new Treasury issues in a short period at a time when
private credit demands may be picking up. On balance, a 3-month Treasury
bill rate in an 8-3/4 to 9-1/4 percent range might be anticipated, with
bond yields unchanged or rising slightly.
(15) A pickup in debt issuance from the very moderate pace of
October is expected over the balance of the year. Over the fourth quarter
as a whole, the debt of all domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to
rise at about a 9-1/4 percent annual rate, leaving this aggregate just
above the midpoint of its 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent 1983 monitoring range.
Consumer credit demands are likely to be stronger in the fourth than the
third quarter, while residential mortgage formation may be maintained near
its recent pace. At the current level of bond rates, much of business
borrowing would probably continue to fall on banks and the commercial
paper market.
(16) Alternative A involves an easing in bank reserve positions
and money market conditions over the next few weeks--with borrowing from
the discount window falling into the $350-450 million range and the federal
funds rate dropping to around 8-3/4 to 9 percent. Growth of nonborrowed
reserves would likely average around 5 percent at an annual rate over
November and December.
(17) M1 under this alternative would be expected to accelerate
in November and December sufficiently to bring growth for the last three
months of the year to around 6-1/2 percent, very near the Committee's
current specification. Growth of M2 and M3, however, would likely exceed
the Committee's current 8-1/2 percent short-term objective, although re-
maining within their longer-term ranges. However, much of the impact on
money growth of easier bank reserve positions late in the fourth quarter
would be felt beginning early next year, through the impact on money demand
both of lower interest rates and the transactions needs associated with
stronger GNP growth.
(18) The extent of easing in money market conditions contem-
plated under alternative A would probably result in a sizable decline
in other short-term interest rates, with the 3-month Treasury bill falling
into the 8 to 8-1/2 percent area, and a decline in the dollar on foreign
exchange markets. The reaction of bond yields may be more muted, espe-
cially if incoming data indicated not only continued strength in economic
activity but also a very substantial pickup in money stock growth.
(19) Somewhat tighter reserve conditions are contemplated under
alternative C, with discount window borrowing in the neighborhood of $800
to $900 million and the federal funds rate rising to around 10 percent.
Under these conditions, growth in M1 and M2 for 1983 would be expected to
move down further in the lower halves of their respective longer-term
ranges, while M3 would come in closer to the midpoint of its range.
Market interest rates would rise sharply from current levels under this
alternative. Such a tightening over the period immediately ahead does
not appear to be widely anticipated in the market despite the recent
strength of the economy, given growth of the monetary aggregates well
within their ranges and concerns generated by international debt problems.
The 3-month Treasury bill rate would probably move up in a 9-1/4 to 9-3/4
percent range, and bond yields would probably adjust similarly, at least
initially. The recent decline on yields in fixed-rate mortgages would
probably be reversed, and the dollar would appreciate further in foreign
exchange markets.
Directive language
(20) Given below is a suggested operational paragraph for the
directive with the numerical specifications adopted at the meeting on
October 4 shown in strike-through form.
The Committee seeks in the short run to (maintain, INCREASE
SLIGHTLY, DECREASE SLIGHTLY) THE EXISTING [DEL: the slightly lesser] degree
of reserve restraint [DEL: sought in recent-weeks]. The action is ex-
pected to be associated with growth of M2 and M3 at annual rates of
around [DEL: 8-1/2] ____ percent AND ____ PERCENT RESPECTIVELY from September
to December, consistent with the targets established for these
aggregates for the year. Depending on evidence about the strength
of economic recovery and other factors bearing on the business and
inflation outlook, lesser restraint would be acceptable in the con-
text of a significant shortfall in growth of the aggregates from
current expectations, while somewhat greater restraint would be
acceptable should the aggregates expand more rapidly. The Commit-
tee anticipates that M1 growth at an annual rate of around [DEL: 7] ____
percent from September to December will be consistent with its
fourth-quarter objectives for the broader aggregates, and that
expansion in total domestic nonfinancial debt would remain within
the range established for the year. The Chairman may call for
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic
Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related
reserve paths during the period before the next meeting is likely
to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside
a range of [DEL: 6 to 10] ____ TO ____ percent.
Security Dealer Positions
Millions of dollars
November 14, 1983
Cash Positions Forward and Futures Positions
Tfreury coupons Tressurycoupona
Period Nt Treasury under over federal private Treasury under over federal private
Total bills 1 year 1 year agency short-term bills 1 year 1 year agency hort-term
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct. 5
12
Nov. 2
.
7 9 3
I _
SStrictly confidential
Net Changes In System Holdings of Securities 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
July
August
September
October S
12
19
26
November 2
9
LEVEL--Iov. 9
November 14, 1983
Treury Treasury coupons net purchases' Federal agencies net purchases
4
chanW ithin 1-5 5.10 over 10 total ithin 1-5 5-10 over 10 total
Iyear I-year Itotal
-- -226
-211 -5,902
change for maturing bills, Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts rollovers of maturing coupon 6 Includes changes in RPs (+), matched sale-purchase transactions (-). and matched purchase sale
lsues. and direct Tresury borrowing from the System. transactions (+1).
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
November 14, 1983
Short-Term Long-Term
Treaury bill CDe money U.S. government constant corporate muni. home mortgages
federal secondary market secondary comm. market bankmaturity yields Aaa utility cipal conen
Proted funds market paper mutual prime recently Bond c one FHAIVA GNMA1-month fund loan e 30year rcenly Bond tonal c n soth .montI 1.y a. 3month 1-moth fund lan 3-year 10yer 30year offered Buyer at Ls ceiling l ecurity
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Nov. 2
9
Daily-4Nov. 4 9.32
Nov. 10 9.42p
a .2
.56r
12.00 12.41
spectlvely, following the end of the statement wek Column 14 Is an average of contraci Interest rates prepaymeni in 12 years on pools of 30 year FHAVA mortgages carrying the coupon rlae 50 basis points
on commitments for conventonal first mortgages with 80 percent loan to value ratios made by a sample of below Ihe current FANVA ceiling
------ - - ----
