Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
July 13, 1984
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) July 13, 1984
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) Growth in M1 accelerated to about a 12-1/4 percent annual
rate on average in May and June. As a result, expansion over the March to
June period, at about an 8-1/4 percent rate, was well above the Committee's
specification for that period of 6-1/2 percent. In contrast to M1, growth
in the broader monetary aggregates was about in line with anticipations,
in the case of M3 in line with the upward revised expectations of the last
Committee meeting. Over the March to June period, M2 grew at a 7-3/4
percent annual rate and M3 at a 10-1/4 percent rate. Compared with the
longer-run ranges adopted at the February meeting, M1 by June was somewhat
below its upper limit, M2 a little below the middle of the range, and M3
above the range.
(2) Domestic nonfinancial debt is estimated to have expanded
at about a 13 percent annual rate over the past three months, with both
federal and private borrowing continuing at about their advanced first-
quarter pace. Borrowing related to mergers is estimated to have accounted
for about one percentage point of total debt growth in the first half of
the year.
(3) Total reserve growth accelerated to a 10-3/4 percent rate
in May and further to a 26 percent annual rate in June, owing to a larger
demand for excess reserves and rapid growth of required reserves in June
which reflected especially strong demand deposits in that month and a
surge in large time deposits that began in May. After adjustment for
borrowing by Continental Illinois before it was formally classified
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
March to Q4 to
April May June June June
Money and Credit Aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve Measures 1
Nonborrowed reserves 2
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
as extended credit in early June, nonborrowed reserves rose at about a
credit remained very close to $1 billion in each of the complete 2-week
statement periods since the last Committee meeting. Thus far in the
current statement period, borrowing has averaged $662 million.
(4) The federal funds rate has risen from the area of 10-1/2
percent at the time of the May meeting to an average of around 11 percent
in June, with trading mostly in an 11 to 11-1/2 percent range thus far
in July. Money market pressures were especially marked around the mid-June
tax date and in the reserve maintenance period containing the quarter-end
statement date and the July 4 holiday. Generally, over the whole period
since the last Committee meeting, federal funds have traded at a higher
rate than might have been expected relative to the average level of discount
window borrowing, perhaps partly because large banks seem to have become
somewhat more conservative in their reserve management (for example, more
reluctant to use the discount window) in light of market concerns generated
by Latin American debt problems. Given these concerns, the spread of CD over
bill rates widened further and there were indications of tiering within the
CD market. Spreads have narrowed somewhat in recent days, but over the
intermeeting period 3-month CD and Euro-dollar rates rose around 50 basis
points on balance, while the 3-month T-bill rate was about unchanged. Mar-
ket concerns also appear to have affected private credits in general to some
degree. The bond market has been quite volatile since the FOMC meeting, with
Treasury bond yields currently about 15 to 40 basis points below levels at
the time of the last FOMC meeting. Private longer-term market rates, on
the other hand, are about unchanged on balance over the same period, while
rates on conventional fixed-rate home mortgages have risen about 65 basis
(5) The dollar's exchange value has risen, net, about 4
percent on a weighted average basis since the last Committee meeting.
Appreciations against major foreign currencies range from 3 percent
against the Canadian dollar to almost 6 percent against sterling. The
dollar weakened early in the period at the time of greatest concern about
large banks, but the rise in U.S. short-term interest rates and indications
of stronger than expected U.S. growth contributed to a sharp rise in the
weighted average dollar to a new peak.
Longer-run ranges for 1984 and 1985
(6) The table below shows the 1984 growth ranges for the
monetary and credit aggregates that are currently in place, an alternative
set that might be considered, and actual growth through the first half of the
year. The alternative encompasses somewhat higher growth ranges for M3 and
credit than in the current set of ranges.
Actual Growth
Current Alternative QIV to QII QIV to June
M1 4 to 8 4 to 8 6.7 7.5
M2 6 to 9 6 to 9 7.0 7.1
M3 6 to 9 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 9.7 9.8
Debt 8 to 11 9 to 12 13.0 13.0
(7) As may be seen from the table, the growth to date for M1
and M2 suggests little need to alter their longer-run ranges. Despite
growth in nominal GNP over the first half of the year that has been about
of the year, expansion of these two aggregates has been within their ranges.
Growth in their income velocities accelerated to annual rates of around
rise in short rates since the fourth quarter, following velocity increases
in the second half of last year in the neighborhood of 2-1/2 percent for
both aggregates. The largest velocity increases for M1 and M2 occurred in
the first quarter of this year, and velocity growth in the second quarter
was more in line with experience in the second half of last year. Assuming
that velocity continues to rise at a moderate pace, and also assuming some
little further rise in short-term interest rates, M1 growth over the balance
of the year is likely to remain in the upper half of its range and M2
growth around its midpoint, given the staff's GNP projection.
(8) In contrast to M1 and M2, growth of M3 and total debt
has been above their longer-run ranges thus far this year, as the
velocities of these aggregates have not accelerated from their pace in
the second half of last year. The alternative set of ranges for 1984
provides an option of raising growth of M3 and debt by 1/2 and one
percentage points, respectively, while retaining the current M1 and M2
ranges. This could be considered as needed to reflect the impact of merger
activity. Credit growth for the year might be above the upward adjusted
range, though, given the strength of demands for goods and services in the
staff's GNP forecast. On the other hand, there is also some, though small,
probability that M3 and debt growth could come within their present longer-
run ranges by year-end. This could occur if concerns about the fragility
of financial institutions and markets were to intensify, making it more
difficult for institutions to raise funds and leading to more conservative
lending practices generally. It may also occur if for other reasons the
economy were to slow more than currently projected and merger activity were
to subside much more rapidly than assumed.
(9) Three alternative sets of tentative ranges for 1985 are
shown in the table below for Committee consideration. Alternative I simply
represents the current ranges. Alternative III reduces all of the ranges
by 1/2 point-with an option shown in parentheses for narrowing the M1
range while retaining the alternative III midpoint should the Committee
wish to indicate a little more confidence in M1 as a guide. Alternative II
is in between. No alternative providing higher ranges is shown on the
thought that would be inconsistent under existing economic circumstances-
particularly so in the market's view--with the Committee's intention to
continue making progress toward reasonable price stability.
I II III
M1 4 to 8 4 to 7-1/2 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 (or 4 to 7)
M2 6 to 9 6 to 8-1/2 5-1/2 to 8-1/2
M3 6 to 9 6 to 9 5-1/2 to 8-1/2
Debt 8 to 11 8 to 11 7-1/2 to 10-1/2
(10) How much, if any, reduction in growth of the aggregates
the Committee might wish to consider for 1985 depends in part on assessment
of the trend in velocity. It also depends on the desirability of a more or
less gradual strategy of monetary growth rate reductions given price
pressures, the need to sustain the economic expansion, and implications of
various strategies for overall financial and economic stability.
(11) With regard to the underlying trend in the velocity of M1,
that cannot be known with any real certainty, given the relative recentness
of institutional changes affecting that aggregate. The trend since the
Second World War after taking out the effect of the rise of interest rates
over that period appears to be around 2 percent. The most probable outcome
under current circumstances would seem to be under 2 percent, as the intro-
duction of interest-bearing checkable accounts may well have increased the
income elasticity of demand for M1 by making transactions accounts more
attractive as savings instruments and also may have worked to reduce the
pace of technological innovation in money substitutes. With regard to the
trend velocity of M2, our best estimate continues to be around zero, al-
though M2 velocity has proven to be quite variable. At the beginning of
from $2,500 to $1,000. We have assumed that this change will have only a
minimal impact on M1 and M2.
(12) At this point monetary policy is expected to confront
greater upward price pressures next year than this, as we go into the third
year of economic expansion with relatively limited excess labor and plant
capacity and assuming a drop in the dollar on exchange markets. If, as
currently projected by the staff, price increases next year are on the
order of 5 to 5-1/2 percent while economic growth decelerates to a pace
more consistent with its potential, it seems probable that a slowing in M1
growth in 1985 to the area of 5-1/2 to 6 percent-as assumed for the GNP
projection and consistent with alternatives II or III--might generate
a little further upward pressure on short-term interest rates. In 1985, we
would anticipate M1 velocity growth of 2 to 2-1/2 percent associated with
the projected GNP increase of around 8 percent. The increases in velocity
of M1 over the third year of four previous expansions that have lasted at
least that long have averaged in the neighborhood of 4 percent, but they
have generally been accompanied by rather sizable interest rate increases
and occurred in an era when the underlying velocity trend was probably
higher than can now be expected. Maintenance of an M1 range of 4 to 8
percent as in alternative I--and with actual M1 growth expected to remain
above the midpoint-might involve no further upward interest rate pressures
next year.
(13) The growth of debt is expected to moderate noticeably next
year, on the assumption of reduced merger activity and in view of the
impact on credit demands of the projected 2-1/4 percentage point slowing
in growth of nominal GNP. As demands taper off, credit at banks and thrifts
also is projected to grow more slowly, accompanied by more moderate M3
expansion. However, with both debt and M3 running above their ranges this
year, even a substantial slowing may not allow scope for more than the
one-half percent reduction in ranges suggested under alternative III, and
growth would be expected near the upper ends of these ranges. Under
alternative II the current ranges for both credit and M3 are suggested to
be retained, although this would of course represent a reduction if the
Committee chose to adjust upward the existing 1984 range.
Short-run alternatives
(15) Shown below are three possible approaches to policy
implementation for the period immediately ahead. Specifications for
the monetary aggregates are presented for the June-to-September period,
along with proposed federal funds rate ranges. (More detailed material
can be found on the charts and table on the following pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from June
to September
Ml 7 5-1/2 4
M2 8 7-1/2 7
M3 9-1/2 9-1/4 9
Federal funds
rate range 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 8 to 12 8-1/2 to 12-1/2
(16) All of the alternatives call for deceleration in growth
of M1 and M3 over the next three months from their March-to-June pace;
however, on a quarterly average basis growth in M1 would be stronger in
the third than the second quarter because of the carryover effect on the
averages of the rapid growth in money in the latter part of the second
quarter. For M1, a deceleration over the third-quarter months is
needed to keep long-run growth from the fourth quarter of 1983 base
from moving closer to the upper limit of the Committee's current 4 to 8
percent range. In the case of M3 the contemplated deceleration would
still leave that aggregate above its long-run range. In all cases, M2
remains at or a little below its midpoint.
(17) Alternative B--which underlies the staff's GNP projection-
contemplates a marked slowing in M1 growth to around a 5-1/2 percent
annual rate over the June-to-September period in the process of bringing
Chart I
Actual and Targeted M1
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II FOMC
Billions of dollars
v---- 7ft
"ACTUAL LEVELS
a SHORT RUN ALTERNATIVES
I I
I I I 1 I I I 1 I I
Chart 3 CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II FOMC
Actual and Targeted M3
Billions of dollars
2960
- 2940
-ACTUAL LEVELS
* SHORT RUN ALTERNATIVES 2920
fe / - 2900
- 2880
- 2860
- 2820
- 2800
- 2780
- 2760
- 2740
- 2720
- 2700
- 2680
IIl .II I I , 1 2640
O N 0 J F M A M J J A S O N O
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Ml M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B
------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------Monthly Levels
July
August
September
Growth Rates
Monthly
July
August
September
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
Alt. C
growth of that aggregate closer to the midpoint of its longer-run range
by the end of the year. Such June-to-September growth, distributed
fairly evenly over the quarter, would entail a 7-3/4 percent quarterly
average increase in M1. That growth in money may not involve much, if
any, further rise of interest rates over the summer, assuming nominal GNP
grows no faster than the 9-1/2 percent annual rate currently projected
for the third quarter and given the rise of interest rates that has already
taken place.
(18) The deceleration of M1 growth under alternative B is
not expected to be accompanied by any significant slowing of M2 from its
rate of growth of the previous three months. Growth of the latter
aggregate is likely to be sustained, given the projected reasonably
strong growth in personal income and assuming little change in the
personal savings rate. Somewhat more rapid expansion in the nontrans-
actions component is expected, partly reflecting a lagged response of
the public to the increased rate attractiveness of time deposits and
MMDAs relative to demand deposits and regular NOW accounts. However,
expansion of M3 over the summer might well slow from its unusually
rapid second-quarter pace. Banks may have less need to issue CDs as
merger-related financing demands are reduced, and in any event the
recent tightening of markets and widening of yield spreads against
banks might encourage a somewhat less aggressive posture by banks in
credit markets. Even so, with the economy and underlying credit demands
expected to be fairly strong, M3 growth would probably be high relative
to its long-run range.
(19) Growth of domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to
decelerate moderately in the months ahead, but credit demands seem likely
to be strong enough to generate growth at around an 11-1/2 percent
annual rate pace over the third quarter, with only a small further falling
off in prospect later in the year. Although the pace of borrowing by
businesses is expected to slow, this reduction reflects only the assumed
abatement of merger activity. Underlying demands for funds by business
are expected to strengthen in the third quarter as the financing gap
(the excess of capital spending over internal funds) widens, and to be
even stronger in the fourth quarter. Federal government credit demands
are expected to moderate slightly between the second and third quarters,
but to remain relatively large over the balance of the year. The more
fundamental slowing in credit growth in prospect is in the household
sector and depends on a weakening in spending for homes and durables.
(20) Expansion in the aggregates as specified in alternative B
would probably entail growth of nonborrowed reserves at about an 8 percent
annual rate from June to September, with borrowing continuing to average
around $1 billion. If recent experience is any guide, the federal funds
rate would probably average in the 11 to 11-1/4 percent area. However,
should investors gain more confidence in banks, and should bank attitudes
toward reserve management and the discount window become less cautious, the
funds rate could well trade consistently below 11 percent for S1 billion
in borrowing. If that occurred, it might entail greater expansion over
time in nonborrowed reserves--as banks more willingly lend and add to
deposits-and hence more money growth than assumed for this alternative.
(21) Interest rates generally might show little net change
under alternative B, though probably edging higher from the most recent
levels if funds traded consistently around 11-1/4 percent. Speculation
about a discount rate increase could become more widespread in markets,
and this could itself add to upward pressures, at least temporarily, on
federal funds and other rates. The dollar may well remain generally firm
on exchange markets.
(22) The degree of tightness in bank reserve positions under
this alternative would also work to restrain money and credit growth later
in the year. Thus, alternative B may be consistent with growth in M1 over
the year 1984 in the area of 6-1/2 percent with only a little further
upward movement of interest rates. Growth of M3 and credit for the year
would probably be somewhat above the upper limits of their current longer-
run ranges, though expanding somewhat more slowly in the second half than
in the first half of the year. Growth of M2 would be expected to be
around the midpoint of its long-run range.
(23) Alternative A involves a policy approach that keeps M1
growth nearer the upper end of its longer-run range. The 7 percent
annual growth rate for this aggregate from June to September would bring
growth from QIV '83 to September to just under 7-1/2 percent. Such money
growth, when translated to a quarterly average basis for the third
quarter, implies only a small rise in the income velocity of M1 over
the months ahead and is probably consistent with some drop in money
market rates from recent levels under existing circumstances, particularly
considering the lingering restraining effects on money demand of the
rise of interest rates over recent months. Nonborrowed reserves are
likely to expand at a 14 percent annual rate under this alternative,
with borrowing about $750 million. Borrowing in that area might involve
a federal funds rate of around 10-1/2 percent-unless the recent relative
reluctance of banks to borrow from the discount window abates, in which
case the funds rate could be lower for such a level of borrowing.
(24) Such reserve and money market conditions appear to be
on the easy side of current market expectations. Should they be sustained,
bond prices might be expected to rise, assuming the economy does not
unexpectedly strengthen, no major disappointments occur with respect to
the budget, and M1 does not grow much faster than specified. The
decline by more in such a market atmosphere. Whether these rate levels
would be sustainable or reversed later in the year or in 1985, depends
in part on the likelihood that the rate declines themselves help generate
a strengthening of money and credit growth inconsistent with the Commit-
tee's long-run objectives. A reversal of the rate declines and a
further rise seems most likely, given the projected overall strength of
money and credit demands, if such objectives encompass M1 growth in
(25) Alternative C contemplates a very considerable decelera-
tion in M1 growth-as more consistent with growth around the midpoint
of its longer-run range over the year as a whole-and greater restraint
on growth of the broader money and credit aggregates. The 4 percent annual
rate of growth in M1 from June to September would bring expansion of this
aggregate from QIV '83 to September to 6-1/2 percent at an annual rate.
Growth at a 3-1/4 percent annual rate from September to December would
be needed to hit 6 percent for the year as a whole.
(26) Such a deceleration of money growth over the next three
months would probably require a sharp slowing of nonborrowed reserve
growth to a one percent annual rate, assuming a rise in borrowing to
$1-1/4 to $1-1/2 billion. The federal funds rate would probably rise to
around 12 percent, and other rates would adjust sharply upwards. Quality
rate spreads-such as between bills and CDs, or high grade industrial
and bank holding company commercial paper--would probably widen. Large
banks may be viewed as coming under even more pressure because of
increasing difficulties many borrowers would have in meeting higher
debt service payments. In addition, thrift institutions-which still
have a sizable portion of their portfolio in fixed-rate mortgages--would
be moving into a negative earnings position. The dollar may rise
further on exchange markets, but this could prove to be temporary
should the market come to the view that the financial system is coming
under excessive strain.
Directive language
(27) Given below is draft directive language related to the
Committee's decisions on the longer-run ranges (draft language for the
operating paragraph is shown in paragraph (28)). Suggested deletions
from the current directive are shown in strike-through form with pro-
posed additions in caps and certain alternatives bracketed. Deletion of
the two full sentences concerning M1 is suggested on the ground that
behavior of that aggregate over recent quarters has been somewhat more
"normal" in relation to GNP and other economic variables. The consider-
able uncertainties that still remain in interpreting M1 and the other
aggregates, given ongoing adaptation to institutional changes by banks
and the public and the potential for financial market disturbances,
appear to be clearly encompassed by the language of the second paragraph
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster mone-
tary and financial conditions that will help to reduce inflation
further, promote growth in output on a sustainable basis, and
contribute to an improved pattern of international transactions.
IN FURTHERANCE OF THESE OBJECTIVES the Committee AGREED AT THIS
MEETING TO REAFFIRM THE RANGES FOR MONETARY GROWTH THAT IT HAD
ESTABLISHED IN JANUARY: [DEL: established growth ranges for the
broader aggregates of] 4 TO 8 PERCENT FOR M1 AND 6 to 9 percent
for both M2 and M3 for the period from the fourth quarter of
THE COMMITTEE CHANGED THE RANGE(S) FOR 1984 TO ___________.
[DEL: The Committee also considered that a range of 4 to 8 percent
for M1 would be appropriate for the same period, taking account
of the possibility that, in the light of changed competition
of M1, its relationship to GNP over time may be shifting. Pend-
ing further experience, growth int hat aggregate will need to be
interposed in the light of of the growth in the other monetary
aggregates, which for the time being would continue to receive
substantial weight.] The associated range for total domestic
nonfinancial debt was ALSO REAFFIRMED [DEL: set] at (RAISED TO) 8 to
AGREED ON TENTATIVE RANGES OF MONETARY GROWTH, MEASURED FROM THE
FOURTH QUARTER OF 1984 TO THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1985, OF ____ TO
____ PERCENT FOR M1, ____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR M2, AND ____ TO ____
PERCENT FOR M3. THE ASSOCIATED RANGE FOR NONFINANCIAL DEBT WAS
SET AT ____ TO ____ PERCENT.
The Committee understood that policy implementation would
require continuing appraisal of the relationships not only among
the various measures of money and credit but also between those
aggregates and nominal GNP, including evaluation of conditions in
domestic credit and foreign exchange markets.
(28) Given below is suggested language for the operating
paragraph of the directive. The specifications adopted at the meeting
on May 22 are shown in strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SLIGHTLY
(ALT. A)/ maintain (ALT. B)/INCREASE SLIGHTLY (ALT. C) existing
pressures on bank reserve positions. This ACTION is expected to
be consistent with growth in M1, M2, and M3 at annual rates of
around [DEL: 6-1/2, 8 and 10] ____, ____, AND ____ percent, respectively,
during the period from [DEL: March to] June TO SEPTEMBER. Somewhat
greater reserve restraint might be acceptable in the event of
more substantial growth of the monetary aggregates, while some-
what lesser restraint might be acceptable if growth of the
monetary aggregates slowed significantly. In either case, such
a change would be considered only in the context of appraisals
of the continuing strength of the business expansion, inflation-
ary pressures, financial market conditions, and the rate of
credit growth. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation
if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pur-
suit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths dur-
ing the period before the next meeting is likely to be associated
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 7-1/2
to 11-1/2] ____ TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
Daily--July 6
12
13
money bank
market prim
mutual pr
fund loan
fund
- 13.00
- 13.00
- 13.00
on Term
Long Term
U S government constant corporate munl home mortgages
maturity yields A utility cpal conven FHAVA FNMA
recently Bond tional 1 year
July 16. 1984
Security Dealer Positions
Millions of dollars
July 16, 1984
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
Cash 
Pgsitions
Treasury coupons
Treaaury under over
bills 1 vear 1 year
federal private
agency short-term
_ -- . Forward e -- nd Futures Positions.. . .reasury coupons [
Treasury under over federal private
bills 1 year 1 year agency short-term
Forward 
and Futur
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted July 16, 1984
Apr.
May
June
HAY 2
9
JULY 4
11
LEVEL--JULY 12
Treasury
bills net
change2
Treasury coupons net purchases
3
within
1-year I 5-10 over 1015
---- -300
- -300
277 1,484
-- -300
Federal agencies net purchases4
within
l1yeaI
Net change
outright
holdings
total
5
I- --I --- ~
131
217
133
change for maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon
isues. and direct Treasury borrowing from the System.
Net RPs 6
