Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
January 27, 1984
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC January 27, 1984
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments 1
(1) M2 and M3 expanded at annual rates of about 7-1/4 and
on preliminary estimates for January. Growth of M2 was somewhat below,
and M3 a bit above, the 8 percent November-to-March paths specified by the
FOMC last month. Expansion of the broad aggregates was bolstered by a
pick-up in M1 growth from the reduced pace of late summer and autumn to
about an 8-1/4 percent annual rate over the two-month period--a more rapid
pace so far than the 6 percent November-to-March rate specified by the
Committee. This accelerated growth in M1 partially offset, in terms of
effects on M2 and M3, a marked slowing in growth of the nontransactions
components of these broad aggregates.
(2) Growth in the monetary and credit aggregates in 1983
relative to FOMC longer-run ranges for the period are shown in the table
below. Annual benchmark and seasonal revisions have raised growth rates
and redistributed growth during the year--in the case of M1 from the
first half of the year into the second half.
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Annual growth
1983 1984 Nov.- rates1
Nov. Dec. Jan.e Jan.e 1983 1982
Money and Credit Aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt 10.2 10.1 - - 10.5 9.2
Reserve Measures2
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and
e--Estimate based on partial data.
1. Fourth quarter to fourth quarter growth rates except for the credit
aggregates which are measured from December to December, and borrowings
and excess reserves, which are average levels for the year.
N.B. Money stock data in this table are preliminary and reflect annual
seasonal and benchmark revisions, as well as a definitional change affect-
ing M3. See Appendix I.
After Before
Ranges1  Revision Revision
M1 5 to 9 7.2 5.5
M2 7 to 10 8.3 7.8
M3 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 9.72 9.1
Debt 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 10.5 10.5
the recent redefinition of M3 to include term Eurodollars.
(3) Borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors in December,
as in November, was above its average pace over the first three quarters of
the year. Treasury borrowing, however, was at a slower pace, reflecting in
part the timing of auctions in relation to year-end holidays. Consumer
credit growth has advanced in recent months with stepped-up purchases of
durables, especially automobiles, while financing needs of corporations rose
as expansion in fixed investment and inventory accumulation evidently out-
stripped growth in internally generated funds. In December, bank credit
growth was near the very brisk November pace, reflecting a further pick-
up in loans, led by the business and consumer categories, and financed in
part by a deceleration of security acquisitions.
(4) Nonborrowed reserves expanded modestly in December and January
on average, but showed more growth than total reserves as the average level
of borrowing dropped somewhat. Excluding the $1.3 billion that was borrowed
in the year-end statement week, borrowing has averaged virtually $650 million
since the last Comittee meeting. The monetary base over the past two months
has increased at about a 10-1/2 percent annual rate, boosted in January by
accelerated currency growth.
(5) The federal funds rate has averaged close to 9-1/2 percent
over the intermeeting period, little different from the weeks just prior
to the last FOMC meeting. Other market rates, however, have moved somewhat
lower, as the market responded to signs of a slowing in economic expansion
relative to expectations and, in the case of short rates, an unwinding of
mid-December tax date pressures. Private short-term rates are off about
(6) The dollar has appreciated by about 1-1/4 percent on a weighted
average basis since the last FOMC meeting, advancing mainly against Euro-
pean currencies while edging down against the yen. The dollar is currently
only slightly below record peaks reached earlier in January.
the United States sold
$143 million, intervening on two days during the period. Exchange markets
seemed particularly thin and volatile in early January reflecting, among
other things, considerable uncertainty over the near-term pace of economic
activity in the United States and the accompanying interest rate outlook.
Long-run ranges
(7) The previous bluebook discussed issues that might be con-
sidered in establishing long-run ranges for the monetary aggregates and
credit for 1984--including consistency with continued economic recovery and
progress toward reasonable price stability, the outlook for a return to
more predictable velocity patterns, particularly for M1, and factors influ-
encing credit growth. This bluebook presents three alternative sets of
longer-term growth ranges for the fourth quarter of 1983 to the fourth
quarter of 1984 for Committee consideration, and discusses in general terms
possible implications for the economy. The set of ranges announced by the
Committee last July as its tentative choices for 1984 are shown below as
alternative II. Alternative I contemplates somewhat less rapid growth in
money and credit, while alternative III--which continues the ranges set for
Alt. I Alt. II Alt. III
M1 4 to 7 4 to 8 5 to 9
M2 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 7 to 10
M3 6 to 9 6 to 9 6-1/2 to 9-1/2
Debt 8 to 11 8 to 11 8-1/2 to 11-1/2
(8) Alternative II includes growth ranges for the broad aggre-
gates and credit that are 1/2 point lower than last year's ranges, and a
range for M1 that is one point lower than the range adopted for the second
half of last year. The 1/2 point reduction in the range for M2 may not
represent an "effective" reduction, since last year's range had allowed
for some residual shifting into MMDAs from assets outside M2--on the order
of 1/2 to 1 percentage point at an annual rate, which is close to what
actually developed, as nearly as can be estimated. On that reasoning,
the Committee could consider whether to reduce the M2 range for 1984 by one
percentage point from 1983 (rather than 1/2 point) so as to be more consist-
ent with the effective reduction embodied in the other ranges shown in
alternative II. That would make the M2 range under alternative II 6 to
(9) The staff's GNP projection for 1984 assumes growth in the
money and credit aggregates generally in the upper half of the alternative
II ranges (though in the case of M2 right around the midpoint of a 6-1/2 to
actual growth rates of the monetary aggregates in 1984 from their rates for
and M2 when comparisons are made with growth in 1983 from their target base
periods. Credit growth in 1984 is expected to be close to the 10-1/2
percent pace of 1983.
(10) The staff anticipates that the behavior of money demand in
ties of the various aggregates will post moderate further increases, partly
induced by an updrift of interest rates over the course of this year that
is currently projected by the staff in the context of a rising structural
budget deficit. Of course, projections of the behavior of the aggregates,
not to mention projections of interest rates, remain uncertain. Nonetheless,
the pickup in M1 velocity over recent quarters is suggestive of the emergence
of somewhat more predictable behavior patterns for that aggregate. The
growth in velocity of M1 for 1984, given the projected growth in nominal GNP
of around 9 percent, would probably be on the order of 2-1/2 to 3 percent.
In the second year of economic expansions since the early 1950s V1 has in-
creased on average by about 3 percent (some of which reflects the impact of
cyclical interest rate increases).
(11) The expected relationship between M2 and M3 next year may
differ a bit from past patterns. Since the beginning of the 1970s, M3 has
for the most part tended to grow a little more rapidly than M2. In 1984,
there is more of a possibility that M3 growth may be about the same as M2
growth--given the expanded capacity of institutions to offer market interest
rates on assets included in M2 and the likelihood that a substantial portion
of bank credit expansion will be funded through the Euro-dollar market (as an
aspect of large net inflows of funds from abroad that are the obverse of our
current account deficit) rather than through CDs issued in the U.S. In
addition, slower growth in mortgage credit should hold back thrift issuance
of large CDs.
(12) The specifications of alternative I would be consistent
with a policy that exerts somewhat more restraint on demands for goods
and services so as to provide greater assurance that inflationary pressures
will be kept in check over time. Slower growth in money and a better price
performance over 1984 and into 1985, through their impact on expectations,
could improve the price-output tradeoff in subsequent stages of the tran-
sition to price stability. As growth in M2 and M1 is restrained to rates
around the midpoints of the proposed 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 and 4 to 7 percent
ranges, respectively, interest rates would probably be subject to more
upward pressure this year than under alternative II. As those pressures
come sooner, the odds would be reduced that interest rates would need to
rise further in 1985 in association with continued deceleration in money
growth targets, and by then might well begin to decline. M3 growth in this
alternative may be little different than under alternative II as institu-
tions attempt to sustain credit expansion by issuing more large-denomination
time deposits, partly to finance a shift in business credit demands from
bond markets to banks under conditions of temporarily rising long-term
(13) The more rapid growth of the aggregates contemplated by
Alternative III may not involve any rise of short-term interest rates over
the course of next year, but at the risk of being more accommodative to
upward price pressures. In that process, the trade-off between output
and price changes, for any given money growth, would begin to deteriorate
if inflationary expectations worsened. Such expectational effects might
tend to push longer-term rates up as the year progressed, and involve
higher short-term rates in 1985 in the process of restraining inflation
over time.
(14) The preceding analysis of all of the alternatives assumed
that underlying demands for goods and services would be about as strong as
as in the staff's GNP forecast. Should such demands prove to be substan-
tially weaker, growth of M1 might tend to be substantially stronger than
indicated--given M2 growth around, say, the middle of the alternative II
range--as falling market interest rates increase the demand for transactions
accounts, especially fixed ceiling rate NOW accounts. In such a case, M1
growth toward the upper end of its alternative III range could evolve.
This would be similar to the experience with M1 in the last half of 1982
and early 1983, and would be a consequence of a greater interest elasticity
for M1 demand under current institutional conditions than for M2. A sym-
metrical argument might be made if demands for goods and services proved to
be substantially stronger than now anticipated--leading to the possibility of
reduced M1 growth well below the top of its alternative I range in face of a
marked rise in interest rates, although this effect could be muted by shifts
of funds into super-NOW accounts from fixed-ceiling NOW accounts and demand
Prospective developments
(15) The table below shows alternative specifications for the
growth of the monetary aggregates for the November-to-March period, the
interval used by the Committee in setting monetary growth rates at its
December meeting; more detailed data are shown on the table and charts on
ensuing pages. The associated federal funds rate ranges for the upcoming
intermeeting period and implied growth rates for the aggregates from
January to March are presented in the lower panels of the table. The speci-
fications of alternative B retain the growth rate for the broad aggregates
chosen by the Committee at its last meeting; however, they also include a
somewhat higher growth for M1 in light of recent experience with the relation-
ship between the narrow and broader aggregates. Alternative A calls for more
rapid money growth, and alternative C involves slower growth, with M1 growing
at the rate specified at the previous meeting.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from November to March
M2 8-1/2 8 7-1/2
M3 8-1/2 8 7-1/2
M1 7-1/2 6-3/4 6
Federal funds rate ranges 6 to 9-1/2 6 to 10 7 to 11
Implied growth from January
to March
M2 9-1/4 8-1/4 7-1/4
M3 8-1/2 7-1/2 6-1/2
M1 6-1/2 5 3-1/2
(16) The specifications of alternative B, which are expected to
involve little change in money market conditions over the intermeeting
period, would bring M2 growth to the middle of its alternative II range by
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M1
Alt. A Alt. B
Growth Rates
Monthly
Nov. '83 to Mar. '84
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
Alt. C
March, with M1 in the upper part of its range. M1 growth would be expected
to moderate in February and March from the relatively rapid average pace
of December and January, to about a 5 percent annual rate. On a quarterly
average basis, M1 expansion in the first quarter would be around 7-1/4 per-
cent, implying growth in velocity of around 2-1/2 percent, given projected
first-quarter nominal GNP growth. Such a velocity rise would be somewhat
less than in the fourth quarter--which was about 3-1/2 percent--and roughly
in line with predictions of the money demand equations in the Board's
quarterly and monthly models. While M1 growth may slow over the next two
months, growth in the nontransactions component of M2 is expected to pick up
from its depressed January pace and be more in line with growth in income,
thereby sustaining M2 growth at around an 8 percent annual rate.
(17) Borrowing at the discount window under alternative B would
be expected to range around $650 million, and federal funds to remain in
the 9-1/4 to 9-1/2 percent area. However, with contemporaneous reserve
requirements being instituted on February 2, reserve paths will have to
take account of transitional and more permanent adaptations by banks in their
reserve management strategies that could affect, among other things, patterns
of borrowing and excess reserves. Reserve paths in the initial stage of CRR
implementation would probably need to allow for higher than average excess
reserves. By March, however, excess reserves may be closer to "normal," and
on that assumption growth in total reserves over the next two months is
likely to be around 5 percent under alternative B. Nonborrowed reserve
growth, assuming borrowing settles down around $650 million, would increase
at a 6 percent annual rate.
(18) Interest rates under alternative B would be expected to
fluctuate in a narrow range around current levels over the intermeeting
period. The recent drop in short and long-term rates is not likely to carry
further, given the continued growth expected in the monetary aggregates and
expansion in credit demands at slightly more than the fourth-quarter pace.
Treasury credit demands are likely to be larger this quarter than in the
fourth, offsetting some tendency for private borrowing to slow. State and
local government bond issuance is expected to be at a relatively reduced
pace, given the legislative uncertainty about the status of some types of
revenue bonds. The increase in household mortgage and consumer installment
debt also is likely to moderate along with the slower growth of consumer
durables purchases and the relatively flat pattern of housing starts and
expenditures. Corporate borrowing, on the other hand, may be greater than
in the fourth quarter as internal fund generation levels off while spending
for capital and inventories continues to rise.
(19) The less rapid growth of money under alternative C, though
still leaving the aggregates well within the alternative II longer-run
range by March, would also be consistent with the slower annual growth
rates of longer-run alternative I. The November-to-March growth rates
of 7-1/2 and 6 percent for M2 and M1, respectively, contemplated by this
alternative would bring these aggregates to levels just above the mid-
points of the alternative I ranges by March. Such growth rates would
probably entail somewhat greater restraint on reserve positions over the
weeks ahead, with borrowing rising to the neighborhood of $1 billion.
Nonborrowed reserves might contract slightly over the next two months.
(20) A funds rate of around 10 percent might evolve from these
reserve conditions. Because market expectations of higher rates have be-
come more muted in recent weeks, interest rates generally would also rise
rather sharply, although interpretations of developments by market partici-
pants might for a time be made more difficult by uncertainties in connection
with CRR. The 3-month Treasury bill rate might move up to the area of 9-1/2
percent, bank CD rates to around 10 percent, and the dollar would rise
further on foreign exchange markets. The tendency for bond yields to rise
might be moderated--especially once the forthcoming Treasury refunding
is distributed--as corporate bond offerings fall off and if expectations
of a weakening in economic activity become more pervasive.
(21) The more rapid growth of money under alternative A would
bring M1 near the upper limit of, and M2 into the upper part of, their
respective alternative II longer-run ranges. In that sense alternative
A may be more consistent with the more expansive longer-run growth rates
of alternative III.
(22) Expansion of M1 and M2 at annual rates of 6-1/2 and 9-1/4
percent, respectively, from January to March, as contemplated by A, would
probably involve a decline of interest rates over the next few weeks as
borrowing at the discount window dropped to an average of around S400
million and nonborrowed reserve growth accelerated to about a 12 percent
annual rate for the January to March period. The funds rate would drop to
parable amounts, with the Treasury bill rates moving to below 8-1/2 percent;
and the dollar would decline-perhaps sharply--on foreign exchange markets.
Such an easing of money market conditions would likely also set off a sub-
stantial rally in bond and stock markets, though a rally that could be
reversed if market participants concluded that greater inflationary
pressures would become more likely.
Directive language
(23) Given below are two alternative approaches to the directive
paragraphs that specify the long-run ranges for 1984 and the objectives for
operations over the intermeeting period. The first alternative retains the
present degree of emphasis on M1, while the second is suggested should the
Committee wish to place additional weight on that aggregate.
Alternative 1 (No change in M1 emphasis)
The proposed language related to the long-term ranges is presented
in paragraphs (a) and (b) and language related to operations is shown in
paragraph (c). Paragraph (a) presents the long-run targets in the same
order and with essentially the same language as in the current directive.
The qualifying language in the current directive about the relationship of
the aggregates to economic goals is shown in brackets at the end of para-
graph (a)--with suggested modifications indicated--should the Committee still
wish to emphasize particular uncertainties in that respect. Paragraph (b),
taken without change from the present directive, indicates weights to the
given to the various aggregates and other factors in policy implementation.
Proposed Language for Long-term Ranges
(a) The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster monetary
and financial conditions that will help to reduce inflation further,
promote growth in output on a sustainable basis, and contribute to a
sustainable pattern of international transactions. In furtherance
of these objectives the Committee established growth ranges for
the broader aggregates of ____ to ____ percent for M2 and ____ to ____
percent for M3 for the period from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the
fourth quarter of 1984. The Committee considered that growth of M1
in a range of ____ to ____ percent from the fourth quarter of 1983 to
the fourth quarter of 1984 would be consistent with the ranges
for the broader aggregates. The associated range for total
domestic nonfinancial debt was set at ____ to ____ percent for
such ranges and ultimate economic goals MAY have become less
predictable; that the impact of {DEL: new] DEREGULATED deposit
accounts on [DEL: growth] ONGOING BEHAVIOR of monetary aggregates
cannot YET be determined with a high degree of confidence; and
that the availability of interest on large portions of transac-
tion accounts may be reflected in some changes in the historical
trends in velocity.]
(b) In implementing monetary policy, the Committee
agreed that substantial weight would continue to be placed on
the behavior of the broader monetary aggregates. The behavior
of M1 and total domestic nonfinancial debt would be monitored,
with the degree of weight placed on M1 over time dependent on
evidence that velocity characteristics are resuming more predict-
able patterns. The Comittee understood that policy implementation
would involve continuing appraisal of the relationships between
the various measures of money and credit and nominal GNP, includ-
ing evaluation of conditions in domestic credit and foreign
exchange markets.
Proposed Operational Paragraph
(c) The Committee seeks in the short run to maintain
at least (or MAINTAIN/INCREASE SLIGHTLY/DECREASE SLIGHTLY) the
existing degree of reserve restraint, TAKING ACCOUNT OF EFFECTS
OF THE SHIFT TO THE CONTEMPORANEOUS RESERVE REQUIREMENT SYSTEM,
PARTICULARLY IN THE PERIOD IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING IMPLEMENTATION,
ON RESERVE MANAGEMENT BY DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS. The action is
is expected to be associated with growth of M2 and M3 at annual
rates of around [DEL: 8]____ AND ____ percent RESPECTIVELY from November to
March. The Committee anticipates that M1 growth at an annual
rate of around [DEL: 6] ____ percent from November to March will be
consistent with its objectives for the broader aggregates, and
that expansion in total domestic nonfinancial debt WILL BE
WITHIN THE RANGE ESTABLISHED FOR THE YEAR [DEL: would continue at
around its recent pace]. Depending on evidence about the con-
tinuing strength of economic recovery and other factors bearing
on the business and inflation outlook, somewhat greater restraint
would be acceptable should the aggregates expand more rapidly
WHILE LESSER RESTRAINT MIGHT BE ACCEPTABLE IN THE CONTEXT OF A
SIGNIFICANT SHORTFALL IN GROWTH OF THE AGGREGATES FROM CURRENT
EXPECTATIONS. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation
if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit
of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the
period before the next meeting is likely to be associated with
a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 6 to
Alternative 2 (Increased emphasis on M1)
Paragraphs (d) and (e) below present alternative language that
would give more emphasis to M1 as a long-run target, while paragraph (f)
suggests conforming changes in the operational paragraph.
Proposed Language for Long-term Ranges
(d) The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster
monetary and financial conditions that will help to reduce
inflation further, promote growth in output on a sustainable
basis, and contribute to a sustainable pattern of international
transactions. In furtherance of these objectives the Committee
established the following growth ranges for monetary and credit
aggregates for the period from the fourth quarter of 1983 to the
fourth quarter of 1984: ____ to ____ percent for M1, ____ to
____ percent for M2, and ____ to ____ percent for M3. The associated
range for total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at ____ to ____
percent in 1984.
(e) In implementing monetary policy the Committee
agreed to increase somewhat the weight on M1 as behavior of its
velocity has recently been broadly consistent with historical
patterns. Still, uncertainties remain about the future behavior
of M1 velocity, in view of the substantial changes in the com-
position of M1 and the characteristics of deposits in this
aggregate; and the Committee will continue to place substantial
weight on the behavior of the broader monetary aggregates and to
monitor expansion in total domestic nonfinancial debt. In
general, the Committee understood that policy implementation
would involve continuing appraisal of the relationships between
the various measures of money and credit and nominal GNP, in-
cluding evaluation of conditions in domestic credit and foreign
exchange markets.
Proposed Operational Paragraph
(f) The Committee seeks in the short run to main-
tain at least (or MAINTAIN/INCREASE SLIGHTLY/DECREASE SLIGHTLY)
the existing degree of reserve restraint, TAKING ACCOUNT OF
EFFECTS OF THE SHIFT TO THE CONTEMPORANEOUS RESERVE REQUIRE-
MENT SYSTEM, PARTICULARLY IN THE PERIOD IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING
ITS IMPLEMENTATION, ON RESERVE MANAGEMENT BY DEPOSITORY INSTITU-
TIONS. THE ACTION IS EXPECTED TO BE ASSOCIATED WITH GROWTH OF
Ml, M2, AND M3 AT ANNUAL RATES OF AROUND ____ PERCENT, ____ PERCENT,
AND ____ PERCENT RESPECTIVELY FROM NOVEMBER TO MARCH. EXPANSION
OF NONFINANCIAL DEBT IS EXPECTED TO BE WITHIN THE RANGE ESTAB-
LISHED FOR THE YEAR. Depending on evidence about the continuing
strength of economic recovery and other factors bearing on the
business and inflation outlook, somewhat greater restraint
would be acceptable should the aggregates expand more rapidly
WHILE LESSER RESTRAINT MIGHT BE ACCEPTABLE IN THE CONTEXT OF
A SIGNIFICANT SHORTFALL IN GROWTH OF THE AGGREGATES FROM
CURRENT EXPECTATIONS. The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Opera-
tions that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related
reserve paths during the period before the next meeting is
likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persist-
istly outside a range of [DEL: 6 to 10] ____ TO ____ percent.
