Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
October 31, 1986
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC October 31, 1986
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) M2 and M3 increased at annual rates of 8-3/4 and 7-1/2 percent
respectively on average over September and October, well below their rates of
growth through the spring and summer. Both aggregates were within the Commit-
tee's 7 to 9 percent range for the August-December period, and in October were
very close to the upper ends of their 6 to 9 percent annual growth cones. M1
growth, while still quite strong at a 12-1/2 percent rate over September and
October, was down substantially from its average over the previous several
months .
(2) The slowing in M2 growth reflected in part weakness in its
overnight RP component relative to previous months, when if had been boosted
to finance unusually sizable acquisitions of government securities; variations
in this component largely accounted for the more marked slowing in M2 growth
in September and moderate rebound in October. Expansion in the sum of the
other components of M2 also decelerated somewhat over the September-October
period. Shifts from time deposits into the more liquid interest-bearing re-
tail components of M2 persisted in September and appear to have intensified
in October. Offering rates on time deposits have adjusted relatively promptly
to earlier declines in market rates, while rates on NOW and savings accounts
have continued to adjust only sluggishly. Inflows to OCDs have remained very
strong, and most of the slowing of M1 growth on average over the two months
was accounted for by a sharp deceleration of its demand deposit component.
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
August QIV' 85
to to
August September OctoberP OctoberP OctoberP
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt 12.5 12.0 n.a. n.a. 12.61
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
p - Based on partial data for October.
n.a. - Not available.
1. QIV 1985 to September.
2. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
3. Based on data through the reserve maintenance period ending October 22.
However, demand deposit growth strengthened a bit over October, contributing
to a rebound in M1 growth from around 10 percent in September to 15 percent
in October. Large CDs ran off over the two months; the decline has been
especially pronounced in October, when bank credit growth slowed abruptly,
leading to a further moderation in M3 growth estimated for this month.
(3) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors rose in September
at about a 12 percent rate, close to its pace for the first three quarters of
the year, but has shown signs of slowing in October. Growth in September was
buoyed by the temporary surge in automobile financing. Mortgage lending evi-
dently has continued brisk over the two months in association with a robust
pace of activity in the single family home market. In October, in addition
to the slowing in consumer credit, federal government borrowing was constrained
by the debt ceiling. Business borrowing was subdued in September, but appears
to have picked up somewhat in October with a rebound in both bond offerings
and short-term borrowing. Borrowing in tax-exempt markets dropped sharply
following the September 1 effective date under the tax bill for restrictions
on public-purpose borrowing; however, private-purpose borrowing has picked up
in October following clarification of limits on issuance under the new law.
(4) Growth of nonborrowed and total reserves moderated somewhat
in September and October, reflecting the slower expansion of transactions
accounts. Reserve paths were constructed throughout the intermeeting period
assuming $300 million of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing. Borrowing
averaged $324 million in the two complete maintenance periods since the last
FOMC meeting; through the first eight days of the current period it has aver-
aged $180 million. With excess reserves in recent months running consis-
tently below levels of earlier this year, the path allowance was reduced to
$850 million.
(5) Federal funds generally have continued to trade around 5-7/8
percent over the intermeeting period. Other interest rates have eased off
somewhat on balance, with most short-term rates down about 5 to 20 basis
points and bond yields as much as 30 basis points lower. Stock prices have
firmed somewhat, retracing a portion of the declines of early September.
Perceptions of stronger foreign demands for dollar assets-prompted in part
by expectations of a cut in the Japanese discount rate, which was announced
Friday-have contributed to recent increase in bond and stock prices. The
Japanese action also was seen as giving the Federal Reserve more scope for an
easing of policy domestically, although levels of short-term rates do not
suggest widespread expectations of such a move in the near term.
(6) The dollar rose about 1-1/2 percent on balance on a weighted
average basis over the intermeeting period. In the first part of the period
the dollar had continued to move lower, particularly against the German mark
as it became clear that the Bundesbank would not act to lower interest rates
and as economic activity in Germany appeared robust. Late in October, how-
ever, the dollar firmed substantially, first on reports of large shifts of
funds by Japanese institutional investors out of yen and into dollar denomin-
ated assets, and later with the release of September U.S. trade figures, which
were much better than market expectations, and the cut in the Japanese dis-
count rate.
Policy alternatives
(7) The table below presents three alternative specifications
for growth of the monetary aggregates together with associated federal
funds rate ranges. Growth rates are shown from the August base chosen
at the last meeting. More detailed data, including implied growth for
each alternative from September to December and from last year's fourth-
quarter base to the fourth quarter of this year, are shown on the table
and charts on the following pages.
(8) With growth in the aggregates over September and October
at rates close to those contemplated at the last FOMC meeting, M2 and M3
would be expected to remain within the Committee's current 7 to 9 percent
range for the August to December period and very close to the upper ends
of their 1986 ranges under the reserve conditions assumed for each of the
three alternatives. Growth in M1, while remaining below the pace in the
spring and summer under all the alternatives, would be expected to expand
at around a 14 percent rate for the year. However, differences in reserve
conditions under the three alternatives would affect the trajectories of
the aggregates entering 1987.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from
August to December
M2 9 8-1/2 8
M3 7-3/4 7-1/2 7-1/4
Ml 13-1/2 12-1/2 11-1/2
Associated federal funds
rate range 3 to 7 4 to 8 5 to 9
(9) Alternative B assumes continuation of the current degree of
pressure on reserve postions, with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in billions
1986-July 2699.1 2699.1 2699.1 3375.1 3375.1 3375.1 676.1 676.1 676.1
August 2724.1 2724.1 2724.1 3400.1 3400.1 3400.1 687.8 687.8 687.8
September 2741.0 2741.0 2741.0 3424.9 3424.9 3424.9 693.5 693.5 693.5
October 2763.9 2763.9 2763.9 3442.8 3442.8 3442.8 702.1 702.1 702.1
November 2781.6 2780.0 2778.4 3462.0 3460.9 3459.7 710.9 710.2 709.5
December 2804.7 2800.2 2795.7 3486.9 3483.7 3481.2 719.0 716.8 714.5
the discount window around $300 million. Federal funds are likely to re-
main near 5-7/8 percent and the Treasury bill rate in the vicinity of 5-1/4
percent. Bond yields also would be expected to fluctuate around current
levels. These rates might be especially sensitive to changing perceptions
of foreign demands for U.S. securities and accompanying movements in the
dollar on foreign exchange markets through the upcoming period of auction
and distribution of the Treasury's mid-quarter refunding issues. And
credit market participants are likely to be watching developments in the
oil market particularly closely, given the uncertainty about future price
movements. Mortgage rates might continue to edge down relative to Treasury
bond yields as concerns about accelerated repayments ebb further in a
relatively stable interest rate environment. The dollar is expected to
drift lower, retracing its recent gains, in light of the continuing large
U.S. current account deficit.
(10) M2, under alternative B, is expected to expand at an 8 per-
cent rate over November and December, a little below the average pace of
September and October and appreciably slower than over the summer months.
This growth would leave M2 right at the upper end of its 6 to 9 percent long-
run range. M2 growth over the remainder of the year should be restrained by
diminishing effects of earlier declines in market rates, and perhaps even
some increase in opportunity costs as depository institutions lower offering
rates on liquid retail deposits. The prospects for a substantial slowing
of retail deposit growth, however, are limited by a continued reluctance on
the part of many depositories to breach the former regulatory ceilings of
M2 growth in the fourth quarter would continue to exceed the expansion of
income, although by a little smaller margin than in the third quarter. The
specifications of alternative B imply a 5 percent rate of decrease in M2
velocity in the fourth quarter, given the staff GNP forecast, bringing the
drop in velocity for the year to an historically large 4 percent.
(11) Growth of M3 under alternative B also would be expected to
slow slightly further over November and December, coming in a little below
the 9 percent upper limit of its long-term range. Issuance of managed
liabilities over the balance of the year is expected to be modest as the
Treasury rebuilds its cash balance at banks and as bank acquisitions of
securities remain below the unusually rapid pace over the summer months.
The use of purchased funds by thrifts may remain light if these institutions
continue to sell a large portion of their substantial mortgage originations
in the market. On a quarterly-average basis, M3 growth for the fourth
quarter would be about 7-1/2 percent at an annual rate, considerably below
that of the previous two quarters. The implied decline in M3 velocity
would be at a 3-1/2 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter and nearly 4
percent over the year as a whole, the largest annual drop since 1982.
(12) M1, under alternative B, would be anticipated to expand in
November and December at about the reduced average September-October pace-
as a rebound in demand deposit growth would offset some moderation in in-
flows to OCDs. Opportunity costs of holding OCD balances would likely widen
a little more as offering rates on NOW accounts continue to edge lower in
adjustment to earlier rate declines. M1 growth on a quarterly-average
basis would be at a 14 percent rate in the fourth quarter, implying a 10
percent rate of decline in its velocity. For the year, M1 velocity would
register an 8-1/2 percent drop, the steepest annual decline in the postwar
(13) Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is likely to grow
briskly over the final months of this year, bringing growth for the year
on a QIV to QIV basis to 12-1/2 percent. Federal borrowing is being boosted
somewhat as the Treasury rebuilds its cash balance following removal of debt
ceiling constraints, while the underlying deficit remains large. Issuance of
tax-exempt bonds is likely to strengthen further in the last two months of
this year owing to efforts to utilize new annual volume caps for private-
purpose issues, including corporate IDBs. Nonfinancial businesses are also
expected to step up their borrowing to finance merger and related activities
in advance of less favorable tax treatment in 1987. Household borrowing,
however, is likely to moderate somewhat from the pace of earlier months as
automobile financing weakens in the wake of the expiration of incentive
programs; mortgage borrowing is likely to be sustained near the relatively
heavy pace of the summer and early fall.
(14) Alternative A assumes either a reduction in discount window
borrowing to a near-frictional level of $150 million or a cut in the discount
rate of one-half percentage point with borrowing maintained at $300 million.
In either event, the funds rate would move down to the 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent
area. Other short-term rates would also decline, with the three-month bill
rate dropping somewhat below 5 percent. The response of bond yields would
depend on indicators of the outlook for economic activity and prices.
Initially, bond yields might respond little to easier money market condi-
tions, but declines in short-term yields could reinforce tendencies for
longer-term yields to move lower if economic indicators pointed to a slug-
gish economy and little likelihood of greater underlying price pressures.
The dollar might weaken appreciably under this alternative, absent any
further easing actions abroad.
(15) Growth in M2 and M3 under this alternative would not be
expected to slow any further over November and December. The more liquid
M2 components would continue to be bolstered by very narrow opportunity
costs, pulling funds from small time deposits and from the open market.
This effect might be muted if the further decline in market rates tended
to break the resistance of banks and thrifts to lowering rates on savings
and NOW accounts-a development that might be considered more likely in
the event the easier money market conditions were triggered by a cut in
the discount rate to 5 percent, below the previous regulatory ceilings on
these accounts. Under this alternative, M2 would enter 1987 above the
ponding parallel bands. Bank funding needs, and thus M3, might be enlarged
by more business lending in a response to lower short-term rates, especially
if bond yields did not also decline. M3 would enter next year around the
upper end of its tentative range. M1 under this alternative would be
expected to pick up somewhat relative to its growth over September and
October, increasing in line with average growth in 1986.
(16) Alternative C contemplates an increase in discount window
borrowing to $500 million. Federal funds would be expected to trade around
the 6-1/4 to 6-1/2 percent area. The tighter reserve conditions of this
alternative would be expected to restrain growth in M2 and M3, raising the
odds that these aggregates would come within their long-term ranges for
interest rates also would act to damp M1 growth, although with opportunity
costs still relatively small this aggregate would continue to expand rapidly,
well in excess of income growth.
(17) There seems to be little expectation among market partici-
pants of a near-term tightening and thus three-month bills could rise as
much as 50 basis points, to about 5-3/4 percent under this alternative.
Private short-term rates could increase by more than bills to the degree
that firmer conditions were seen as intensifying the debt-servicing diffi-
culties of some borrowers. Bond rates would tend to back up also, although
the degree to which they would rise would depend on any accompanying
reassessment of inflation prospects. The dollar might strengthen, at least
for a while, on foreign exchange markets.
Directive language
(18) Draft language for the operational paragraph with the
usual alternatives is shown below. The proposed format follows that
adopted at recent meetings in specifying numerical growth rates for M2
and M3 but not for Ml. In addition, the draft retains August as the base
for the monetary growth specifications. (Should the Committee wish to
change the base to September, growth implied under each alternative for the
September-to-December period is shown in the detailed table on page 6.)
The changes suggested for the sentence concerning M1 are intended to clarify
the reference to the timing of the expected moderation in M1 growth. The
sentence on possible intermeeting adjustments keeps the language adopted
at the September meeting with respect to the role of the monetary aggregates
and other factors. It also retains the reference to the possibility of
"slight" adjustments to reserve pressures; the more usual terminology of
"somewhat", as well as alternatives with respect to the use of "might"
and "would" are given in parentheses.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain (Alt. B)/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. This action is expected to be consistent with growth in
M2 and M3 over the period from August to December at annual rates of
[DEL: 7 to 9] ____ AND ____ percent, RESPECTIVELY. While growth in M1 OVER
THE SAME PERIOD is expected to moderate from the ITS EXCEPTIONAL PACE
[DEL: exepetionally large increase] during the [DEL: past] PREVIOUS several
months, [DEL: that] growth IN THIS AGGREGATE will continue to be judged
in the light of the behavior of M2 and M3 and other factors.
Slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint would (MIGHT), or
slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint might (WOULD), be
acceptable depending on the behavior of the aggregates, taking
into account the strength of the business expansion, developments
in foreign exchange markets, progress against inflation, and con-
ditions in domestic and international credit markets. The Chairman
may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the period before
the next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds
rate persistently outside a range of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 4 to 8] percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
November 3, 1986
Short-term Long-Term
Treasury bills Cs comm. me bank U.S. government constant corporate municipal conventional home mortgages
Period secondary market s papr ma prime maturity yields rond on primary market
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sep.
July 2
9
Oct. 1
8
Waily-Oct. 24
30
31
- 7.50
- 7.50
- 7.50
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Seasonally adjusted
NOV. 3, 1986
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt2
nontransuclions total loans U.S.
PRrlod M1 M2 components M3 L and goernment 2  other2  tlolal
In M2 In M3 only invs_ tment 
1
PKRCNT ANNUAL GBOHTH:
AIIUALLY (1UV ,O ulI)
OirM LI LBIsLS ($1ILL1ONS)
1986--1A1 658.7 2649.6 1991.0 665.7 3315.3 3950.5 1957.5 1664.6 5414.9 7079.5
NUEKLL LEVELS (SBILLIOIS)
1986-58P. 1 693.0
OCT. 6 701.6
13P 696.6
20P 7U2.6
PM-i'HdttL INSI ES ATIA
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
NOV. 3. 1986
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight . denoml- mutual tunds, NSA denomi- Term Tern Short-
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation gineral Institu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Commer- Bankers
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars NSA deposits time purpose, tions time NSA NSA bonds Treasury cial paper accep-
ANaiBLLI (4T QTB):
APR.
BAY
JOu8
JULY
AUG.
SEPT.
NSTITUTIONS ARE SUBTRACTED1/ INCLUDES BETAIL REPURCHASE AGRE dNTS. ALL ia* AND KOGH ACCOUNTS AT COHHMECIAL BANKS AND f HFT II
FROM SMALL TIB DPOSITS.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities' CLASS II-FOMC
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Aug. 6
13
Oct. 1
8
LEVEL--Oct. 29
($ billions)
Treasury bills
net change'
Treasury coupons net purchases'
within 1-5
1-year
Federal agencies net purchases'
-- -- ~- -- --
-- -- ~- -- --
-- -- -- -- --
- - ~- - --
-- -- ~- -- --
-- -- ~- -- --
-- -- ~- -- -
-- -- ~- -- --
-- -- ~- -- --
-- -- ~- -- --
-- - ~- - --
-- -- - -- --
- -- ~- -- --
-- -- ~- -- --
-- -- ~. -- --
-- -- -- - --
-- -- ~. -- --
-- -- -- -- --
-- -- -- -- --
-- -- -- -- 
--
-- -- -- -- --
-- -- -- -- 
--
November 3, 1986
Net change
outright holdings Net RPs'
maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury
borrowing from the System.
