Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC March 22, 1991
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) In the period immediately after the February FOMC meeting,
the Desk sought a degree of reserve pressure consistent with federal funds
continuing to trade in the area of 6-1/4 percent. Reserve targets were
based on a formal allowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $100
million. On March 8, in response to data indicating that the economy had
continued to weaken substantially into February, the borrowing allowance
was lowered by $25 million and the Desk signalled a 25 basis point
reduction in the System's intended federal funds rate. The average
federal funds rate has dropped to 6.11 since the easing, down from 6.33
percent over the first two maintenance periods after the meeting.
Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing has run appreciably above the path
allowance, in part reflecting a greater willingness by banks to come to
the discount window when conditions tighten in the funds market.1
(2) The change in borrowing behavior may have been one reason
for a substantial decrease in the volatility of the federal funds rate
over the intermeeting period. The intraday trading range, for example,
has narrowed to levels prevailing last autumn, before the cut in reserve
requirements. An additional factor damping funds rate movements may have
been the greater experience of bank reserve managers in operating with
lower balances. The most important factor, however, probably has been the
rise of required reserve balances from their seasonal low reached in early
February, so that, together with enlarged required clearing balances, they
now appear to exceed the level needed for daily clearing purposes. With
required balances moving above clearing needs, demands for excess reserves
fell over the intermeeting period, averaging a more normal $1.1 billion in
the last two maintenance periods.
(3) Despite the drop in the federal funds rate, short-term
Treasury bill rates declined only very slightly over the intermeeting
period and rates on longer-term Treasury issues rose about 35 basis
improved prospects for economic recovery following the quick and success-
ful conclusion of the war--with the resulting rebound in consumer con-
fidence and demands for reconstruction capital by Kuwait. Signs of
increased activity in housing markets also appeared to foreshadow an eco-
nomic turnaround, which--along with disappointing news on prices--was seen
as limiting any scope for further easing by the Federal Reserve. Antici-
pation of better business earnings and reduced strains on borrowers have
helped narrow spreads of private securities over Treasury debt during the
intermeeting period, particularly for those issuers that had been seen as
especially vulnerable to a prolonged recession. Rates on most private
short-term paper have declined a little more than Treasury bill rates
while, in contrast to yields on Treasury bonds, rates on high-grade bonds
are little changed and those on lower-rated bonds are down substantially.
Stock prices flirted with record levels during the period, though they
have retraced part of these gains in recent days. Bank stock prices were
about unchanged over the period, but spreads on subordinated bank debt
have narrowed substantially--drawing forth some issuance--and the access
of lower-rated banks to the federal funds market has become a bit less
(4) The dollar's weighted-average foreign exchange value soared
from its low just after the February FOMC meeting, before easing back a
little over the last few days. In addition to optimism about the U.S.
economy, there was a growing perception that growth abroad was weakening
and that foreign interest rates were now more likely to move lower, on
average, than higher. Political turmoil in the Soviet Union appeared to
affect the German mark adversely, and the dollar rose more against the
mark than against the yen. These factors, however, seem unable to account
fully for the extraordinary strength of the dollar. Whereas in the first
days of the intermeeting period the Desk
sold $850 million equivalent of marks to support the
dollar, by the second week of March the Desk was selling dollars ($330
Foreign short-term interest rates on
average declined about 35 basis points over the period, while long-term
rates were about unchanged.
(5) At least partly in response to earlier declines in interest
rates, the monetary aggregates have accelerated in recent months. M2
increased at an 8-1/2 percent annual rate in February, and partial data
suggest growth has continued in March at about a 7 percent pace. This
outcome would bring expansion over the December-to-March period to a 5-1/2
percent pace, considerably above the FOMC's expectation at the last meet-
ing of 3-1/2 to 4 percent, and would leave M2 near the middle of its 2-1/2
to 6-1/2 percent target range. The bulk of the acceleration within M2 has
occurred in liquid retail deposits--OCDs, savings, and MMDAs. Offering
rates on these accounts have, as usual, responded quite sluggishly to the
declines in market interest rates over the past several months, substan-
tially reducing their opportunity costs. In addition, demand deposits
also reversed their January decline, and currency growth remained brisk in
February before moderating this month. The belated emergence of a
response to opportunity costs, which had been narrowing since last summer,
may suggest some return of confidence in the banking system, in light of
the prospects for economic recovery and absence of new highly publicized
bank failures or depositor losses. Over the last two months, M2 has grown
considerably more rapidly than predicted by econometric models, making up
a small portion of the earlier shortfall. Nevertheless, given the slow
growth late last year and in January, expansion in the first quarter on a
quarterly average basis still is below model predictions, and M2 velocity
is likely to decline at only about a 1 percent annual rate.
(6) Whether the pickup in M2 also is associated with a greater
willingness to lend by depositories (or at least no further intensifica-
tion of restraint) is difficult to tell. Bank credit has strengthened in
February and early March, but the spread of the prime over market rates
has widened even further, and banks report that they have continued to
tighten credit standards for businesses. M3 growth also accelerated--to a
March--bringing December-to-March growth to a 6-1/4 percent rate. How-
ever, the strength of M3, which also ran well above expectations,
reflected a number of influences unrelated to an expansion of credit
through depositories. For example, a substantial portion of the increase
in M3 over the first quarter was attributable to rapid growth of institu-
tion-only money market funds, which have been boosted by declines in money
market rates during the past few months. In addition, an unanticipated
rise in large time deposits over the past two months was due entirely to
issuance by branches and agencies of foreign banks, primarily to
substitute domestic CDs for federal funds and Eurodollar borrowings as a
result of the elimination of the reserve requirement on nontransaction
liabilities, which reduced the relative cost of domestic CDs.4  Large
time deposits at domestic banks and thrifts have continued to run off.
(7) Private credit growth appears to have strengthened, but only
a little from its very depressed pace in the months around year-end.
Overall business borrowing has been damped by a fall-off in equity retire-
ments as well as by weak fixed capital and inventory investment. Offer-
ings of corporate bonds have risen sharply, as treasurers apparently
believe that interest rates are unlikely to decrease further. But, in
part, this issuance was used to fund a paydown of short-term debt, as the
total of bank loans and commercial paper declined. Consumer loans at
banks rose in February on a monthly average basis, even after adjusting
for a changing volume of securitization across months, but leveled out
over the latter part of February and in early March. Issuance of tax-
exempt securities has increased. However, Treasury borrowing has been
reduced substantially, albeit temporarily, during the latter part of the
first quarter, reflecting contributions related to the war and the slow
pace of RTC resolutions. In total, domestic nonfinancial sector debt in
February grew 6-1/4 percent at an annual rate from its fourth-quarter
base, leaving this aggregate in the lower half of its 4-1/2 to 8-1/2
percent monitoring range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Dec '90 QIV '90
* to * to *
Feb. Mar. Mar. Mar.
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
* - partly projected.
1. Through February.
2. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
Policy Alternatives
(8) Three policy alternatives are presented below for Committee
consideration. Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade
around 6 percent and would be associated with adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing initially of $125 million. An increase to about $250 million
over the intermeeting period may be called for as seasonal borrowing
continues its normal climb. Under alternative A, the federal funds rate
would fall to 5-1/2 percent, effected either through a reduction in
borrowing to $75 million or a 50 basis point cut in the discount rate and
the same borrowing specification as in alternative B. As noted in recent
bluebooks, it is technically feasible for federal funds to trade below the
discount rate. However, the discount window becomes a marginally less
effective buffer to unpredictable changes in reserve supply or demand, and
the federal funds rate likely would be a little more volatile than if
alternative A were achieved through a discount rate cut. Moreover, allow-
ing the funds rate to fall below the discount rate is likely to give rise
to market uncertainty about System intentions; in particular, there would
be more speculation about whether a discount rate cut is forthcoming or
whether a penalty discount rate is being instituted. Under alternative C,
the federal funds rate would rise to 6-1/2 percent and the initial borrow-
ing level would be increased to $175 million.
(9) The structure of market interest rates does not now appear
to incorporate expectations of any further easing in monetary policy in
the weeks ahead; thus under alternative B, short-term interest rates are
unlikely to change substantially, though they may edge lower. Private
rates should slip off with the passing of quarter-end, and bills could
well benefit from steeper reductions in outstanding supplies after the
April tax date. The greenbook forecast implies some further unwinding of
the recent sharp rise in the dollar under the unchanged policy of alterna-
tive B. Still, with interest rate differentials now more favorable to
dollar assets, the dollar should remain well above its February lows.
Longer-term securities markets are likely to continue to be quite sensi-
tive to data about developments in the real economy over the intermeeting
period, as investors search for indications as to whether consumer and
business responses to the end of the war are helping to propel a turn-
around in the economy. Bond yields already seem to have built in some
rebound in the economy, judging by their levels relative to inflation
expectations and to short-term rates. Thus, they might not rise much, if
at all, even should incoming information confirm that the economy was
reaching a trough.
(10) Under alternative A, money market rates would likely
decrease by close to the full amount of the reduction in the federal funds
rate, and the prime rate would be lowered 1/2 percentage point, given its
already wide margin over funding costs. The dollar would decline promptly
and substantially. The drop in interest rates and the dollar could be
seen by market participants as adding further stimulus at a time when a
rebound in the economy already is expected. In such circumstances, bond
rates might not decline by much, and could even back up. A reversal of
any adverse reaction would occur, however, if incoming data began to con-
firm that the easing had correctly anticipated weaker money growth, more
favorable trends in prices, or a substantial further shortfall in
economic activity.
(11) The tightening of policy under alternative C would surprise
market participants, coming on the heels of recent easing measures, and
bill rates would rise by 1/2 percentage point. Private money market rates
could well rise by more and quality spreads retrace some of their recent
declines. In particular, a portion of the improvement since year-end in
the prices of securities of financial firms likely would be reversed by
the unexpected increase in short-term rates. Increases in bond yields
might be limited, however, by a sense that the Federal Reserve was taking
early action to check potential inflation pressures in the coming recov-
ery. In this environment, the dollar would be subject to further upward
(12) The money growth paths projected under each alternative are
given in the table below and in the table and charts on the following
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from March to June
M2 6-1/2 5-1/2 4-1/2
M3 4 3-1/2 3
M1 7 5-1/2 4
Implied growth from
1990:Q4 to June
M2 5-1/2 5 4-1/2
M3 4-1/2 4-1/4 4
M1 6-3/4 6 5-1/2
(13) Under alternative B, M2 would expand at about a 5-1/2
percent rate over the March-to-June period, in line with its December-to-
March growth, placing it a little above the midpoint of its 1991 range.
Expansion of money will continue to be boosted by previous declines in
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in billions
1991 January 3333.4 3333.4 3333.4 4124.4 4124.4 4124.4 826.7 826.7 826.7
February 3357.3 3357.3 3357.3 4160.9 4160.9 4160.9 836.4 836.4 836.4
March 3376.9 3376.9 3376.9 4177.1 4177.1 4177.1 840.9 840.9 840.9
April 3392.4 3391.0 3389.6 4191.0 4190.3 4189.6 845.4 844.8 844.2
May 3410.5 3406.2 3401.9 4204.3 4202.2 4200.1 850.3 848.6 846.9
June 3431.3 3422.7 3414.1 4217.6 4212.7 4207.8 855.8 852.5 849.2
Billions of dollars
Actual Level
* Projected Level
-- 11200
-- 11000
-- 10200
I I I i I I I I I I I I I I
O N D J F M A M J J A S 0 N D
market interest rates, but these effects will be less over the second
quarter than over the first.5  On the other hand, the projected pickup in
nominal spending will be working to buoy M2 growth over coming months. As
in recent months, most of the increase in M2 will occur in the form of
inflows to liquid retail balances, owing to their narrow opportunity
costs, as offering rates come down only a bit in response to recent
declines in market rates. Growth in small time deposits, by contrast,
should continue anemic, given the much larger adjustment of the rates on
these deposits to declines in market yields.
(14) On a quarterly average basis, M2 under alternative B would
expand at a 6 percent annual rate in the second quarter, a shade faster
than nominal GNP. Expansion at this rate would be a bit higher than pre-
dicted by the staff money demand models, implying a partial makeup of the
shortfall of recent quarters. The projection thus assumes a continuation
of the very recent experience, in which some of the unusual factors that
of 5-1/2 percent over the March-to-June period, as transaction deposits
complete their adjustments to interest rate changes, and as currency
demand abates with the end of war-related uncertainties. The level of
demand deposits may be boosted to some degree by greater mortgage
refinancing at the reduced levels of rates on fixed-rate mortgages of
recent months; prepayments of securitized mortgages generally are held
in demand deposits for some time before being passed through to security
holders. However, at current interest rates, the effects of this on M1
growth rates are expected to be quite small in coming months. Growth of
the monetary base is expected to slow to a 5-1/4 percent rate in the
second quarter.
had been damping money growth in earlier quarters seem less pronounced.
The recent recovery in confidence by depositors and investors in the bank-
ing system is not expected to be reversed, and against this backdrop,
constriction of credit supplies by banks should not intensify. While
opportunity costs will rise as offering rates continue to adjust, they are
not expected to become unusually wide in coming months.
(15) Growth in M3 would slow to a 3-1/2 percent rate over the
March-to-June period in the case of alternative B. To be sure, a modest
pickup in bank lending and in the associated needs for funds is antici-
pated as credit demands strengthen with spending; banks should be willing
to meet this demand in light of improved prospects for borrowers, enhanced
access to capital markets and the recent regulatory initiatives. However,
rate relationships are expected to be less favorable to money funds. In
addition, the unusual issuance of large time deposits by U.S. branches of
foreign banks related to the reserve requirement cut is assumed to slow in
the second quarter. RTC resolution activity will pick up over the quar-
ter, so that increasing quantities of thrift assets will end up financed
by Treasury securities instead of M3. Even with its slowing, M3 would
remain above the midpoint of its annual range by June. On a quarterly
average basis, M3 would grow at a 4-1/2 percent rate in the second quar-
ter, once again lagging growth in nominal income.
(16) Private debt growth should be a little stronger in the
second quarter than in the first as the economy recovers, though below the
growth in spending. Household borrowing will firm as consumer spending,
including spending on durables, resumes expanding and as housing activity
picks up further. Although access to credit by some households might be
curtailed, especially as delinquencies continue to rise, narrow spreads on
mortgages and asset-backed securities recently suggest that credit con-
straints on households are unlikely to be very important. By contrast,
the small business and commercial real estate sectors will continue to
face stringent credit conditions. For firms with access to securities
markets, however, limitations on credit should prove to be less of a
factor, as indicated by reduced quality spreads. Overall, corporate
borrowing is expected to edge higher, albeit largely reflecting a tran-
sitory pickup in share retirements. Stresses on state and local govern-
ments will result in some boost to their borrowing, mostly temporary
short-term borrowing to cover deficits. Federal debt growth will pick up
later in the quarter once RTC resolution activity revives. Growth in the
debt of all domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to be merely 5 per-
cent from February to June, keeping this aggregate in the lower half of
its 1991 monitoring range.
(17) Under alternative A, M2 would strengthen to a 6-1/2 percent
rate over the March-to-June period. The pickup would be concentrated in
retail liquid accounts as their opportunity costs fell further. By June,
this aggregate would be well into the upper half of its annual range. M3
would expand at a 4 percent rate over this period, buoyed by larger
inflows to money funds and by some spillover of the strength in M2.
(18) The tighter money market conditions of alternative C would
slow M2 from the pace of December to March, holding this aggregate down to
the midpoint of its 1991 range by June. M3 growth over the three months
would moderate to a 3 percent rate, with some risk that expansion could be
even more damped if there were an appreciable adverse reaction in bank
capital and funding markets.
Directive Language
(19) Draft language for the operational paragraph, including the
usual options and updating, is presented below.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SLIGHTLY (SOMEWHAT)/
maintain/ INCREASE SLIGHTLY (SOMEWHAT) the existing degree of
pressure on reserve positions. Depending upon progress toward
price stability, trends in economic activity, the behavior of the
monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and
domestic financial markets, slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve
restraint (WOULD) might or (SLIGHTLY) somewhat lesser reserve
restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable in the intermeeting period.
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with growth of [DEL: both] M2 and M3 over the period from [DEL: December
through] March THROUGH JUNE at annual rates of about ___ AND
____ [DEL: 3-1/2 to 4] percent, RESPECTIVELY.
March 22, 1991
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Short-Term on-Term
S CDs I money I corporate conventional home mongages
federal reasury bills secondary comm. maket bank US govemment constant A utility municipal secondary
unds seconday market market paper mutual prme maturity yields recently Bond market primary market
_-I 3month 1 -month fund loan 3-yM -J 30-YMr a, B. fixed-rate iedi-ral I ARM
Monthly
Mar 90
Apr 90
May 90
Jun 90
Jul 90
Aug 90
Sep 90
Oct 90
Nov 90
Dec 90
Jan 91
Feb 91
Weekly
Dec 5 90
Dec 12 90
Dec 19 90
Dec 26 90
Jan 2 91
Jan 9 91
Jan 16 91
Jan 23 91
Jan 30 91
Feb 6 91
Feb 13 91
Feb 20 91
Feb 27 91
Mar 6 91
Mar 13 91
Mar 20 91
Daily
Mar 15 91
Mar 21 91
Mar 22 91
p -- preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR).
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted MAR. 25, 1991
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt1
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
ANN. GROWTH RATES (%)
ANNUALLY (Q4 TO Q41
LEVELS S(BILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
WEEKLY
1991-FEB. 4 833.3 3345.9 2512.7 798.4 4144.4
MAR. 4 p 837.6 3367.1 2529.4 800.7 4167.7
11 p 839.6 3373.2 2533.7 799.7 4172.9
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Class II FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted MAR. 25, 1991
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds denomi- Short- Bankers
Demand checkable RPs and Savings nation general Institu nation Term Term Savings term Commer. accep.
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars MMDAs deposits time purpose tions time RPs Eurodollars bonds Treasury cial paper' tance
NSA1 deposits' and broker/ only deposits' NSA' NSA' securities
dealer
LEVELS (SBILLIONS) :
ANNUALLY 14TH QTR.)
MONTHLY
1990-FEB.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
Net of money market mutual fund holdings of these items.
Includes retail repurchase agreements. All IRA and Keogh accounts at commercial banks and thrift i
Excludes IRA and Keogh accounts.
Net of large denomination time deposits held by money market mutual funds and thrift institutions.
p-preliminary
nstitutions are subtracted from small time deposits.
-- -
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasuy coupons _Federal Net change
Not purchase 3 4 agencies outrightPeriod Nt Redeptl Nt Nt purhas Redemptions Net redemptions holding 6
purchaes (-) change 1-5 5-10 over 10 (-) Change -)otal Ne
t R
Weekly
January 2
January 9
January 16
January 23
Januy SO
February 6
February 13
February 20
February 27
March 6
March 13
March 20
Memo: LEVEL (bL $) 7
March 20
March 22, 1991
- -854
- 2,847
- -1,250
March 20
