Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC December 18, 1992
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Reserve conditions have remained unchanged since the last
Committee meeting. Because of settlement day pressures, the federal
funds rate averaged a little above its expected level of 3 percent and
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing a little above its allowance.
Rates on Treasury securities registered relatively small mixed changes
over the intermeeting period, with bill rates essentially unchanged and
bond yields falling.2  Economic activity was stronger than expected,
but the more robust economy along with the tenor of the new Administra-
tion's appointments and statements were seen as lowering the odds on
outsized fiscal stimulus. The flattening of the Treasury yield curve
may have been partly a response to actual and potential shifting of
relative supplies: bill auction sizes increased over recent weeks, and
there was talk in the incoming Administration of shortening the
maturity structure of Treasury debt issues. Long-term forward rates
embedded in the Treasury yield curve fell to their lowest levels in
nearly three years, and investors also may have been encouraged by
discussions of long-term deficit reduction and by prospects for sus-
tained low inflation. Rates rose sharply on one-month private paper as
that maturity came to span the year-end. However, expected rates over
the year-end holiday weekend have fallen recently, contributing to a
drop of 20 to 45 basis points in private short-term rates beyond the
one-month maturity. The declines are greatest for bank obligations,
perhaps reflecting reduced concerns about possible banking problems,
partly as bank earnings exceeded expectations. Bank stock prices
outperformed broad stock market indexes, which were themselves boosted
to record highs by the prospects for a stronger economy and decreases
in bond yields. Private long-term rates also dropped 10 to 20 basis
points late in the period, except for rates for weaker credits which
remained unchanged.
(2) The dollar's weighted-average exchange value has declined
slightly on balance since the November FOMC meeting. Foreign short-
term interest rates rose while long-term rates declined a few basis
points on average over the period. Although new economic data indi-
cated that both the West German and the Japanese economies are in
recession, markets seem to have postponed or reduced expectations of
near-term monetary easing, owing in part to statements by the central
banks of those countries. Small dollar depreciations against the mark,
the yen, and several other currencies were about offset by a 15 percent
appreciation against the Swedish krona, which was cut loose from its
ECU peg after a second round of extremely heavy selling pressures. The
pressures then spread episodically to other European currencies, cul-
minating in the floating of the Norwegian krone; tensions within the
ERM persisted through the end of the intermeeting period, but at a
somewhat reduced intensity.
The Desk did not intervene in currency markets over the inter-
meeting period.
(3) Growth rates of M2 and M3 appear likely to come in a
little below below their respective 3-1/2 and 1 percent paths specified
for September to December at the last FOMC meeting. In November, M2
decelerated to a 3-1/2 percent annual growth rate, and weekly data for
the first half of December indicate significant further slowing this
month. A deceleration had been expected, owing primarily to the waning
effects of special factors.3 Abstracting from those effects, the
underlying growth in M2 was apparently quite weak, and less than ex-
pected, despite an upward revision to estimated nominal income growth.
M1 growth has slowed especially sharply in recent weeks, accounted for
in part by weakness in demand deposits.4 Some of this deceleration
may reflect smaller contributions to growth from mortgage refinancing,
and it may be that demand deposits, and NOW accounts as well, were
reacting to the runup in short-term interest rates over October and
November. The nontransactions component of M2 continued to decline.
Small time deposits again fell substantially, with a portion of the
funds apparently captured by savings deposits, which expanded rapidly.
M3 accelerated to a 1-3/4 percent growth rate in November, as the
runoff of large time deposits and institutional money funds slowed
substantially. Branches and agencies of foreign banks increased CD
issuance, perhaps anticipating year-end needs, but appear likely to
rely more heavily on borrowing from overseas offices as the year end
approaches. Early December data indicate a likely decline in M3 for
this month.
(4) M2 and M3 should finish the year about 1/4 and 1/2 per-
centage point, respectively, below the lower bounds of their target
ranges. The velocity of M2 is projected to rise 3-1/4 percent this
year, including a 5-1/4 percent (annual rate) increase in the third
quarter--despite further declines in market rates and the influence of
special factors, such as mortgage refinancing, that boosted money and
held down velocity. Banks and thrifts, rebuilding capital positions,
promptly reduced deposit rates as short-term market rates fell, and a
steepening yield curve as well as the stickiness of bank loan rates
induced shifts out of M2 deposits. The experimental staff M2 model,
which employs a variety of rates affecting household portfolio choices
and shows a rise in overall opportunity costs this year, predicts a
by greatly increased reliance by banks and thrifts on capital and other
nondeposit sources of funds not included in M3.
(5) Domestic nonfinancial debt posted a paltry 2-3/4 percent
growth rate in October owing to a temporary dropoff in federal borrow-
ing, before picking up in November. Although borrowing by nonfederal
sectors appears to be strengthening a little, some of the recent pickup
may have been the result of efforts to fund year-end needs in advance.
At banks, business loans expanded at a more robust 5-1/4 percent pace
in November. While part of this increase reflected a shift from the
commercial paper market by one large firm that was downgraded, commer-
cial paper still posted a strong gain in November. Corporations not
only obtained early funding of year-end positions but reduced their
reliance on long-term debt markets after the backup in bond yields in
October and November. Overall, business borrowing seems to be increas-
ing slightly, after decreasing in the second and third quarters. While
equity issuance also has declined, the recent stock market rally has
led to a buildup of the new issue calendar. Bank loans to consumers
remained weak in November, even after adjusting for securitizations,
and although revolving credit posted a third monthly gain in October,
total consumer credit, including noninstallment loans, turned down
after being flat or rising slightly the previous several months. Real
estate loans at banks grew modestly again in November. Residential
mortgage growth had not kept pace with indicators of housing activity
through the third quarter, but some boost may be expected in the fourth
quarter with the record level of refinancings and rising home sales
with concomitant opportunities for increasing mortgage sizes. Since
October, however, a steep decline is evident in indexes of new mortgage
applications for home purchases and especially for refinancing. Over-
all, the debt aggregate appears likely to finish the year at about the
have fallen slightly for both households and business; debt-service
burdens have declined much more substantially as obligations are rolled
over at prevailing lower interest rates.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'91
to
Sept. Oct'. Nov. Nov.
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 287 143 104
Excess reserves 994 1074 1051
Policy Alternatives
(6) Three alternatives are presented below for consideration
by the Committee. Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to
trade around 3 percent, in association with the allowance for adjustment
and seasonal borrowing remaining at $50 million. (Seasonal borrowing
ordinarily would be expected to edge down in January, but with such
borrowing already at a very low level of about $20 million, little
change is likely over the intermeeting period.) Alternative A incor-
porates a 1/2 percentage point reduction in the federal funds rate.
Such a reduction could be accomplished through open market operations--
by lowering the borrowing allowance by $25 million--pushing the federal
funds rate below the discount rate. The lower funds rate also could be
achieved by reducing the discount rate by 1/2 percentage point and
leaving the borrowing allowance unchanged. The latter approach would be
in line with the Committee's usual procedure, as it would not involve
moving the intended federal funds rate below the discount rate. The 1/2
percentage point increase in the federal funds rate of alternative C
could be implemented by raising the borrowing allowance by $25 million.
(7) In view of the stronger tone of economic data in recent
weeks, market participants seem to be anticipating a firming in the
stance of monetary policy some time next year, but likely not between
now and the early February FOMC meeting. With an unchanged federal
funds rate under alternative B, other private short-term rates will
decline over the intermeeting period as remaining year-end pressures
unwind. Apart from year-end effects, rates along the maturity spectrum
might tend to drift lower should developments unfold as in the staff
forecast; in these circumstances, expectations of substantial policy
tightening in 1993 are likely to fade, albeit slowly, as inflation re-
mains subdued and the pace of expansion stays moderate. Intermediate-
and longer-term rates may be importantly influenced by new proposals on
fiscal policy. Markets apparently are anticipating some modest fiscal
stimulus, but there is considerable uncertainty about the size of any
short-term package and the scope and credibility of proposals for
longer-term deficit reduction. Interest rates could also be affected by
discussions of other policy measures apparently being considered by the
new Administration, which also have not been assumed in the staff fore-
cast. For example, efforts to increase bank lending by relaxing regula-
tions, intended to ease the cost and availability of credit to borrowers
dependent on banks, might boost some market interest rates if such a
relaxation were seen as having a significant impact on spending and as
shifting bank portfolios toward loans and away from government
securities. Proposals to put greater emphasis on shorter maturities in
Treasury debt management, while motivated primarily by possible saving
in federal interest expense, may flatten the yield curve a little.
(8) The 1/2 percentage point decline in the federal funds rate
under alternative A would be passed through fully to other short-term
interest rates. The three-month Treasury bill rate would drop into the
to 5-1/2 percent. Market expectations about the trajectory of interest
rates over the next few months would be marked down, but anticipations
that the easing move might need to be reversed before much time had
passed--especially in the context of possible fiscal stimulus--would
limit declines in longer-term rates. The foreign exchange value of the
dollar could drop noticeably, although in present circumstances, foreign
central banks might ease their own policies somewhat sooner than they
are likely to otherwise, muting the dollar's decline.
(9) Although many market participants have come to the view
that monetary policy easing has run its course for the current economic
cycle, none appears to expect a tightening to be implemented in the near
term, as in alternative C. Consequently, short-term Treasury rates
would jump by the full 50 basis point increase in the federal funds
rate. Private rates could increase a bit more, as market participants
built in higher risk premiums in response to the greater odds that the
economic expansion could slow. The increase in long-term yields,
however, would be held down by the enhanced credibility of the Federal
Reserve's price stability objective, and the yield curve should flatten
somewhat. The foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely rise
(10) Projected growth of the monetary aggregates under the
three alternatives for the interval from November to March is shown in
the table below. (Additional data appear in the detailed table and
charts on the following pages.) Growth of M2 and M3 in coming months is
expected to remain damped relative to that of nominal income under all
of the alternatives. The forces that have been restraining money demand
over the past two years should abate only a little in the near term.
With the yield curve steep and the cost of consumer credit high relative
to deposit rates, households are likely to steer funds into capital
market instruments, such as bond and stock mutual funds, and to use
deposit balances to reduce debt burdens further. Credit flows will
continue to be diverted from the depository sector. Nonfinancial busi-
nesses, while showing a renewed interest in shorter-term credit as
inventory financing needs rise, are expected to continue to rely heavily
on the capital markets in view of the attractive levels of bond rates
and stock prices. Restraints on banks' supply of credit are expected to
ease, but only gradually, in response to improvements in the financial
condition of banks and as the outlook for the economy brightens. With
their balance sheets highly liquid, banks are likely to remain unaggres-
sive in bidding for retail deposits and managed liabilities. Overall
demands for credit by nonfederal sectors are expected to remain damped
relative to income. Federal borrowing, however, should remain brisk.
Under any of the alternatives, overall nonfinancial debt is expected to
expand at about a 5-1/2 percent rate from the fourth quarter through
March, in the lower half of its provisional 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent moni-
toring range, and below the pace of nominal GDP.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from November to
March
M2 2 1-1/2 1
M3 1/4 0 -1/4
M1 7-1/2 5-3/4 4
Implied growth from
1992:Q4 to March
M2 2-1/2 1-3/4 1-1/4
M3 1/2 1/4 0
M1 8-1/4 6-3/4 5
(11) The 1-1/2 percent M2 growth projected for the November-
to-March period under the unchanged money market conditions of alterna-
tive B represents a considerable slowing from the pace of recent months.
This projected deceleration largely reflects the reversal of the net
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A
Levels in billions
1992 October 3497.1
November 3507.2
December 3507.7
February 3522.3
March 3531.5
Monthly Growth Rates
1992 October 5.2
November 3.5
December 0.2
Quarterly Ave. Growth Rates
1992 Q1 4.2
Q2 0.4
Q3 0.2
Q4 3.7
Sep 92 to Dec 92 3.0
Dec 92 to Mar 93 2.7
Nov 92 to Mar 93 2.1
Q4 92
Nov 92
Dec 92
Jan 93
Feb 93
Mar 93
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. C
Tentative 1993 Target Ranges:
impact of certain special factors that have boosted M2 recently, includ-
ing heavy mortgage refinancing activity. The slowing in growth also is
due to the additional reductions in rates on liquid deposits, catching
up to previous declines in market interest rates. 5 On a quarterly
average basis, M2 would grow at only about a 1-1/2 percent rate in the
first quarter, well below the staff projection for nominal income
growth, and velocity would extend its recent increases--at a projected
percent pace from its fourth-quarter base, leaving the aggregate below
its tentative 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent range.
(12) M3 is expected to be unchanged on balance over the
November-to-March period under the reserve market conditions of alterna-
tive B, as a decline that appears to be in train in December offsets
sluggish growth over the following three months. Restraint on balance-
sheet growth by depository institutions and slack demands for loans at
banks and thrifts will continue to stunt the growth of this aggregate.
Around year-end, certain bank liabilities, including large time depos-
its, could decline noticeably, as banks seek to minimize deposit in-
surance charges and capital requirements, but such maneuvers in them-
selves should have little effect on growth over the November-to-March
period. M3 growth would be about 3/4 percentage point below its tenta-
tive 1 to 5 percent target range in March.
(13) The lower interest rates of alternative A would boost M2
growth well into 1993, putting this aggregate near the lower end of the
current provisional range by March. This alternative would also improve
the odds that growth of the aggregates in 1993 would be within the pro-
visional target ranges later in the year as the lower interest and ex-
change rates boosted income relative to the staff forecast. Much of the
higher money growth over coming months relative to alternative B would
reflect stronger expansion of M1. Compensating balances would increase
further, and NOW accounts would rise more quickly. However, deposi-
tories are likely again to be fairly prompt in adjusting liquid deposit
rates, limiting the impact of the policy easing on the monetary aggre-
gates. Bank credit is unlikely to respond very strongly to lower rates,
and additional needs for funds would be met from core deposits. With
issuance of managed liabilities weak, growth in M3 would be boosted only
slightly as compared with alternative B, and that aggregate would remain
below its provisional target range in March.
(14) M2 is projected to expand at only a 1 percent rate from
November-to-March under alternative C and M3 would decline at a 1/4
percent rate. M1 growth would be limited to 4 percent over November-to-
March by the higher opportunity costs of demand deposits and NOW ac-
counts under this alternative. Losses on capital market instruments as
long-term rates rise could limit flows into bond and stock mutual funds,
cushioning the restraining effect on M2 and M3. Still, M2 would be just
Directive Language
(15) Draft language for the operational paragraph, including
the usual options and updating, is presented below. No Committee mem-
bers expressed a desire to discuss the language relating to the factors
to be taken into account when considering intermeeting adjustments.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/main-
tain/INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. In the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly
(SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint might (WOULD) or
slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint (MIGHT) would
be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contem-
plated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from [DEL:September]
NOVEMBER through [DEL: December] MARCH at annual rates of about
____ AND ____ [DEL:3-1/2 and 1] percent, respectively.
December 18, 1992
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market I market
Monthly
Dec 91
Jan 92
Feb 92
Mar 92
Apr 92
May 92
Jun 92
Jul 92
Aug 92
Sep 92
Oct 92
Nov 92
Weekly
Sep 2 92
Sep 9 92
Sep 16 92
Sep 23 92
Sep 30 92
Oct 7 92
Oct 14 92
Oct 21 92
Oct 28 92
Nov 4 92
Nov 11 92
Nov 18 92
Nov 25 92
Dec 2 92
Dec 9 92
Dec 16 92
Daily
Dec 11 92
Dec 16 92
Dec 17 92
Strictly Confidential (FR).
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted DEC. 21, 1992
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nonlransactions total loans U.S.
Period Mi M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
in M2 in M3 only investments
ANNUALLY (Q4 TO Q4)
1989
1990
1991
QUARTERLY AVERAGE
1991-4th QTR.
1992-1st QTR.
1992-2nd QTR.
1992-3rd QTR.
MONTHLY
1991-NOV.
LEVELS ($BILLIONSI :
MONTHLY
NEEKLY
1992-NOV. 2
DEC. 7 p
discontinuities.
p-preliminary
pe-preliminary estimate
averaging end-of-month levels of adjacent months, and have been adjusted to remove
Strictly Confidential (FR).
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Class II FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted DEC. 21, 1992
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds denomi- Short* Bankers
Demand checkable RPs and Savings nation general Institu- nation Term Term Savings term Commer- accep-
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars deposits' time purpose tions time RPs Eurodollars bonds Treasury cial paper' lances
NSA' deposits' and broker/ only deposits' NSA' NSA' securities
dealer*
LEVELS ($BILLIONS) :
ANNUALLY (4TH QTR.)
December 18, 1992
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net changeI I r agencies outright
Period Net 2  Redemptions Net within Net purchases 3 Redemptions Net redemptions holdings
purchases (-) change 1 ear 1-5 5-10 over 10 (-) Change ) total 4 Net RPs
Weekly
September 9
December 2
9
16
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
December 16
--- 11,282
--- 4,150
--- 1,450
--- 1,815
--- 3,867
--- 2,452
--- 3730
-.- 5,927
--- 1,027
--- 1,425
--- 3,530
--- 595
--- 5,332
--- 200
--- 3,832
-- 500
--- 600
--- 5,906
isury and agency securities.
rchase transactions (-), and matched purchase sale transactions (+)
December 16
within
1 year 1-5 5-10 over 10 total
