Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR) June 28, 1996
Class I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The Committee's decision at the last FOMC meeting to
leave the intended federal funds rate unchanged at 5-1/4 percent was
widely expected and prompted little response in market interest
rates. Following the release in early June of the strong employ-
ment report for May, however, market yields resumed the uptrend that
began this past February, increasing as much as 30 basis points during
the intermeeting period; in recent days, though, that rise has been
largely rolled back, as expectations of System tightening ebbed, and
on balance most rates are up only 5 to 10 basis points (chart).
Markets still seem to incorporate modest policy firming over the
balance of the year, as is evident in the trajectory of quotes on
federal funds futures. Stock prices have generally fallen, with
notable declines in the high-tech and small-capitalization sectors.
(2) The increases in interest rates since the last meeting
bring the upward movement over the period since January 31, the day of
Although banks have continued to implement new retail sweep pro-
grams, required reserve balances have fallen only slightly over the
intermeeting period, owing to a surprising surge in demand deposits,
while required clearing balances have edged up. These developments
have left the sum of required reserve and required clearing balances
about unchanged.
the Committee's last policy move, to about 7/8 to 1-1/4 percentage
points at intermediate and long maturities; short-term rates, anchored
by the federal funds rate, rose considerably less. This pattern was
reflected in substantial increases in one-year forward rates at all
horizons. An especially sharp bulge in forward rates in the three-
year area is consistent with the interpretation that the increase in
yields was primarily a response to signs of cyclical strength in the
economy. Judging from the available survey data, long-term inflation
expectations have deteriorated little, if at all, and thus the in-
crease in nominal long-term rates seems to represent primarily higher
real interest rates. Shorter-term inflation expectations are flat to
up slightly on these survey measures since early in the year, implying
that the real federal funds rate since the last easing has held steady
or fallen a bit. At its current level, however, the real funds rate
is only a little below its level last June, because part of the reduc-
tion in the nominal funds rate since then has been offset by declines
in short-term inflation expectations over the second half of last
(3) The dollar's weighted-average exchange value slipped
about 3/4 percent over the intermeeting period. The dollar declined
moderately against the German mark and other European currencies as
accumulating signs of a pickup in economic growth in Germany prompted
a reduction in expectations of any further easing of German monetary
policy. Ten-year government bond yields in Germany rose 20 basis
points over the intermeeting period. The dollar firmed 2-3/4 percent
against the yen, despite the much larger-than-expected gain in first-
quarter Japanese GDP. Various statements by Japanese officials
indicated that Japanese monetary policy would not be tightened until
the recovery proved self-sustaining; as a result, Japanese bond yields
declined slightly, on balance, over the period.
; the Desk did not
intervene. Since the end of January the dollar has risen 1/2 percent
on balance, placing it in the middle of its range of fluctuations over
nearly a decade.
(4) Domestic nonfinancial sector debt has decelerated in the
past few months, bringing this measure to just below the middle of its
ly damped over the second quarter, owing mainly to unexpectedly strong
tax receipts. Nonfederal borrowing also is estimated to have edged
down. Consumer credit growth appears to be slowing, although it
continues to outpace income. Home mortgage borrowing to date, how-
ever, has been well maintained and has yet to show any perceptible
response to the rise in mortgage interest rates. Business borrowing
was slower in the second quarter, as merger activity and associated
share retirements dropped substantially. In general, funding for both
households and businesses appears to remain readily available.
Spreads on junk and investment-grade bonds and mortgage-backed securi-
ties have stayed narrow. Terms on bank loans are generally attrac-
tive, and banks seem to be tightening standards only selectively,
mainly for credit cards. Equity markets also have been highly recep-
tive, at least until very recently, and equity issuance--especially
through initial public offerings--has been robust over the quarter,
holding down credit needs.
(5) The broad monetary aggregates remained weak in May fol-
lowing relatively slow growth in April, apparently reflecting the
drawdown of balances to meet unusually large individual tax liabili-
ties. Preliminary data, however, suggest that both M2 and M3 have
rebounded in June to annual rates of about 5-1/2 and 6 percent,
respectively. The pickup was spread widely across the components of
these aggregates, including M1. The latter has registered a small
upturn following two months of decline, as currency has accelerated
non-M1 components of M2 and M3, money market mutual funds have been
particularly robust.
(6) From the fourth quarter of 1995 through June, M2 has
grown at a 4-3/4 percent annual rate, leaving it just below the upper
end of its 1 to 5 percent annual range. M3 has increased at a
percent range. M2 growth so far this year has been quite close to the
staff forecast prepared in advance of the January meeting. Nominal
GDP growth over the first two quarters of the year, however, appears
to have been a bit stronger than expected last January. As a conse-
quence, the velocity of M2 has been a little higher than projected,
declining only slightly rather than falling at a 3/4 percent annual
rate. This firmer velocity has likely reflected the depressing
effects on money demand of unusually sluggish upward adjustment of
deposit interest rates as well as of higher expected yields on market
instruments. Consistent with this interpretation, flows into stock
mutual funds were very heavy in the first half of the year and noncom-
petitive tenders at Treasury bill and note auctions have picked up as
well.4  In contrast to M2 expansion, the growth of M3 has been
stronger than expected over the first half. While the increase in
bank credit was significantly slower than projected, in part owing to
downward revaluations of investment portfolios, banks have substan-
tially reduced their reliance on nondeposit funding this year, prob-
ably in response to the elimination of deposit insurance premiums last
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV
to
Apr. May Jun. Jun.
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial
debt 4.3 3.9 -- 4.8
Federal 3.6 1.8 -- 3.9
Nonfederal 4.6 4.6 -- 5.1
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 91 127 327
Excess reserves 1120 871 982
Long-Run Scenarios
(7) This section examines the monetary policies needed to
achieve alternative objectives for inflation over the long run.
Specifically, the first set of scenarios compares two approaches for
maintaining inflation around the rate forecast to prevail at the end
of the Greenbook projection period. The second set of scenarios
addresses issues related to achieving effective price stability over
the next five years or so.
(8) The new staff econometric model of the U.S. economy
(FRB/US) was used to extend the baseline forecast beyond the Greenbook
horizon and to derive the effects of alternative policies.5 One of
the distinguishing characteristics of the new model is the process of
expectations formations. Participants in labor, product, and finan-
cial markets use the information at their disposal to make projections
of future events in a much more complex fashion than in the staff's
previous large-scale model (the MPS model), in which expectations were
adaptive and not distinguished from other sources of sluggish adjust-
ment. For the purposes of the exercises in this section, the manner
of forming inflation expectations is especially important: Partici-
pants use historical relationships among interest rates, prices and
output along with a notion of where inflation will be in the distant
future to forecast a path for prices and the economy; long-run infla-
tion expectations in turn can depend on actual inflation, but the
model also allows them to be influenced by announced objectives of the
monetary authority. Aside from the contributions of expectations,
wage and price adjustments are influenced by labor and product market
frictions, imparting real effects even to anticipated policy actions.
(9) The simulations share a common NAIRU of around 5-3/4
percent. The sacrifice ratio varies, however, depending on the ele-
ments influencing long-term inflation expectations. For the model
relationships embodied in Chart 2, which do not have monetary policy
credibility effects, the sacrifice ratio is 2-1/2--that is, reducing
inflation by 1 percentage point would require unemployment to exceed
the NAIRU by 1 percentage point for 2-1/2 years. By assumption, fis-
cal policy in all the scenarios moves slightly in a stimulative direc-
tion over the extended forecast period, as indexed by a rise in the
NIPA Federal government current account deficit in the steady infla-
tion cases to 2-1/2 percent of GDP from 1-3/4 percent in 1997. The
model's implied equilibrium real funds rate stays close to 2-3/4
percent, with the effects of mild fiscal stimulus offset by the
influence of an assumed steady real dollar on the foreign side, which,
with the relatively high income elasticities for U.S. imports, tends
to induce faster growth of imports than exports.
(10) The baseline strategy, shown by the solid line in
Chart 2, follows the Greenbook through 1997, by which time inflation,
as measured by the chain-weight PCE price index, is expected to have
edged up to nearly a 3 percent rate (from 2.2 percent in 1995). With
the nominal federal funds rate fixed and inflation rising, real short-
term interest rates fall over 1997 and would continue that downward
course absent a tightening of monetary policy. But the disequilibrium
is not large, and a 50 basis point increase in the federal funds rate
in early 1998 raises real short- and long-term rates by enough to
induce an increase in the unemployment rate to its natural level in
Chart 2
Implications of Alternative Monetary Policy Choices
Nominal Fed Funds Rate (Quarterly average)
-- Baseline
....... Near-Term Tightening
PCE Inflation (Four-quarter percent change)
Civilian Unemployment Rate (Quarterly average)
..~,.....
''' I
near-term tightening strategy, the Committee begins to tighten sooner,
following a Taylor rule adjusted to embody the 2-3/4 percent equi-
librium real interest rate implied by the simulations and a 3 percent
target for the increases in the PCE chain-weight index. Nominal and
real rates begin to rise immediately, so that the unemployment rate is
higher in the near term than in the Greenbook and inflation levels are
a little lower. Starting sooner also implies that both nominal and
real interest rates do not have to climb as high in the middle years
of the simulation.
(11) Chart 3 considers policies aimed at achieving effective
price stability by reducing measured inflation to around 1 percent
early in the next decade. The three scenarios illustrate the effects
of different processes by which the public's expectations of inflation
adjust to this policy goal. In the circumstances illustrated by the
dotted line (low credibility), perceptions of the eventual inflation
rate are formed by observing actual inflation, as they were for
Chart 2: Inflation expectations adjust down to 1 percent, but they do
so slowly, and the central bank's target plays no role in this process
except to discipline its actions and hence inflation outcomes. In
this case, the funds rate needs to rise more than a percentage point,
and the unemployment rate increases about a percentage point, running
at about 6-1/2 percent for a while. The dashed line shows a high
credibility case in which the public's expectation of where inflation
will be in the long term is quickly lowered to the 1 per-
cent objective established and presumably announced by the Federal
Reserve. Owing primarily to frictions in labor and product markets,
even with high credibility it takes several years for inflation to
move to 1 percent, and unemployment rises slightly above the natural
rate. The sacrifice ratio is only about 1 and it would be even lower
Chart 3
Strategies for Achieving 1 Percent Inflation
Nominal Fed Funds Rate (Quarterly average)
Percent
7.0- Baseline (from Chart 2)
....... Low Credibility
6.5 ...............-- High Credibility
"4.0 "-4 * II * I ... .... ..
PCE Inflation (Four-quarter percent change)
Percent
3.5
' * i i l , I * I *i l I * I *I r
Civilian Unemployment Rate (Quarterly average)
Percent
6.8
if the disinflation process were stretched out further. The dot-dash
line (earning credibility) gives an intermediate case. Initially, the
public forms expectations much as in the scenario shown with the solid
line. But the Federal Reserve earns increasing credibility for its 1
percent inflation target as actual inflation is reduced. As might be
expected, cumulative output losses are below the two other cases.
While these simulations illustrate the potentially powerful effects of
inducing the public to reduce inflation expectations faster than they
would by observing actual inflation outcomes, they provide no guidance
on how to accomplish this. As noted in the report to the FOMC on "The
Price Objective for Monetary Policy", empirical evidence of credi-
bility effects of announced inflation targets is difficult to find.
Long-Run Ranges
(12) The table below provides background for the Committee's
discussion of growth rate ranges for the monetary and debt aggregates
for 1996 and 1997. The staff baseline projections for money and debt
are based on the Greenbook forecast of the economy. In terms of the
outlook for money growth, the key elements in that forecast are the
federal funds rate remaining at 5-1/4 percent through next year, long-
term interest rates staying around current levels, and nominal GDP
growing at a rate close to 4-1/2 percent over each of the next six
Growth of Money and Credit and Alternative Ranges
Staff Proiections Ranges
Baseline
(Greenbook)
M2
M3
Debt
Memo:
M1
Adjusted for
sweeps
Nominal GDP
Memo:
1995:QIV
to June
Baseline
(Greenbook) Tighter
sweeps 5 2
Nominal GDP 4-1/2 3-1/2
* - 1995:QIV to May.
** - 1995:QIV to 1996:QII (Greenbook projection).
Alt. II
(13) M2 is projected to outrun nominal GDP slightly over the
forecast period, leaving growth for 1996 at about 5 percent and at
around that same pace next year.6 Interest rates on small time
deposits, which have been rising, are still unusually low relative to
market interest rates and should continue to move higher. If the
historical money demand relationship prevails, this edging lower of
the opportunity cost of M2 relative to short-term interest rates
should work to reduce the velocity of M2 a little. In fact, the his-
torical relationship between movements in M2's opportunity cost and
in its velocity appears to have reasserted itself in recent years
after having gone off track in the early part of this decade
(chart 4 ). The staff's working assumption is that this rela-
tionship will continue to hold, though the increased availability of
alternative financial instruments and the changes in household balance
sheets over the last decade suggest that considerable uncertainty
remains about the characteristics of M2 demand.
(14) Unlike M2, M3 is seen as moderating over the second half
of this year to a little more than a 5 percent rate, bringing its
growth over the four quarters of the year down to 6 percent. Shifts
of funding from Eurodollar borrowing to large time deposits, which
apparently had been encouraged in part by the removal of the deposit
insurance premiums for commercial banks last year, are expected to
ebb. In addition, inflows to money market mutual funds, which had
been boosted by the drop in short-term market rates resulting from
policy easings in late 1995 and early 1996, should be moderate with
short-term market rates about unchanged. Next year, M3 expansion is
projected to strengthen from its second-half pace to a 6 percent rate,
as bank credit growth picks up.
(15) The growth of the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors
is projected to be 4-1/2 percent over both this year and next. The
expansion of the debt of nonfederal sectors over the next six quarters
slows relative to the first half of 1996, along with nominal income.
While equity is anticipated to be retired at a hefty pace, the cor-
porate financing gap over the balance of 1996 and 1997 is expected to
remain relatively low owing to restrained inventory investment and
rising internal funds. The staff does not foresee any pullback in
credit supplies to businesses, whose outlook for earnings and debt
servicing seems favorable. In contrast, in light of rising delin-
quency rates on consumer credit--especially the revolving component--
households may well face a further tightening of the availability of
certain types of consumer credit. This contributes to slowing growth
of such credit in coming quarters, but only a little--most of the
deceleration reflects spending trends and rising repayments from debt
assumed earlier. Home mortgage debt expansion later this year and in
mortgage rates exert more noticeable restraint. Debt of the state and
local government sector will continue to contract over the remainder
of this year and next owing to the large volume of advance refunded
bonds still scheduled to be retired. Federal debt should grow more
slowly this year than last, but it is likely to be picking up by 1997
because of projected increases in the federal budget deficit.
(16) The money and credit projections for the "tighter"
strategy are consistent with the alternative scenario presented in the
Greenbook Part I in which the federal funds rate is raised gradually,
by a total of 100 basis points by year-end, and maintained at that
level through next year. The more restrictive policy damps nominal
GDP growth by about a percentage point over the next six quarters.
The slower spending growth, together with the higher opportunity costs
of holding liquid money balances generated by sluggish upward adjust-
ment of rates on retail deposits, should hold M2 growth to 4-1/2 and
of the slowdown in M2 would show through to M3; bank credit and
associated funding needs would moderate only a bit, leading banks
to rely more heavily on managed liabilities in M3 to make up for some
of the shortfall in funding from M2 sources. The expansion in the
debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors would likely be retarded next
year to about the same extent as growth in nominal spending, posting
a projected rate of growth of 3-1/2 percent.
(17) The table on page 11 presents two alternatives for money
and credit ranges for 1996 and 1997. The Committee first selected the
alternative I growth rate ranges for 1996 of 1 to 5 percent for M2,
basis at its meeting a year ago, and it reaffirmed these ranges at its
ably well centered on the likely outcomes for growth in this measure
under staff or Committee members' economic forecasts, and it remains
so unless policy tightens very substantially. When the Committee
chose its 1996 M2 and M3 ranges in July and January, however, it
recognized that staff baseline projections of these aggregates were in
the neighborhood of the upper ends of these ranges. The Committee's
rationale was to provide a benchmark for secular growth of the broader
monetary aggregates that, in the words of the Federal Reserve Act,
would be "commensurate with the economy's long run potential to in-
crease production so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum
employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates"
under the assumption of historically typical velocity behavior. The
Monetary Policy Reports to the Congress after those meetings indicated
that growth of the broader aggregates might run near the upper ends of
their ranges. A very similar situation confronts the Committee at
this meeting, with the baseline staff forecast for M2 and M3 for both
this year and next at the 5 and 6 percent upper bounds of their
respective alternative I ranges. The Committee may wish to reaffirm
the alternative I ranges for 1996 under this rationale of providing
longer-run benchmarks, and extend them to 1997. As another rationale
for the alternative I ranges, the Committee may foresee slower growth
of M2 and M3 than the staff projects, moving these aggregates comfor-
tably within their ranges: For example, a hike in short-term interest
rates, to better ensure that inflation remains contained, such as in
the tighter scenario, would tend to depress the growth of the broader
aggregates, particularly next year given the usual lags.
(18) Alternative II raises the M2 and M3 ranges by 1 percent-
age point to align them better with the money growth likely to prevail
under the staff forecast and, judging by the central tendency of the
members' nominal GDP projections, the Committee's as well. Even if
the Committee has no intention of placing greater weight on the
aggregates, this alternative might be seen as closer to the spirit
of the Federal Reserve Act's requirement to report the "objectives
and plans" for money and credit for the current and, in July, the
following calendar year, taking account of past and prospective
developments in employment, prices, and other factors. One option
might be to center the ranges around expected monetary growth. To be
sure the alternative II ranges are not high enough to accomplish this,
but the Committee may find this feature acceptable if it intends to
pursue an opportunistic strategy in approaching its long-run objective
of price stability. In this case, monetary policy would respond
aggressively to upside surprises to nominal GDP or inflation in order
to hold the line against sustained increases in inflation, but would
be more tentative in resisting downward shocks to spending. Because
increases in short-term interest rates or shortfalls in nominal GDP
would therefore be more likely to be sizable than movements in the
opposite direction, shortfalls of money growth from the staff forecast
would tend to be larger than overshoots.
Short-run Policy Alternatives
(19) Two policy alternatives are discussed below for con-
sideration by the Committee. Under alternative B, federal funds would
continue to trade around 5-1/4 percent. The tighter option, alterna-
tive C, would boost the funds rate to 5-1/2 percent, through either a
restrictive provision of nonborrowed reserves using open market opera-
(20) The unchanged reserves market conditions of alter-
native B are assumed in the staff economic forecast. In that fore-
cast, growth in output and employment slows in the months ahead to a
pace that is in line with the rate of increase in the economy's poten-
tial. However, because the staff sees the economy as operating in
level terms a bit beyond its potential currently and over the forecast
period, an upward drift in inflation develops. Even so, the overshoot
of output is quite small and the rise in inflation consequently mild
and gradual, suggesting that major policy adjustments would not be
necessary to keep inflation from rising. Real bond yields have in-
creased substantially in recent months and are now more in line with
levels that in the past appeared to have been consistent with holding
inflation in check. The yield curve at present embodies only small
odds of a modest policy tightening over coming months, and further
decreases in rates are likely to be quite minimal in the near term if
the Committee chose to keep policy unchanged at this meeting. In
these circumstances, even if the Committee wished to lean against the
sorts of incipient inflation pressures inherent in the staff forecast,
it might be able to afford to wait for more information to gauge
whether those pressures were likely to develop and their extent.
(21) A 1/4 percentage point increase in the federal funds
rate, as under alternative C, might be favored if the Committee wished
to impose greater restraint on spending to reduce the odds of a
gradual increase of inflation pressures. Prompt action would help to
counter the possibility of an impression developing, should data come
in on the strong side, that the Federal Reserve had become less will-
ing to act anticipatively to forestall a buildup of inflationary
pressures. A single 1/4 point tightening, however, would likely not
be adequate to contain inflation pressures if aggregate demand were
stronger than in the Greenbook or if the recent favorable behavior of
prices and costs were not to persist. Even in the staff forecast, a
single 1/4 point move probably is not sufficient to induce a downward
tilt to inflation. For example, the tighter alternative in the
Greenbook, in which policy is sufficiently restrictive to make
noticeable progress toward price stability in 1997 and beyond, assumes
that a quarter point tightening at this meeting would be followed by
considerable further firming later in the year.
(22) A 25 basis point rise in the federal funds rate at this
meeting as under alternative C would exceed the small amount currently
built into money market yields. As a consequence, interest rates
probably would rise across the maturity spectrum, and the exchange
rate would tend to firm. The extent of the rise in intermediate- and
longer-term interest rates would depend on whether the market saw this
as the first in a series of firming actions. Some such extrapolation
seems quite probable; market participants would reason that the new
direction for policy was unlikely to be limited to only a 1/4 percent-
age point increase, and might read the action as suggesting that the
Federal Reserve saw inflation pressures as relatively strong. The
interest rate increase might be more circumscribed if the tightening
were implemented through open market operations rather than by raising
the discount rate, and if the announcement emphasized that the Federal
Reserve itself saw the action as a limited adjustment reflecting, for
example, a view that the easing undertaken at the end of January to
gain greater assurance of satisfactory economic growth was no longer
needed. In any case, the large backup in intermediate- and long-term
yields that was associated with the initial firming in 1994 is
unlikely to be repeated: Nominal and real federal funds rates were
much lower then, and the Federal Reserve's public posture at that time
was that a substantial policy adjustment was to be expected. If the
Committee were to tighten more aggressively, by 50 basis points, real
rates would ratchet significantly higher, but the rise in nominal
longer-term rates might be limited by the perception of timely and
decisive action to counter a buildup in inflationary pressures. There
is some risk that market participants would read the action as sig-
nalling that the Federal Reserve was quite concerned that the economy
had excessive momentum and was prepared to tighten considerably fur-
ther, prompting a very substantial upward movement in interest rates,
especially in short and intermediate maturities, and in the dollar.
(23) The money and credit flows associated with a flat
federal funds rate under alternative B were discussed in the previous
sections of this document under the baseline case. In sum, the staff
would expect money and credit growth at or below their rates in the
first half, keeping M2 and M3 near the upper ends of their ranges and
debt in the middle of its range. Money growth would be expected to
slow somewhat more under alternative C, putting the broad aggregates
on paths more likely to leave them below the upper ends of their
longer-term ranges.
Directive Language
(24) Presented below for Committee consideration is draft
directive wording relating to the Humphrey-Hawkins ranges for 1996 and
Paragraph for 1996 and 1997 Ranges
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and
promote sustainable growth in output. In furtherance of
these objectives, the Committee REAFFIRMED at THIS [DEL: its]
meeting [DEL: in January] THE RANGES IT HAD established IN JANUARY
ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 2 to 6
percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of
OBJECTIVES, THE COMMITTEE AT THIS MEETING RAISED/LOWERED THE
RANGES IT HAD ESTABLISHED IN JANUARY FOR GROWTH OF M2 AND M3
TO RANGES OF ___ TO ___ PERCENT AND ___ TO ___PERCENT
RESPECTIVELY, MEASURED FROM THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1995 TO THE
FOURTH QUARTER OF 1996.] The monitoring range for growth of
total domestic nonfinancial debt was MAINTAINED set at 3 to 7
percent (RAISED/LOWERED TO ___ TO ___ PERCENT) for the year.
FOR 1997 THE COMMITTEE AGREED ON TENTATIVE RANGES FOR MONE-
TARY GROWTH, MEASURED FROM THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1996 TO THE
FOURTH QUARTER OF 1997, OF ___ TO ___ PERCENT FOR M2 AND
TO __ PERCENT FOR M3. THE COMMITTEE PROVISIONALLY SET THE
ASSOCIATED MONITORING RANGE FOR GROWTH OF TOTAL DOMESTIC
NONFINANCIAL DEBT AT ___ TO ___ PERCENT FOR 1997. The be-
havior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be evalu-
ated in the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. In the context of the Committee's long-run objec-
tives for price stability and sustainable economic growth,
and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve
restraint WOULD/MIGHT or slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve
restraint would/MIGHT be acceptable in the intermeeting
period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to
be consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming
