Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
December 18, 1998
Monetary Policy Alternatives
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the Staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) December 18, 1998
Class I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Although financial markets had not fully anticipated the Committee's quarter-
point easing of the intended federal funds rate at its November meeting, the accompanying
statement was interpreted by the market as suggesting that no additional action was likely at the
December meeting, so that market interest rates showed small, mixed changes. However, most
interest rates declined, on balance, over the intermeeting period as a whole (chart 1).1 The largest
decreases in Treasury rates--amounting to 27 basis points-came at longer maturities, in response
to a weaker outlook for foreign activity and to the effect of lower oil and other commodity prices
on the prospects for inflation. Real interest rates, as measured by yields on indexed securities,
were about flat over the period. On net, major equity indexes posted changes ranging from about
December meeting, although, judging by federal funds futures rates, market participants appear
to have built in about even odds of an easing at the February meeting and a very high probability
of action by mid-year.
(2) The November policy move seemed to encourage further unwinding of strains in
financial markets over the next week or two. Equity markets extended their rally, and quality
spreads and the implied volatility of bond and stock prices fell somewhat further from their
October highs (chart 2); issuance in the corporate bond market, which had picked up before the
meeting, remained heavy. Although markets have continued to be receptive to corporate debt
offerings, in recent weeks indicators of market stress have reversed a portion--and in some cases
more than all--of their improvement after the last meeting. In part, the recent deterioration in
market conditions reflects widespread warnings of lower corporate profits, heightened policy
uncertainties in Brazil, and a weaker outlook for Europe. The reduced willingness of market
participants to take positions-especially before year-end-appears to have decreased liquidity,
tending to exaggerate price movements.2
(3) The effective federal funds rate averaged very close to the intended level over the
intermeeting period, and variation around the intended rate declined somewhat from the elevated
levels of the preceding interval.3 Nonetheless, variability remained on the high side.
Intertemporal arbitrage of the federal funds rate has been impaired by continuing caution in
reserve management and perhaps also by the further erosion of required operating balances,
which flirted with record lows over the intermeeting period, as the introduction of new sweep
programs continued to trim transactions deposits.
(4) The weighted average value of the dollar against major currencies declined about
financial difficulties in Brazil and uncertainty generated by the impeachment proceedings
weighed on the dollar at times. Hostilities in Iraq have had a negligible effect on the foreign
exchange value of the dollar. In Europe, a slackening of inflation pressures and signs of slowing
economic growth prompted monetary easing, including a coordinated interest rate reduction by
euro-area central banks on December 3 and a reduction in the official repo rate of the Bank of
England on December 10. On balance, European long-term interest rates fell somewhat more
than those in the United States, but the dollar was about unchanged against the mark and sterling
over the intermeeting period. In Japan, by contrast, the call money target rate has held steady,
and the yield on the bellwether government bond rose about 45 basis points over the period,
boosted by expectations of sizable increases in government bond issuance to finance fiscal
stimulus. With the dollar-yen interest rate differential narrowing, the dollar depreciated 3-1/4
percent against the yen. The Bank of Canada matched the U.S. policy move in November, and
the U.S. dollar eased less than 1 percent against the Canadian dollar. U.S. monetary authorities
did not intervene in foreign exchange markets over the period.
(5) Latin American equity markets, which had moved higher early in the period in
the wake of the announcement of a financial support package for Brazil, displayed renewed
strains following the decision by that country's lower house of congress to reject a key fiscal
reform measure. Subsequent decisions by the legislature to delay consideration of other reforms
reinforced concerns about the policy outlook. Equity prices in Brazil declined 16 percent,
Brazil's Brady bond spread rose 350 basis points, and capital outflows continued. In Mexico,
equity prices and Brady bond spreads were little changed on balance. Mexican authorities
tightened monetary policy to support the peso, which ended the period up 2 percent against the
dollar. In Asia, some currencies experienced upward pressures against the dollar, resulting in
part from their increased competitiveness vis-a-vis Japan as the yen strengthened against those
currencies, as well as from the declining interest rates in industrial countries. Monetary
authorities in many of these emerging market economies took this opportunity to ease policy.
Equity prices continued to move higher in a number of Asian countries. The rise was particularly
large in Korea, where recent data suggest that the recession has bottomed out, and the Korean
won rose 8-3/4 percent against the dollar. The currencies of other Asian emerging market
economies were mixed, on balance, against the dollar over the period.
(6) The broad monetary aggregates continued to expand robustly in November. M2
advanced at a 10-1/4 percent pace, reflecting, in part, the reduction in its opportunity cost
resulting from monetary policy easings this fall. In addition, heavy mortgage refinancing activity
provided a fillip to liquid deposit growth, while demand for currency, both at home and abroad,
apparently continued to expand briskly. However, growth of M2 last month was a bit below both
the October rate and the projection in the November bluebook. The slight moderation reflected a
sharp slowing in retail money fund growth, possibly reflecting a shift by some investors back into
bond and stock mutual funds in association with the substantial rise in equity prices and the
partial quelling of market turbulence after mid-October. In contrast, M3 accelerated somewhat to
a 14-1/2 percent pace in November, appreciably above the rate projected in the last bluebook.
Much of the rapid increase in the non-M2 portion of M3 was accounted for by continued heavy
flows into institution-only money market funds. M3 was also bolstered by advances in RPs,
likely reflecting in part the funding of brisk securities acquisitions by banks. Incoming data
indicate some deceleration in both of these aggregates this month.
(7) From the fourth quarter of 1997 to the fourth quarter of 1998, M2 grew an
estimated 8-3/4 percent, placing this aggregate well above the upper bound of its 1 to 5 percent
range.4 In part, the robust expansion over the year can be attributed to relatively rapid growth in
nominal income and to the decline in market interest rates in late 1997 and in 1998. These
factors, though, cannot explain all the strength in M2; among the other forces that likely boosted
money growth in 1998 are increased demand for safe and liquid assets as investors responded to
the heightened volatility in financial markets in the second half of the year and households'
ongoing efforts to reverse some of the decline in the share of their portfolios allocated to
monetary assets, following several years of outsized gains in stock market wealth. M3 grew even
faster than M2, posting an estimated 10-3/4 percent rise from the final quarter of 1997 to the final
quarter of 1998, substantially above the upper end of its 2 to 6 percent range. The rapid advance
in M3--the fastest since 1984--importantly reflected the funding of vigorous growth in depository
credit with managed liabilities, many of which are in M3. The strong expansion in depository
credit owed in turn to rapid growth in spending, decisions by banks to lever up their capital by
purchasing substantial volumes of securities, and a shift by some borrowers to bank loans when
financial markets were troubled in the fall. However, M3 growth was boosted to an even greater
extent by flows into institution-only money funds, which are capturing a growing share of the
corporate cash management market and whose relative attractiveness was temporarily enhanced
late in the year by declines in short-term market interest rates.
(8) Domestic nonfinancial sector debt has expanded at a greater than 6 percent annual
rate over the past few months, with robust growth in nonfederal debt more than offsetting
paydowns by the federal government. Demand for credit continued to be buoyed by strong
spending on durable goods, housing, and business investment as well as by merger and
acquisition activity. Disruptions in securities markets since mid-August apparently did not
significantly damp private borrowing, as a well-capitalized banking system was able to
accommodate demand deflected from those markets and federally sponsored agencies continued
their aggressive acquisitions of mortgages. On a fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter basis, domestic
nonfinancial debt is projected to increase 6-1/4 percent this year--in the top half of its 3 to 7
percent range, considerably outstripping the growth of nominal income. The relatively strong
growth of debt may reflect the outsized contribution to GDP this year of domestic demand--a
higher proportion of which may be financed with U.S. debt than is likely to be the case for
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Sep. Oct. Nov. 1998:Q4
Money and Credit Aggregates
M1
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Adjusted1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
Excess reserves
pe - preliminary estimate
Policy Alternatives
(9) In light of the surprising strength in incoming real-side data as well as the
buoyancy of equity markets, the staff has boosted its forecast of GDP growth. Compared with
the projection in the November Greenbook, real GDP is anticipated to grow about 1/2 percentage
point faster in 1999, starting from a level of output in the fourth quarter of this year that is
somewhat higher than anticipated a month ago. The resulting growth of output is still a little
below that of potential in 1999 and again in 2000. Production has been supported in recent years
by sustained large increases in outlays for capital goods, inventories, consumer durables, and
housing. Given the high levels of these stocks relative to output and income, firms and
households should slow the rate of accumulation of these goods--a tendency reinforced in the
outlook by the projected slight weakening in equity prices, which holds down household net
worth and raises the cost of capital to businesses. The outlook for inflation is little changed, as
the impact of tighter labor markets than in the last forecast is nearly offset by the effects of recent
declines in oil and other commodity prices on the prospects for inflation and inflationary
expectations. Overall prices are anticipated to rise considerably faster in 1999 and 2000 than in
over the next two years remaining at about the level of 1998.
(10) If the Committee views the Greenbook forecast as acceptable and the most likely
outcome, it presumably would maintain the intended federal funds rate at 4-3/4 percent, as under
alternative B. The announcement just after the last Committee meeting indicated that the
cumulative easing since September had appropriately positioned policy to promote sustained
growth and low inflation. The incoming data might be read, on balance, as providing no
compelling reason to change that view. Although measures of activity have been on the strong
side, inflation has remained damped. Slower wage growth, along with declining commodity
prices, suggests that price pressures and inflation expectations should be contained for some
time, even in the face of what appear to be very tight labor markets. Moreover, the points of
vulnerability to the outlook seem about as they were at the time of the last policy ease. Foreign
economies are expected to strengthen on balance next year, but a significantly worse outcome
cannot be ruled out. Strains in U.S. financial markets, for the most part, do not differ materially
from mid-November, with credit spreads remaining elevated and markets still comparatively
unsettled. As a consequence of the mix of incoming information and the wording of the
November announcement, market participants do not expect a policy move in either direction at
this meeting, and, absent an especially compelling case for policy action, the Committee may
wish to avoid surprising them-particularly before year-end when thin markets and a reluctance to
put capital at risk could magnify the effects of any policy action.
(11) Against this backdrop, the choice of alternative B should have little effect on
domestic interest rates or dollar exchange rates. After year-end, when trading volume picks up
and investors again become more willing to put weaker credits on their balance sheets, conditions
in securities markets may well become more liquid, and risk spreads could well narrow. Still,
difficulties in foreign financial markets, domestic market disruptions, high volatility, and unusual
patterns of asset price movements of recent months are likely to leave a lasting imprint on
perceptions of risk, the appetite for it, and the resources dedicated to taking positions in financial
markets. As a consequence, spreads in many markets should remain appreciably above their
levels of last summer and liquidity somewhat reduced.
(12) The choice of the quarter-point increase in the federal funds rate of alternative C
would seem to rest on the judgment that the inflation outcome in the staff forecast is
unacceptable or that there are significant risks of a more substantial pickup in inflation. In the
staff forecast, core CPI inflation persists above 2 percent, and many other measures of inflation
notch higher. The Committee may believe that a worse inflationary scenario is plausible because
the economy continues to operate beyond its long-run potential, incoming data show that
aggregate demand has considerable momentum, and financial conditions in general may now be
too accommodative. The resilience of equity prices in the face of continued earnings
disappointments could suggest the possibility that the stock market will remain a positive
influence on demand, in contrast to the drag anticipated in the staff forecast. Although spreads
remain wide in the bond market, the absolute cost of credit, averaging across quality classes, is
little changed from early summer, when the Committee was concerned about inflation pressures.
Moreover, the cost of funds is down substantially for borrowers from banks as well as in the
commercial paper market owing to the monetary policy easings. And after the turn of the year,
markets might become even more attractive to private borrowers. In addition, the foreign
exchange value of the dollar against the major currencies has fallen 6 percent since mid-July.
Finally, the surprise easing of monetary policy in continental Europe may indicate an increased
willingness there to respond to signs of demand weakness, which would facilitate easing in other
countries and reduce the risk of a slackening in global economic activity.
(13) The case for easing further at some point, as in the 1/4 point reduction in the
federal funds rate at this meeting of alternative A, might rest on the view that there are
substantial risks of a shortfall in global demand and of more downward pressure on prices than
the Committee might find desirable. The prospects for Brazil remain fragile, and the lack of
progress in resolving fiscal imbalances in that country may now suggest even higher odds for
problems there that would spread to other emerging markets, feeding back to the United States.
Furthermore, the continuing steep declines in oil and commodity prices may be signalling that
worldwide demand is weaker than expected. Such price declines could themselves feed through
to further reductions in aggregate price measures and inflation expectations, elevating the real
federal funds rate, should the nominal funds rate remain unchanged, and putting upward pressure
on real long-term rates. Higher long-term rates could come at an inopportune time given a
possibly developing overhang in manufacturing capacity. Preemptive action to head off undue
restraint on spending might be viewed as especially appropriate if inflation already were expected
to be consistent with price stability. Indeed, market participants implicitly appear to be putting
some weight on these demand and price risks in that they continue to factor into market quotes
another policy ease by mid-year.
(14) Market participants would be surprised by either a tightening or an easing at this
meeting. Hence, reactions would be sharp in either direction, with substantial changes in interest
rates, equity prices, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar. Such reactions would be
exacerbated by the current illiquidity of markets and by the attempts of market participants to
divine the rationale for such an action. While the press release could help to shape the
interpretation of the action by market participants, they might suspect other motives or
undisclosed information. Reactions to a tightening would be greater than to an easing, because
the former would reverse recent trends in policy and would be inconsistent with the direction of
policy currently built into the yield curve.
(15) Under alternative B, conditions in credit markets could well improve after the turn
of the year, but lenders should stay on the cautious side as the growth of economic activity slows
and profits and incomes soften further. This caution is likely to keep the price of credit elevated
for more marginal business borrowers, but other businesses should continue to find credit readily
available. Most households, too, are unlikely to face unusual credit stringency, although lenders
will probably remain selective. As the growth of spending slows, business and household
borrowing should decelerate over coming quarters. Overall nonfinancial debt should slow to a
provisional range for 1999.
(16) Under alternative B, M2 and M3 are likely to decelerate substantially. The growth
of M2 in the first quarter will probably continue to exceed that of nominal income, in part
reflecting the lingering effects of the decline in market interest rates in the latter part of 1998. As
a result, velocity will decline, but by only about 3-1/2 percent at an annual rate, approximately
one-half of the pace that appears to have occurred in the current quarter. The slowing in the
decline in velocity owes in part to a tapering off of the enhanced demands for liquidity that
accompanied the financial turmoil. M3 is projected to grow faster than M2 as bank credit should
continue to expand rapidly, financed in part with wholesale instruments, and as inflows of
institution-only money funds are expected to stay brisk. Under alternative B, M2 and M3 are
projected to expand over the November-to-March period at annual rates of 7-1/2 and 9 percent,
respectively. Under all of the alternatives, M2 and M3 by March would be well above their
provisional ranges.
Directive Language
(17) Shown below are three options for the operational paragraph: Option 1 is the
traditional wording; option 2 is alternative language shown in the November bluebook; and
option 3 represents revised alternative language incorporating the Committee's comments at the
November meeting. Also, the monetary aggregates sentence in all three options contains
different choices to characterize expected money growth.
Traditional Wording of the Operating Paragraph
(Option 1)
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks
conditions in reserve markets consistent with MAINTAINING/INCREASING/ decreasing the
federal funds rate AT/to an average of around ____ [DEL: 4-3/4] percent. In the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving
careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, a
slightly/SOMEWHAT higher federal funds rate WOULD/MIGHT or a slightly/SOMEWHAT
lower federal funds rate would/MIGHT be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with moderate/some moderation
in/some pickup in the growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
Alternative Language for the Operating Paragraph
(Option 2)
To promote the Committee's long-run objectives of price stability and sustainable
economic growth, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with maintaining/increasing/decreasing the federal funds rate at/to an average of
around percent. In view of the evidence currently available, the Committee believes that
prospective developments are [equally likely to warrant an increase or a decrease (NO TILT)];
[more likely to warrant an increase/a decrease than a decrease/an increase (TILT)] in the federal
funds rate in coming months. Any potential changes in the federal funds rate operating objective
during the intermeeting period should be considered in that context. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with moderate/some moderation in/some pickup in the
growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
Revised Alternative Language for the Operating Paragraph
(Option 3)
Topromote the Committee's long-run objectives of price stability and sustainable
economic growth, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with maintaining/increasing/decreasing the federal funds rate at/to an average of
around ____ percent. In view of the evidence currently available, the Committee believes that
prospective developments are [equally likely to warrant an increase or a decrease (NO TILT)];
[more likely to warrant an increase/a decrease than a decrease/an increase (TILT)] in the federal
funds rate operating objective in coming months as well as during the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with moderate/some moderation
in/some pickup in the growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Money and Credit Aggregates
Alt. A Alt, B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C All Alternatives
Monthly Growth Rates
Sep-98
Oct-98
Nov-98
Dec-98
Jan-99
Feb-99
Mar-99
Quarterly Averages
1998 Q1
1998 Q2
1998 Q3
1998 Q4
1999 Q1
Growth Rate
From
Nov-98
Nov-98
Dec-98
Mar-99
Nov-98
Dec-98
Mar-99
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Monthly
Dec 97
Jan 98
Feb 98
Mar 98
Apr 98
May 98
Jun 98
Jul 98
Aug 98
Sep 98
Oct 98
Nov 98
Weekly
Oct 16 98
Oct 23 98
Oct 30 98
Nov 6 98
Nov 13 98
Nov 20 98
Nov 27 98
Dec 4 98
Dec 11 98
Dec 18 98
Daily
Dec 2 98
Dec 3 98
Dec 4 98
Dec 7 98
Dec 8 98
Dec 9 98
Dec 10 98
Dec 11 98
Dec 14 98
Dec 15 98
Dec 16 98
Dec 17 98
Dec 18 98
December 21, 1998
Short-term Long-term
Treasury bills s Comm. U.S, governamment constant Conventonal home
Federal secondary maket sond paper mury yds ndexed yields Mood Muncal mortgagessc fundsm maket paper aBon primary market
p -preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money and Debt Aggregates
December21,1998
Seasonally adjusted
Money stock measures and liquid assets Domestic nonfinancial iebt
nontransactions components .
Period M1 M2 M3 rnm other' total
In M2 In M3 only government'
Annual growth rates(S):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
Levels (Sbillions)t
Monthly
Weekly
1998-Nov. 2 1091.0 4360.3 3269.3 1513.0 5873.3
Dec. 7p 1084.3 4394.3 3310.0 1556.2 5950.5
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Treasury bills Tree
Period Net Redemptions Net i Net purchases 3
purchases (-) change 1 ear 1-5 5-10
Weekly
September 9
December 2
9
16
Memo: LEVEL (bll. $)
December 16
S598 2,744
1,918 2,766 416 15,471
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Nel change
outrlght
holdings
total 4
Net RPs
5
*21,985
4,262
2.314
9.405
December 16
" yer I 1-S 5-10 I ov0l9 I tola
December 18, 1998
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
' '
