Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
JANUARY 30, 1998
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) January 30, 1998
Class I -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Financial market developments over the intermeeting period were once again
dominated by investors' changing perceptions of the Asian economic turmoil and its potential
repercussions for the U.S. economy. The Committee's widely anticipated decision to hold
policy unchanged at its December meeting elicited essentially no market response, and
Treasury securities traded in a relatively narrow range through the year-end (Chart 1).1 Early
in January, however, heightened concerns over the turbulence in Asia combined with its
implications for U.S. prices and output, which were underscored by statements of Federal
Reserve officials, seemed to augment the demand for dollar-denominated assets and especially
for Treasury securities. By mid-January, yields on Treasury notes and bonds had dropped as
much as 50 basis points from their levels at the December FOMC meeting. Short-term rates
fell over these weeks as well, apparently on the view that the impact here of troubles in Asia
could prompt an easing in monetary policy in coming months. Over the remainder of the
intermeeting period, Treasury yields retraced some of their earlier declines, partly as market
participants seemed to become more confident that effective steps were being taken to deal
with the situations in several Asian countries. On balance, intermediate- and long-term
Treasury yields fell 15 to 35 basis points over the intermeeting period while yields on short-
term Treasuries edged lower. The rally in bond markets over the intermeeting period
probably helped to support equity prices. Corporate earnings announcements for the fourth
quarter for the most part met or exceeded analysts' downward-revised expectations, but
concerns about the effects of Asian developments made investors more cautious in their
assessment of the trajectory for corporate profits going forward. Many major stock price
indexes recorded small gains on balance.
(2) The slope of the Treasury yield curve--measured as the yield spread between
the ten-year Treasury note and the three-month Treasury bill--narrowed a little further over
the intermeeting period and, at about 35 basis points currently, the spread has fallen 3/4
percentage point since August to stand considerably below its average level of 1-1/4 percentage
points since 1965 (Chart 2). Unlike most prior episodes of pronounced flattening in the yield
curve, this time around there have been sizable declines in yields at maturities of two years or
more while those for short-term Treasury bills, anchored by Federal Reserve policy, have held
fairly steady. Some of the drop in longer-term rates still likely reflects enhanced demand for
safe and liquid dollar assets amid turmoil in foreign markets, in effect reducing the term
premium at the long end of the yield curve. In addition, investors' concerns about an
incipient buildup in inflationary pressures that would prompt monetary policy tightening have
been much attenuated since August. Indeed, the current shape of the yield curve seems
consistent with a view common among market participants that calls for a slowing in output
growth accompanied by low and stable inflation, with relatively minor adjustments to the
stance of monetary policy. Judging from recent federal funds futures quotes, market
participants currently rate the odds for a policy easing at the February FOMC meeting as slim
at most, but consider the probability of a small easing by midyear to be somewhat higher.
(3) Since the December FOMC meeting, the dollar has continued to appreciate
against the currencies of emerging market economies in Asia. The dollar rose a further 6
percent against the won over the intermeeting period, but has been little changed since early
January. The factors that have helped to stabilize the situation in Korea include President-
elect Kim Dae-jung's public support of strong adjustment measures and material progress in
resolving the short-term liquidity problems of Korean financial institutions. The Indonesian
rupiah fell 46 percent against the dollar over the intermeeting period on concerns about the
government's commitment to economic reform and about longer-term political stability. The
weakness in the rupiah led to downward pressures on other regional currencies. The
Malaysian ringgit and Thai baht fell 8 percent and 11 percent, respectively, vis-a-vis the
dollar over the intermeeting period. Equity markets rallied in those countries whose
currencies had fallen the most, apparently as some investors felt that both equity prices and
currencies had dropped far enough to warrant taking a chance on companies with strong
export potential.
(4) On balance, the exchange value of the dollar against the currencies of most
industrialized countries was up somewhat over the intermeeting period. European currencies
were affected by growing market realization of the adverse impact of the Asian crisis on
European economies. The dollar gained around 2 percent against the Canadian dollar,
. To counter the
associated decline in the Monetary Conditions Index, the Bank of Canada raised short-term
rates 50 basis points. The one major exception was the yen, which appreciated 3 percent
against the dollar on balance, as the prospects for additional fiscal stimulus, along with
somewhat greater stability in the region, appeared to support the yen.
. The Desk did not intervene in the foreign
exchange market during the period.
(5) Growth of the broad monetary aggregates finished 1997 on a strong note and
that tone has been sustained into the new year. M2 expanded at a 6 percent pace in the
fourth quarter last year, boosting its growth over the four quarters of 1997 to just above the
upper end of its annual range.2 The velocity of M2 fell in the fourth quarter of 1997 for the
second time in as many quarters, retracing a small portion of its upward drift over the period
since mid-1994. M2 growth in January is now projected at 7 1/2 percent, well above the staffs
projection at the December FOMC meeting. Much of this strength in M2 has likely been
associated with recent gains in nominal income. In addition, M2 has been boosted by a
pickup of mortgage refinancing and, perhaps, some substitution away from market instruments
whose yields have declined relative to those on M2 assets.3 M3 also accelerated in the last
quarter of 1997, and its growth over the year--at 8 1/4 percent--came in well above the upper
end of its annual range. M3 growth in January--now projected at 10 1/2 percent--also exceeded
the staff projection in December and was propelled by the strength in M2, a sharp jump in RP
financing by a few banks, and continued solid expansion in bank credit. Business loan
growth at banks remained brisk in December and January; the strength was related to
financing needs associated with a spate of merger activity in recent months and perhaps rising
business inventories.
(6) Total domestic nonfinancial debt advanced at about a 5 percent pace in
December, putting its estimated annual growth over 1997 at about 4-1/2 percent--well within the
nonfederal debt growth apparently remained elevated in December, bolstered by strong
business borrowing. Credit supply conditions have changed little on balance of late. In
securities markets, risk spreads have been about flat, except for a small firming of junk
spreads. At domestic banks, C&I loan standards were about unchanged, and spreads were
narrowed further, albeit by fewer banks than in previous quarters. At branches and agencies
of foreign banks, particularly Japanese institutions, however, the recent pace of tightening of
terms and standards picked up. The survey results also suggested a continued modest
tightening in standards on credit card and other consumer loans.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Dec. Jan. 97:Q4 Jan.
Money and Credit Aggregates
M1
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Adjusted1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves 2
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
Excess reserves 1683
Longer-Term Scenarios
(7) This section considers alternative longer-term scenarios for monetary policy
and highlights some important risks over the Greenbook forecast horizon and beyond.
Starting from a "baseline" scenario that judgmentally extends the Greenbook forecast, the staff
model was used to gauge the effects of: 1) an alternative monetary policy designed to
achieve virtual price stability in around five years; 2) a delayed recovery in Asia; and 3) a
more favorable productivity trend.
(8) For the baseline extension, key domestic assumptions are that fiscal policy
gradually moves the federal budget to a position of modest surplus and that the NAIRU is 5-1/2
percent. Owing to the potential for an unsustainable widening of the current account deficit,
the baseline extension builds in a real depreciation of the dollar. Specifically, we have
assumed a 1-1/2 percent real depreciation each year, which is sufficient to stabilize the current
account deficit relative to GDP. Foreign real GDP growth picks up to an above-trend pace in
over the next several years.
(9) In the baseline scenario, shown by solid lines in Chart 3, core PCE inflation
remains below 2 percent through the end of the Greenbook projection period. By 2000,
however, the Committee faces some upward pressures on inflation: The unemployment rate
remains below the staff estimate of the NAIRU, and the dollar and foreign GDP swing from
depressing to buoying U.S. GDP and inflation. The Committee can hold inflation to a little
more than 2 percent by increasing the nominal federal funds rate from 5-1/2 to 6 percent in
large part because it is associated with a more pronounced rise in bond yields as the yield
curve reverts to a more normal slope. The unemployment rate needs to move up to slightly
above the NAIRU to offset the inflationary impacts of the continuing decline in the dollar.5
Because the favorable supply shocks that have brought inflation down in recent years are
assumed not to persist in the baseline, further disinflation requires that the unemployment rate
exceed the NAIRU by even more for a time.6 To achieve virtual price stability--defined as
temporarily above the NAIRU by a full percentage point.
(10) Chart 4 presents a prolonged Asian shock scenario in which the difficulties in
the economies of Asia unwind much more gradually than in the baseline, where they start to
diminish in 1999 and then largely disappear by 2001. 7 The U.S. economy is affected by both
a lower level of foreign GDP and a dollar that, at least initially, falls more slowly than in the
baseline, though it then depreciates more rapidly toward the end of the period. The relatively
higher dollar contributes to better near-term inflation performance, even though the
Committee is assumed to lower interest rates to cushion the contractionary effect on output.
A federal funds rate that drops as much as 75 basis points below the baseline trajectory is
sufficient to keep output close to the baseline path.
(11) Chart 5 presents two scenarios in which trend productivity growth is
permanently raised one percentage point. In the staffs model, higher trend productivity
growth will over time increase the rate of growth of real wages by an equivalent amount and
raise the level of the real interest rate associated with a normal level of resource utilization
and stable inflation. Real rates must be higher because faster economic growth boosts
permanent income, thereby stimulating consumption relative to current income, and because
investment must rise to ensure that the capital stock keeps pace with production, which is
growing faster. In the fixed unemployment path scenario, the Committee raises rates
immediately to keep aggregate demand in line with aggregate supply. This limits the demand
for labor and any upward pressure on wages. Moreover, wages are inherently less flexible
than prices, so firms with reduced unit labor costs compete to expand output and this puts
downward pressure on price inflation. Alternatively, the Federal Reserve could keep real
rates the same for awhile, allowing the increase in demand to reduce the unemployment rate
(fixed long-run inflation scenario). The resulting rise in labor compensation does not push
up inflation for a time because the increase in productivity holds down unit labor costs. This
configuration might make it appear that the economy has a lower NAIRU, but ultimately the
unemployment rate must return to the true, unchanged NAIRU to avoid ever-rising inflation.
Long-Run Ranges for 1998
(12) As background for the Committee's discussion of the annual ranges for 1998,
the table below presents staff projections for money and debt consistent with the Greenbook
forecast, as well as three alternative sets of ranges for Committee consideration.
Growth of Money and Debt and Alternative Ranges
(actual) (projected) (provisional)
M2 5.1 3-1/2 1 to 5 1 to 5 1 to 5
M3 8.3 6-3/4 2 to 6 3 to 7 2 to 6
Debt 4.6 5-1/4 3 to 7 3 to 7 2 to 6
Nominal GDP 5.8 3-1/2
Projected money and debt growth
(13) M2 growth is expected to decline appreciably from 5 percent over the four
quarters of last year to 3-1/2 percent this year. The slowing in the rate of expansion of M2
reflects projected deceleration in nominal GDP from growth of 5-3/4 percent last year to 3-1/2
percent this year, and the Greenbook assumption of an unchanged stance of monetary policy,
which keeps the opportunity cost of holding M2 balances unchanged. As shown in the lower
panel of Chart 6, from mid-1994 to mid-1997 a small uptrend in M2 velocity was associated
with a stable spread, on balance, of the three-month Treasury bill rate over the weighted-
average own rate on the components of M2. However, over the final two quarters of last
year, V2 remained near its second-quarter level, with little change in M2's opportunity cost.
In the staff forecast, the period of no velocity trend is extended, as nominal GDP and M2
grow at the same rate this year. One source of the previous uptrend in V2, and associated
downtrend in M2 demand, may well have been continued allocation of savings into the equity
market; in 1998, owing to the downdraft of equity prices predicted by the staff, we expect
slower inflows to stock mutual funds and greater preference for more secure M2 assets, which
have fixed principal values.
(14) The staff expects most of the deceleration in nominal GDP and M2 in 1998 to
show through to M3. The growth in this aggregate is projected to decline from 8-1/4 percent
last year to 6-3/4 percent this year. Even so, the expansion of M3 relative to that of GDP
remains high, implying a further appreciable decline in M3 velocity (Chart 7). The forecast
of M3 has been elevated by the rapid growth in both bank credit and M3 in recent months
and by the projection of a relatively robust pace of depository credit expansion this year. As
discussed below, total debt growth is likely to be strong relative to GDP this year, and with
profit margins and capitalization of depositories at high levels, these instititutions are expected
to remain sufficiently accommodative suppliers of credit to hold on to their share of lending.
Also, heavy inflows to institution-only money funds likely will boost M3 growth again this
year, as businesses further increase their reliance on these money funds as an attractive cash
management instrument.
(15) Unlike the deceleration foreseen for nominal GDP and the broader money
aggregates, growth of the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is anticipated to pick up from
a 4-1/2 percent rate last year to a 5-1/4 percent rate this year. Thus, debt velocity is expected to
drop in 1998, after increasing on balance over the last two years (Chart 7). To a minor
extent, the rise in debt relative to spending reflects the evident surge in home mortgage
refinancings, which is likely to entail some cashing out of equity. More important, business
borrowing should be boosted relative to capital spending this year by weaker growth of
internal funds as profits lag as well as by increased net retirements of equities associated with
merger and acquisition and share repurchase activity. With debt rising relative to income for
businesses, lenders may become somewhat wary of prospective repayment performance.
However, the staff does not anticipate a significant deterioration in business or household
credit quality or a substantial pullback in credit availability, in part because refinancing of
outstanding debt at lower rates will reduce debt-service obligations.
Issues related to money and debt ranges
(16) In recent years, the Committee has selected ranges for both of the broad
monetary aggregates on the rationale that, given continued heightened uncertainty about
money demand, the ranges should represent benchmarks for average money growth over time
under conditions of price stability and normal velocity behavior, not forecasts of money
growth over the specific upcoming year or two. The debt range by contrast has been used to
convey projected growth over the particular upcoming year or two. The Committee's choice
of ranges at this meeting would seem to boil down to whether to continue past practice, as in
alternative I, to switch the rationale for the M3 range from the one previously used for the
broader monetary aggregates ranges to the one that in the past applied mainly to the debt
range, as in alternative I, or to switch the rationale for the debt range to one more consistent
with price stability, as in alternative III.
(17) In the past, one source of conflict between the two rationales for choosing
annual ranges for the money and credit aggregates has been the fact that nominal GDP was
anticipated to grow at a pace that differed from what would be expected under conditions of
price stability. This conflict does not arise this year. The staff estimates that in future years
measured potential real GDP will grow at an annual rate of 2-1/2 percent and broad GDP price
indexes will have a bias of a bit more than a 1/2 percentage point per year. Thus, under
conditions of true price stability, nominal GDP would grow at about a 3 percent rate--very
close to the 3-1/2 percent nominal GDP growth that the staff is projecting for 1998.
(18) With M2 velocity anticipated to be about flat in 1998, as it would be under
conditions of sustained price stability, M2 as projected for 1998 and under conditions of price
stability are very close, and both fall well within the Committee's provisional range. Even if
the stance of policy needs to be substantially tightened or eased, M2 is likely to be in its
current range. Under the tighter or easier scenarios of the Greenbook, Part I, in which the
FOMC's federal funds rate intention is adjusted upward or downward by 25 basis points in
each quarter of this year, annual M2 growth in 1998 likely would vary from 3-1/2 percent by
less than one percentage point.
(19) The current provisional range for M3 is consistent with the behavior of that
aggregate under price stability if it grows nearly one percentage point faster than GDP, as it
did on average over the three decades prior to the 1990s.8 Nonetheless, the staff forecast
places M3 growth well above this provisional range, as relatively rapid credit growth, a
healthy depository share of that growth, and continued structural shifts toward using M3
money funds for cash management result in a further steep decline in M3 velocity this year
that is not likely to persist in the long run. A question for the Committee is whether to move
the range to encompass likely growth (alternative II) or to leave it at the provisional, price
stability, range.
(20) The provisional debt range readily encompasses the staff projection for 1998,
but it is not likely to be consistent with the behavior of debt under conditions of price
stability. In the steady state, the stock of business capital and consumer durables--and the
debt used to finance them--probably would be growing at close to the rate of GDP. To be
sure, there are a number of influences that might cause the velocity of debt to trend one way
or another for a considerable period--for example, changes in tax laws or tastes that shifted
the debt/equity mix, or financial innovation that promoted greater intermediation and a
concomitant increase in both financial assets and liabilities on balance sheets. On average
beginning in 1960, debt growth has exceeded that of nominal GDP somewhat. But that
overage is entirely accounted for by the 1980s, when firms and households greatly increased
their leverage, and innovation and deregulation encouraged the expansion of financial
intermediation. Hence, going forward, absent evidence of ongoing disturbances to the
relationship between debt and spending, the best estimate of steady-state debt growth would
seem to be equal to the growth rate of nominal GDP. If the Committee wanted to adopt the
same price-stability rationale for the debt aggregate that it has in the past for M2 and M3, a
significant reduction of the range would seem to be called for, perhaps to 1 to 5 percent or, as
a halfway house, 2 to 6 percent, as in alternative III, matching the ranges for debt and M3.
However, even this alternative would leave the midpoint of the range well below the staffs
projection for debt this year.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(21) The staff is projecting reasonably steady measured CPI inflation at around 2
percent over the second half of 1998 and in 1999, after increases of only about half that size
over the first half of this year. In this forecast, upward pressure on inflation associated with a
tight labor market is offset by downward pressures emanating importantly from the rise in the
dollar and decline in oil prices in 1997 and early 1998 and from declining capacity utilization.
The staff forecast is built on an unchanged federal funds rate, and if the Committee agrees
that this is both a reasonable and desirable outcome under those conditions, retaining the
current stance of policy under alternative B would be appropriate. Even if the Committee
suspects that the staff forecast has misjudged the likely economic situation, in the current
circumstances waiting for additional information might be seen as unlikely to have
significantly destabilizing effects on the economy. If, for example, the damping effects of the
Asian crisis turn out to be greater than is built into the forecast, since the economy still would
be operating beyond its sustainable potential for a while, the Committee should have enough
time to take appropriate countervailing action before the resulting economic weakness and
disinflation proceeds further or faster than the Committee would find desirable. On the other
hand, even if inflation pressures turn out to be more intense than the staff expects--perhaps
because persistent tightness in labor markets continues to boost the growth of compensation
increasingly beyond that of productivity--downward price pressures already in the pipeline
will still keep inflation quite low for a time. In these circumstances, the Committee should be
able to head off a potential upturn in inflation before higher actual inflation gets built into
wage and price decisions.
(22) Because markets put very low odds on any move at the February meeting,
interest rates should not react significantly if the Committee keeps the stance of policy
unchanged. A portion of the flight-to-quality effects seems to have unwound in the last two
weeks as conditions in parts of Asia appeared to improve. Markets, though, are likely to
remain highly sensitive to developments abroad and at home that bear on the strength of final
demands and pressures on prices in the United States, given unusually divergent views on the
outlook among market participants. Rates on intermediate- and long-term Treasury securities
could retrace still more of their recent backup if incoming data, consistent with the staff
outlook, confirm the slowdown in growth, including a further buildup of inventories, and a
flattening of consumer prices. Worries about corporate earnings should mount, though not
enough to boost quality spreads appreciably in corporate bond markets or put much downward
pressure on equity prices, which would be bolstered by any downward drift in bond yields.
The dollar would be expected to trade around its levels of late, off some from its recent peak
(23) The Committee may see sufficient chances of a shortfall in activity from the
staff forecast to suggest a small easing at this time--as in the 25 basis point decline in the
federal funds rate under alternative A. The Committee has held the nominal federal funds
rate constant since March, even as inflation and inflation expectations have fallen, raising the
real funds rate to a high level. The rise in the real funds rate may have been viewed as a
beneficial development when risks in the economic outlook seemed tilted toward strong
economic growth and a rising output gap. However, given forecasts that now see appreciably
slower growth and lower inflation than was earlier foreseen, the Committee may now interpret
the recent increase in the short-term real rate as risking tighter financial conditions than would
be consistent with satisfactory economic performance. Indeed, the very damped behavior of
the CPI over the first half of this year in the staff forecast may portend a further reduction in
inflation expectations and an additional rise in real short-term rates over coming months if the
nominal funds rate were left unchanged. To date, the steady nominal funds rate does not
seem to have appreciably impeded the drop in nominal, and possibly real, long-term rates as
the market took out expected tightening and built in a small ease. But at some point, failure
to ratify current expectations might put upward pressure on rates, nominal and real, and more
certainly would inhibit the pricing in of further easing. This suggests that an easing of policy
could have an unusually pronounced effect on long-term rates over time because it would
facilitate building in further easing, as well as reduce short-term rates by nearly the full 25
basis point decline in the funds rate. The drop in yields would tend to boost equity prices
and depress the dollar.
(24) Alternative C might be favored if the Committee saw the economy as
continuing to operate beyond its potential, with the risk that sustained pressures on labor
markets might show through more forcefully than in the staff forecast to higher labor costs
and prices, perhaps hinted at in the recent employment cost report. Domestic spending
continues to be supported by very favorable conditions in debt and equity markets. The
decline in long-term rates should spur spending, in part as borrowers free cash flow by
refinancing higher cost debt. In this environment, counting on Asian developments to defuse
enough of the momentum in the economy may be viewed as too risky, especially as the
rebound in Asian stock markets and in commodity prices may suggest that limits to Asian
turmoil may be in sight. In response to the tightening, short-term rates would rise by at least
the 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate. Intermediate- and long-term yields
would also rise, although market participants are unlikely to build in much further tightening
in light of the situation in Asia, thereby constraining the extent of the increase. Stocks would
come under some selling pressure, accentuated perhaps by the uncertainty precipitated by such
a surprise in policy. The dollar would tend to rise on foreign exchange markets.
(25) As discussed in detail in the Long-Run Ranges section of this bluebook, we
would expect growth of the broad money aggregates to slow this year relative to last year and
relative to their pace of expansion in recent months. That deceleration is expected to start
soon, in keeping with the moderation in nominal income. By June, M2 would be 4-1/4 percent
at an annual rate above its fourth-quarter level--in the upper portion of its provisional range.
M3 would be 7-1/2 percent above its base, well above the upper end of its provisional range.
Borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to be well maintained in coming
months, paced by the business sector. Household debt growth will continue to be led by
mortgage financing, owing in part to the burst in refinancing activity and accompanying cash-
outs, and to continued aggressive promotion to subprime borrowers. The very small federal
deficit implies that, on balance, Treasury debt issuance will only about replace maturing debt.
As a consequence, debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to grow at a 5 percent
annual rate over the first half of 1998, at the midpoint of its provisional range.
Directive Language
(26) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording relating
to the Committee's ranges for the aggregates in 1998 and the operational paragraph for the
intermeeting period.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In furtherance of
these objectives, the Committee at THIS [DEL:its] meeting [DEL: in July reaffirmed the] ESTABLISHED
ranges [DEL: it had established in February] for growth of M2 and M3 of ____ TO ___ [DEL: 1 to 5] percent
and ____ TO ____ [DEL: 2 to 6] percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1997 [DEL: 1996] to
the fourth quarter of 1998 [DEL: 1997]. The range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt
was SET AT ____ TO ____ [DEL: maintained at 3 to 7] percent for the year. [DEL: For 1998, the Committee
agreed on a tentative basis to set the same ranges as in 1997 for growth of the monetary
aggregates and debt, measured from the fourth quarter of 1997 to the fourth quarter of 1998.]
The behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light of progress
toward price level stability, movements in their velocities, and developments in the economy
and financial markets.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks
conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/DECREASING the
federal funds rate at/TO an average of around ____ [DEL: 5-1/2] percent. In the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, a
SOMEWHAT/slightly higher federal funds rate WOULD/MIGHT or a SOMEWHAT/
slightly lower federal funds rate WOULD/might be acceptable in the intermeeting period.
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with some moderation in
the growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Money and Credit Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
-------------------------
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
All Alternatives
Monthly Growth Rates
Sep-97
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan-98
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Quarterly Averages
97 Q2
97 Q3
97 Q4
98 Q1
98 Q2
Growth Rate
From To
Jan-98 Jun-98
