Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) August 16, 2001
Class II – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent D evelopments
(1) Market expectations for the path of the federal funds rate moved up in
late June as investors apparently read the Committee’s choice of a 25 basis point
easing at the June meeting and the May minutes released the next day as evidence that
the Committee might ease in the future by less than previously thought.1  This step-up
was short-lived , though, as market participants  began to mark down the expected path
for policy in light of predominantly disappointing news on economic activity and
corporate earnings and generally benign inflation reports.  Policy expectations
declined considerably following the Chairman’s monetary policy testimony in mid-
July–which was seen as emphasizing downside risks for the economy in general and
capital spending in particular–and the anecdotal reports in the August
Beigebook–which were viewed as signs that economic weakness was becoming  more
widespread.  Concerns about the deteriorating economic outlook in Europe and
Japan, along with the continuing woes of Argentina and some other emerging market
countries, added to  the sense of uncertain ty and pessim ism in globa l financial markets .
Futures market quotes suggest that investors are confident that the FOMC will ease
by at least ¼ percentage poin t at this meeting (chart 1).  Futures prices imply a path
for the funds ra te that troughs at about 3¼ percent early next year–about ¼
percentage point lower and a few months later than expected at the time of the June
Chart 1
Financial Market Indicators
Aug Oct Dec Feb Apr Jun Aug Oct
2001 2002
June 26, 2001
August 16, 2001
Expected Federal Funds Rates Estimated from
Financial Futures*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures rates with an
allowance for term premia and other adjustments.
May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul
2000 2001
Selected Treasury Yields*
*Nominal Treasury yields are estimated from a smoothed yield curve based
on off-the-run securities.
May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul
2000 2001
High Yield
(left scale)
Ten-year BBB
 (right scale)
Ten-year Swap
(right scale)
Selected Private Long-Term Yields
May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul
2000 2001
High Yield
(left scale)
Ten-year BBB
(right scale)
Selected Risk Spreads*
*Computed as the spread of the yield on the Merrill Lynch 175 index and
an estimated ten-year BBB yield over ten-year swap rates.
May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul
2000 2001
Wilshire 5000
Selected Equity Indexes
May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul
2000 2001
Broad Index
Major Currencies Index
Other Important
Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Exchange Rates
FOMC meeting–before rebounding to about 4 percent or so by late next year.2
(2) The souring mood regarding the economic outlook and the attendant
change in expectations for monetary policy were associated with widespread declines
in longer-term yields over the period and a selloff in equity markets.  Off-the-run
nominal Treasury coupon yields fell 20 to 30 basis points, with shorter maturities
registering the steepest declines.3  By contrast, yields on longer-term Treasury
inflation-indexed securities were little changed, implying that the inflation
compensation in nominal securities fell about 25 basis points.4  Despite the more
pessimistic economic outlook, investment- and most speculative-grade private yields
declined about in line with comparable off-the-run Treasury yields, leaving risk
spreads little changed on balance.  As an exception to this general pattern, yields on
junk bonds in the telecom sector  rose further to widen already hefty spreads.
Through early August, stock prices largely proved resilient to a spate of negative
earnings announcements and resulting cuts in analysts’ earnings projections for the
remainder of this year.  But equity prices have slumped since then in response to the
accumulation of adverse news on the economy and earnings; broad indexes have
fallen 2¾ to 6½ percent over the period, with especially disappointing reports on
profits for high-tech firms weighing on the Nasdaq.
(3) The index of the dollar’s trade-weighted exchange value against other
major currencies declined 2½ percent over the period, with much of this change
occurring in recent days.  While investors marked down their expectations of
economic growth around the world and interest rates and equity prices fell in most
industrial countries, the downward revision to the expected path of policy rates
seemed greatest in the United States.  In addition, public debate about the merits of
the “strong-dollar” policy intensified over the intermeeting period, and m arket
concerns about the sustainability of the U.S. current account deficit were heightened
by the publication this week of the IMF Article IV  review of the U .S. economy.  O n
balance since the June meeting, the dollar has fallen 6 percent against the euro and 3
percent against the yen despite further discouraging news about the economies of
Europe and Japan .  On August 14, the Bank of Japan surprised many market
participants by announcing an increase in its provision of liquidity to the financial
system.  The dollar gained 1 percent on balance against the Canadian dollar; the Bank
of Canada cut its policy rate 25 basis points in mid-July, citing spillover effects from
slower growth in the U.S. economy.  Over the intermeeting period,
U.S. monetary authorities did not intervene.
(4) The dollar was little changed against a basket of currencies of our o ther
important trading partners.  Concerns about the Argentine government’s ab ility to
resolve its budget problems were not allayed by the announcement of a fiscal austerity
plan requiring budgetary balance on a month-to-month basis.  The runoff of private-
sector deposits from the banking system was very steep, and spreads of Argentine
debt over comparable Treasuries remained high and volatile.  Spillovers from the
turmoil in Argentina added to problems in Brazil, which resorted to monetary policy
tightening and foreign exchange intervention  to blunt pressure on the real.  Despite
the announcement in early August that Brazil would obtain a new $15 billion IMF
program, the real has depreciated 7½ percent against the dollar on net over the
intermeeting  period.  Mexican financial markets were large ly unaffected by the turmoil
elsewhere in Latin America, and the peso held steady even as the central bank eased
policy.  In emerging Asia, the ongoing worsening of global high-tech markets put
downward pressure on exchange rates and equity prices in several countries.
(5) In the United States, overall private borrowing appears to have slowed
from the brisk pace registered in the spring (chart 2).  In recent months, issuance of
corporate bonds has dropped well below its earlier torrid rate, while commercial paper
and business loans at banks have continued to contract.  According to respondents to
the August Senior Loan Officer Survey, almost all of whom represent large banks, the
recent decline in business loans owed importantly to a weakening in demand that has
stemmed, in part, from firms scaling back their capital spending.  These banks also
reported a further tightening of terms and standards on business loans, although the
fraction doing so was down from prior surveys.  In the household sector, mortgage
debt growth has slowed only a little, but the expansion of consumer credit has fallen
off appreciably.  By contrast, federal debt growth has turned up in the last couple of
months–albeit probably only temporarily–reflecting both weaker-than-expected tax
receipts and borrowing to finance the tax rebates.
(6) M2 growth remained strong in July, at about 8½ percent, but was below
the average pace over the first half of this year.  The expansion over the first half was
supported by declining opportunity costs associated with policy easing, but M2
growth was faster than would have been expected based on historical re lationships.
Indeed, M2 velocity fell at a 6¾ percent rate, the most rapid half-year decline since the
early 1980s.  A portion of this unusual strength likely owes to a surge in mortgage
refinancing spurred by declining long-term interest rates late last year and also to the
increase in stock market volatility and steep declines in equity prices earlier this year,
Chart 2
      Growth of M2 and Selected Debt Aggregates
Growth of Nonfederal Debt
Annualized
Percent
Q1 A M J J
1999 2000 2001
p - Preliminary.
f - Forecast.
Growth of Federal Debt
Annualized
Percent
Q1 A M J J
1999 2000 2001
p - Preliminary.
Growth of Business Debt
Sum of Selected Components*
Annualized
Percent
p - Preliminary.
f - Forecast.
*Bonds, commercial paper, and C&I loans.
Q1 A M J J
1999 2000 2001
Growth of M2
Annualized
Percent
p - Preliminary.
f - Forecast.
Q1 A M J J A
1999 2000 2001
Growth of Consumer Credit
Annualized
Percent
p
f
p - Preliminary.
f - Forecast.
Q1 A M J J
1999 2000 2001
which may have prompted portfolio substitutions toward  liquid deposits and money
funds.  The recent slowing in  M2 reflects in part the ebbing of portfolio ad justments
to opportun ity costs and perhaps the effects of somewhat less volat ile equ ity markets.
Tending to offset this underlying slowing in the near term, M2 has been boosted of
late by tax rebates and continued strong demand for U .S. currency abroad, particularly
in Argentina.
The Expected Path of the Federal Funds Rate and Investor Uncertainty
The staff often presents measures of the expected path of the federal funds rate derived
from federal funds and eurodollar futures, as in the panel below.  This path is constructed
by subtracting estimates of term premiums from futures quotes and, in the case of
eurodollar futures, the premium of the spot three-month LIBOR rate (the settlement rate
for the eurodollar futures contract) over the target federal funds rate.  Estimates of term
premiums are based on historical differences between futures rates and subsequent spot
rates.  The reliance on such estimates necessarily implies some imprecision in the calculated
expected funds rate path.  But the estimated expected funds rate path has nonetheless
seemed to provide a reasonable measure of market participants’ mean expectation of
possible future federal funds rates.
In addition to a mean expectation of future federal funds rates, investors also have views
about the variance of possible future federal funds rates.  A measure of this type of
uncertainty–investors’ perceptions of the likely range of potential outcomes for the federal
funds rate–can be obtained from the prices of options on eurodollar futures using a
standard option-pricing formula.  Such estimates indicate that investors believe there is a 90
percent probability that realized funds rates over the next twelve months will fall in the
shaded area.  Thus, although the expected funds rate path indicates that investors are
forecasting some modest further easing into early next year followed by substantial
tightening, the 2¼ percentage point width of the shaded area twelve months from now
suggests that they believe it quite possible that the actual funds rate a year from now could
turn out to be considerably higher or lower than their current mean expectation of almost 4
percent.
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Apr 2001 May 2001 Jun 2001 Jul 2001 (p)
Money and Credit Aggregates
Policy Alternatives
(7) Benchmark revisions to the National Income and Product Account data
and reports of a bleaker outlook for fixed investment in the near term have prompted
the staff to reduce further i ts estimate of prospective growth  in potential output.
Given the associated scaling down of future returns to labor and capital, as well as
weaker-than-expected spending data here and abroad, the Greenbook projection of
the growth of aggregate demand has been lowered about as m uch as that of aggregate
supply.  As a result, the forecasts of the output gap and inflation do not differ much
from those prepared for the  June meeting.  As before, the sta ff believes that a variety
of forces–including the expected completion of the inventory correction, further
declines in energy prices, the fiscal stimulus provided by the tax cut, and the
cumulative monetary policy easing–will support a revival of economic growth at
around prevailing financial market conditions.  In the baseline projection, the staff
assumes that the federal funds rate will be maintained at 3¾  percent over the forecast
period, with equity prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar projected to
edge off only a little and longer-term yields moving up a tad.  Against this financial
backdrop, real GDP is anticipated to advance at a rate of 1¼ percent in the second
half of this year and of 2¾ percent over the four quarters of next year.  Output
growth over 2002 about matches the downward-revised estimate of growth of the
economy’s potential output and  keeps the unemployment rate around the level
consistent with no change in inflation pressures.  The resulting slack in resource
utilization helps to hold core  PCE inflation to 1¾ percent next year, a touch below
the rate projected for 2001.  Given the projected drop in energy prices, overall PCE
inflation is expected to decline from 2 percent this year to 1¾ percent in 2002.5
(8) Should the Com mittee find the staff’s explication of the forces
promoting a rebound in economic growth and shaping the inflation outlook to be
convincing, it may opt to keep the funds rate unchanged .  After all, cumulative policy
easing this year has put the real funds rate well below estimates of its equilibrium value
(see box on page 13), and this policy stance presumably will, after some further delay,
foster a reasonable revival in the growth of spending over time.  In that regard, the
rapid growth of M2 and other measures of household liquidity so far this year might
be taken as a tentative indication that financial conditions are well positioned to
support such a rebound.  In these circumstances, the Committee may believe that
further policy stimulus would carry too great a risk of an overshooting of aggregate
demand that would  lead to added  pressures on inflation and a deterioration in
inflation expectations that may prove stubborn  to unwind.  Indeed, the Committee
may be of the view that the slow recovery of aggregate demand in the Greenbook
forecast, and the associated easing of pressures in labor markets, is both necessary and
desirable so as to provide better assurance that core inflation will be capped going
forward, as it is in the  staff forecast.
(9) The choice of an unchanged federal funds rate target would come as a
surprise to financial markets that would be little tempered by an announcement of
continued downside risks.  Short-term interest rates would  back up by a  considerable
amount and equity prices likely would decline, as the tighter-than-expected monetary
policy stance more than offsets the perception that the Federal Reserve sees a stronger
economy than previously thought by market par ticipants.  The po licy surprise would
tend to raise bond yields by pushing expected  funds rates higher.  The likely decline  in
equity prices, however, would lead investors to anticipate more restraint on
consumption via the wealth effect, perhaps limiting the extent to which the expected
path of the funds rates is ratcheted up and, accordingly, the pickup in longer-term
(10) The Com mittee may consider the Greenbook forecast to be both
plausible and acceptable, even with the projected delay in the resumption of
satisfactory output growth, but still choose to reduce the federal funds rate 25 basis
points .  In particular, the string of bad news on the economy may heighten the sense
that there are sizable odds on especially adverse outcomes for aggregate demand,
particularly for capital spending.  The Committee may be of the view that such
downside risks to the real side could be countered by a slight further easing in the
present situation with little ill effect, as inflation recently has been benign and is like ly
to remain contained.  Given the scope for downside developments, the Committee
may be especially averse to surprising markets, in that an unchanged policy stance
could risk tightening financial conditions appreciably should  market participants begin
to question Federal Reserve intentions.  Alternatively, the Com mittee may consider
the staff’s outlook, especially the speed and the extent of the projected rise in the
unemployment rate, to be unacceptable and to warrant another slight further policy
easing as a countervailing move.
(11) The selection of a 25 basis point reduction in the funds rate, presumably
accompan ied by an assessment that the risks are  still weighted toward economic
weakness, would be almost as accommodative as the average expectation built into
financial markets.  Accordingly, bond yields likely would edge higher, while stock
prices may come under some downward pressure.  The recent downdraft of the dollar
on foreign currency markets makes it more difficult to predict the probable course of
exchange rates.  While textbooks teach that po licy ease that falls short of market
expectations should lead to an appreciation of the currency, the recent market focus
on relative spending prospects suggests that the dollar might come under some
downward pressure.
(12) Choice of a 50 basis point easing action might follow from the concern
that more economic weakness could well be in  train than pro jected in the G reenbook.
Although consumption has held  up remarkably well so far, an abrupt softening in
consumer spending is not implausible given the prospect of a sharp rise in the
unemployment rate and already relatively high debt burdens.  Moreover, foreign
economic activity could well disappoint for a variety of reasons, including deepening
crises in certain emerging market economies or additional slowing in the pace of
activity in some major industrial economies.  Such eventualities would tend to prolong
both the inventory liquidation and the decline in capital spending, which would
translate into a decline in the equilibrium real funds rate.  Although the level of the
real funds rate implied by the 3¼ percent nominal funds rate of this alternative and
prevailing inflation  expectations would be appreciably below that which is sustainable
in the long run, a rapid policy reversal along the lines of that currently embedded in
futures market prices could be undertaken once information finally starts to signal
convincingly that more solid economic growth has taken hold.
(13) The choice of a 50 basis point easing, combined with a statement
continuing to point to downside risks, would be more forceful than markets have
priced in for this m eeting, though futures market participants seem to expect that a
cumulative easing of this magnitude w ill be put in place by early next year.  If
investors come to believe that the Comm ittee is more concerned about economic
softening than previously thought as a result of the surprise component of the action,
they would  both move the anticipated  easing forward in time and  augment its
cumulative extent.  As an immediate consequence, shor t-term interest rates would
move down.  The unexpected size of the policy ease would probably prompt a decline
in bond yields and the foreign  exchange va lue of the dollar and some increase in
equity values, although the magnitude of these changes would importantly be shaped
by the word ing of the statement announcing the action.
(14) Under the Greenbook assumption of no change in the federal funds
rate, the staff projects that the growth of M2 from July to December would slow to a
as deposit rates adjust further to prior easing actions.  Other contributors to the
slowing in M2 growth include the likely waning of mortgage refinancing activity and a
leveling out of stock prices.  M2 would still be growing faster than nominal GDP over
the second and third quarters, but the contraction in velocity would be  slowing.
However, the staff considers th is money projection to be subject to considerable
uncertainty because several unusual influences will be boosting observed money
growth to an extent that is difficult to assess.  These special factors include
households’ placement of tax rebate checks in liquid deposits and elevated demands
for U.S. currency in Argentina owing to that country’s financial crisis and in the euro
area ahead of the conversion to euro cash  at the start of next year.
(15) The staff anticipates that growth of domestic nonfinancial deb t will
move lower to a 3½ percent rate over the last six months of the year.  A renewed
paydown of federal debt in  the fourth quarter is expected to  offset the rise this
quarter, leaving federal debt outstanding about unchanged on net over the second half
of the year.  The growth of the debt of nonfederal sectors is foreseen to decline to a
expected to be maintained at around its second-quarter pace, based on the
continuation  of low mortgage interest rates, a predilection for extracting equity in
refinancings, and still-solid housing activity.  Consumer credit growth, though, seems
poised to downshift further from the second quarter pace, in line with projected
weakness in  nominal ou tlays on consumer durables over the second half of  the year.
Businesses have already made considerable s trides in restructuring their balance sheets
in response to lower longer-term yields and the favorable issuance climate of the first
half of this year.  With capital spending remaining weak and share repurchases and
merger activity unlikely to revive for a  time, overall business borrowing should remain
light.  That borrowing should still be concentrated in bond markets, though the
paydown of C& I loans and commercial paper should be drawing to a  close.
Sources of the Change in the
Equilibr ium Federal Funds Rate 
from 2000Q3 to 2001Q3
(Percentage points)
* Calculated using historical data augm ented by the staff
Estimates of the Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
One way to assess the stance of monetary policy is by comparing the actual real
federal funds rate to estimates of its equilibrium level.  The equilibrium real federal
funds rate can be thought of as the rate consistent with output being at its potential
level once the effects of transitory shocks–those with  dynamics that play out within
a few years–have dissipated.
Board staff constructs various estimates of the equilibrium real federal funds rate
using three different frameworks: the FRB/US model, a statistical filter based on
the relationship between the real federal funds rate and the output gap, and yields
on indexed Treasury debt (which are available only since 1998).  The FRB/US
model and the statistical filter are each used to derive two estimates, the first based
on historical data only and the
second on h istorical data
augmented by the staff
projection.
The chart that follows shows the
range of these estim ates, as well
as the actual real federal funds
rate and the real funds rates
implied by the policy alternatives
discussed in the text.  (The real
funds rates are measured as the
nominal federal funds rate less
the lagged four-quarter change in
core PCE prices as a proxy for
expected inflation.)  Over the past
year or so, the range of the
estimates of the equilibrium funds
rate has fallen by about half a
percentage point.  For the
equilibrium rates based on the
FRB/U S model, we can identify
the sources of the decline.  The
table at the right parses the change in the FRB/US estimate using the historical data
augmented by the staff forecast.  A reduction in the structural growth rate of GDP
and a h igher average equi ty prem ium account for the bulk of the decline.
Estimates of the Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate (continued)
Benchmark revisions to the NIPA data published over the intermeeting period, as
well as other incoming data, caused the staff to revise down its assessments of
aggregate demand and  potential output, both in the past and going  forward.  These
changes had mostly offsetting effects on the estimates of the equilibrium real
federa l funds rate.  In  the case of the  FRB/US measures, a reduct ion in the staff’s
estimates of structural growth in GDP in recent years and in the forecast caused a
decrease in estimates of the equilibrium funds rate.  However, this effect was
countered by lower estimates of the equity premium–which reconcile the level of
equity prices in recent years with more modest gains in earnings.  As shown in the
bottom-left panel of the chart, the net changes over the intermeeting period in the
FRB/US estimates of the equilibrium funds rate (based on the historical data and
the staff projection) are relatively small.  Adjustments to the statistical-filter-based
estimates of the equ ilibrium funds rate  were a lso modest  (the bottom-right panel ). 
While the sta ff trimmed its estim ates of potential output, it marked down aggregate
demand by a similar amount, with only a modest impact on the estimates of the
output gap that underl ie these  estimates of the equ ilibrium rate .
The revisions to the various equilibrium funds rate measures over the intermeeting
period are quite small compared to the substantial uncertainty associated with the
estimates.  In the case of the statistical filter method, for example, formal standard
errors of the estimates can be calculated for each observation.  These standard
errors indicate that a 90 percent confidence interval around the estimates of the
equilibrium funds rate ranges from 1½ to 2½ percentage points on each side of the
point  estimates.
Chart 3
Actual Real Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Estimated Equilibrium Real Rates
Actual Real Funds Rate
Historical Average: 2.80
  (1966Q1-2001Q3)
Current Rate
25 b.p. Easing
50 b.p. Easing
Equilibrium Funds Rate Estimates
August 16
June 22
August 16
June 22
* Calculated using the historical data augmented by the staff projection.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(16) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for
(1) the directive and (2) the “balance-of-risks” sentence to be included in the press
release issued after the  meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stab ility and promote sustainable growth in
output.  To further its long-run  objectives, the Committee in the immediate
future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with MAINTAINING/
INCREASING/reducing the federal funds rate AT/to an average of around
___3¾ percent.
(2) “Balance-of-Risks” Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the
Committee believes that the risks [ARE BALANCED WITH RESPECT TO
PROSPECTS FOR BOTH GOALS] [ARE WEIGHTED MAINLY
TOWARD CONDITIONS THAT MAY GENERATE HEIGHTENED
INFLATION PRESSURES] [continue to be weighted m ainly toward
conditions that may generate economic weakness] in the foreseeable future.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
M2                            M2        M3       Debt
                                       ----------------------------             ---------------------------
                                          Ease      Ease   No Move                  Greenbook Forecast* 
                                         50 b.p.   25 b.p.
                                       ----------------------------             ---------------------------
Monthly Growth Rates
                Mar-2001                  14.4      14.4      14.4                14.4       9.8       6.2
                Apr-2001                  10.4      10.4      10.4                10.4      18.2       3.9
                May-2001                   5.2       5.2       5.2                 5.2      13.9       4.1
                Jun-2001                   9.6       9.6       9.6                 9.6      13.1       4.1
                Jul-2001                   8.5       8.5       8.5                 8.5       6.8       2.3
                Aug-2001                   8.0       7.8       7.6                 7.6       2.5       5.0
                Sep-2001                   8.8       8.2       7.6                 7.6       5.9       6.1
                Oct-2001                   5.7       4.9       4.1                 4.1       5.4       2.6
                Nov-2001                   4.6       3.9       3.1                 3.1       5.4       2.6
                Dec-2001                   4.6       4.0       3.4                 3.4       5.6       2.5
Quarterly Averages
                2000 Q4                    6.3       6.3       6.3                 6.3       7.3       4.6
                2001 Q1                   10.7      10.7      10.7                10.7      12.6       4.8
                2001 Q2                   10.2      10.2      10.2                10.2      14.1       4.6
                2001 Q3                    8.4       8.2       8.1                 8.1       8.0       3.9
                2001 Q4                    6.3       5.6       5.0                 5.0       5.2       3.7
Growth Rate
                From        To
                Dec-2000    Jun-2001      10.7      10.7      10.7                10.7      13.9       4.4              
                Dec-2000    Jul-2001      10.4      10.4      10.4                10.4      13.0       4.1
                Jun-2001    Dec-2001       6.8       6.3       5.8                 5.8       5.3       3.5
                Jul-2001    Dec-2001       6.4       5.8       5.2                 5.2       5.0       3.8
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
