Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 5/26/2009.
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) October 23, 2003
Class II – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The FOMC’s decision at its September meeting to keep the target for the
federal funds rate unchanged at 1 percent and not to alter the assessment of risks to
the economic outlook was widely anticipated, and rates on near-dated federal funds
futures contracts held about steady after its announcement.  The Committee’s
characterization of labor market conditions as “weakening” and reaffirmation that an
accommodative policy can be maintained for a “considerable period” reportedly led
investors to mark down rates on futures contracts covering next year by a few basis
points.  In recent weeks, though, longer-dated futures rates have risen sharply against
the backdrop of better-than-expected economic data, positive corporate earnings
announcements, and a pronounced weakening of the dollar.  In addition, comments
by some Federal Reserve officials last week were read by many as signaling that policy
firming might commence sooner than had been previously expected, adding to the
upward pressure on market rates.  While short-term futures rates remained anchored
near 1 percent throughout the intermeeting period, those at longer horizons increased
about 25 to 30 basis points on net (Chart 1).  (Further discussion of the recent stability
of near-term policy expectations is provided in the box below.)  Market participants
seem certain that policy will remain on hold at this FOMC meeting, but they now
place considerable odds on a 25 basis point tightening by the middle of next year.1
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
October 23, 2003
September 15, 2003
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premia and other adjustments.
Jan. Mar. May July Sept.
2003
Basis Points
Six Months Ahead
Twelve Months Ahead
Policy Uncertainty*
*Width of a 90 percent confidence interval computed from the term
structures for the expected federal funds rate and implied volatility.
Daily
FOMC
Implied Distribution of the Federal Funds Rate
About Six Months Ahead*
September 15, 2003 
(Dotted Line)
October 23, 2003 
(Solid Bars)
*Based on the distribution of the three-month eurodollar rate five 
 months ahead (adjusted for a risk premium), as implied by options 
 on eurodollar futures contracts.
Jan. Mar. May July Sept.
2003
Ten-Year Treasury
Two-Year Treasury
Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Jan. Mar. May July Sept.
2003
Implied Volatility on the Long-Term Bond
Jan. Mar. May July Sept.
2003
Over Next Ten Years
Over Next Five Years
Inflation Compensation*
Daily
FOMC
*Based on a comparison of an estimated TIIS yield curve to an estimated
nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
The Recent Stability of Near-Term Policy Expectations
The Committee’s recent announcements as well as comments by Federal
Reserve officials have hinted strongly–most explicitly in Chairman Greenspan’s
monetary policy testimony in July and in the concluding sentence of the August and
September FOMC statements–that the stance of policy would remain
accommodative for some time.  These statements seem to have left investors quite
confident that the target funds rate will remain near 1 percent for the next few
months.  For example, an estimate of uncertainty about the near-term policy path
derived from options data–shown in the left panel of the chart–has fallen sharply
over the summer and remains near historical lows.  The efficacy of the Committee’s
statements in anchoring near-term policy expectations has also been suggested by
movements of near- and longer-dated futures rates.  The right panel plots daily
changes in the eurodollar futures rate eight quarters ahead on the vertical axis
against the corresponding daily changes in the three-month-ahead federal funds
futures rate.  The solid black regression line shows the average relationship between
these variables over the entire period from 1990 to the present.  The red dashed
line shows the regression line fitted with data since the Chairman’s testimony in
July; the significantly steeper slope of this line is consistent with the view that near-
term policy expectations have been unusually stable over recent months.  This
conclusion holds even when a more recent period–the year ended June 2003 (the
blue dot-dashed line)–is used as the basis for comparison.
(2) These changes in policy expectations showed through to short- and
intermediate-term Treasury yields, which gained 10 to 20 basis points over the
intermeeting period.  Nominal yields on longer-term Treasury securities were about
unchanged, while those on indexed debt fell about 10 basis points.  As a result,
implied inflation compensation edged higher, consistent with the uptick in the
University of Michigan Survey’s measure of long-term inflation expectations.
Treasury yields remained volatile, but bid-asked spreads held near normal levels, and
transaction volumes were in a typical range.2   Continued debate about the appropriate
regulatory structure for the GSEs, as well as reports of losses suffered by three
Federal Home Loan Banks, left only a small imprint on agency spreads.
(3) Investors’ improved economic outlook and perhaps some increased
appetite for risk supported the prices of corporate debt and equity over the
intermeeting period (Chart 2).  While investment-grade yields moved about in line
with Treasuries, lower-tier spreads registered further significant and broad-based
declines.  Major equity indexes rose roughly 2 percent, even as earnings reports for the
third quarter came in about as strong as analysts had expected, and forward-looking
measures of the volatility of the S&P 500 fell to their lows for the year.  In addition,
gross equity issuance jumped in September and even included a rise in initial public
(4) The foreign exchange value of the dollar fell almost 5 percent over the
intermeeting period against major currencies, paced by a 6-1/2 percent drop against
the Japanese yen (Chart 3).  The dollar depreciated more than 4 percent against the
euro and the Canadian dollar.  The communique issued at the conclusion of the G-7
meeting in Dubai on September 20 was reportedly interpreted by market participants
Chart 2
Financial Market Indicators
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2002 2003
Ten-Year AA
Ten-Year Swap
Higher-Tier Spreads*
*AA spread measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield
 curve. Swap spread measured relative to the on-the-run Treasury
 security.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2002 2003
Basis Points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Master II (right scale)
Lower-Tier Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
S&P 500 EPS Revisions Index
Percent, monthly rate
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2002 2003
Wilshire
Nasdaq
Stock Prices
Jan. Mar. May June Aug. Oct.
2003
Daily
FOMC
Earnings-Price Ratio for S&P 500
and Ten-Year Treasury
Monthly
Twelve-Month Forward E/P Ratio
Real Ten-Year Treasury Yield*
*End-of-month ten-year Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed ten-year 
 expected inflation.
+ Denotes latest daily observation, October 23, 2003 .
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
(Daily Data)
Jan. Mar. May July Sept.
0.0
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Indexes Index(12/31/02=100)
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Jan. Mar. May July Sept.
2003
Commodity Prices
$U.S./ounce $U.S./barrel
Gold (left scale)
Oil (right scale)
Jan. Mar. May July Sept.
2003
Total Custody Holdings at FRB-NY
and Periods of Japanese Intervention $Billions
Jan. Mar. May July Sept.
2003
Total Custody Holdings at FRB-NY
and Periods of Japanese Intervention $Billions
Oct.
22
*Total purchases of U.S. dollars in billions per episode
of intervention by Japanese monetary authorities. Cumulative total
purchases in 2003: $136.6 billion.
.   The Desk did not intervene for the accounts of the
System and the Treasury over the intermeeting period.
as indicating official acceptance of further dollar depreciation.  Subsequent statements
by the Administration that the “strong dollar” policy had not changed and a
resumption of significant intervention by Japanese authorities within ten days of the
G-7 meeting did not halt the dollar’s decline.3  Long-term government bond yields in
advanced economies showed mixed changes; the exception was in the United
Kingdom, where yields jumped 32 basis points as market participants came to believe
that the Bank of England would be the first major central bank to tighten policy.  In
contrast, announcements by the Bank of Japan regarding its monetary policy
intentions supported equity prices and trimmed longer-term JGB yields.4  Stock prices
in other major foreign economies registered mixed changes on net over the
intermeeting period.
(5) Against the currencies of our other important trading partners, the trade-
weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar changed little on net, as a 2 percent rise
against the Mexican peso was offset by declines against the currencies of Brazil and
several Asian economies.  The Mexican government lowered its growth forecast for
the remainder of 2003, and Mexico’s stock market index posted only minor gains,
while risk spreads widened somewhat.  In contrast, Brazilian financial market
indicators improved considerably on market speculation that Brazil’s sovereign debt
rating may be raised shortly.  Although the Chinese authorities maintained the
renminbi’s peg against the dollar, rates on forward contracts suggest that market
participants have marked up the odds on renminbi appreciation within the next year.
(6) Nonfinancial businesses appear to have pared their borrowing further on
balance in September, as a pickup in net bond issuance was more than offset by
further paydowns of short-term debt (Chart 4).  For the third quarter as a whole, debt
of the nonfinancial business sector is estimated to have grown at a 2-3/4 percent pace.
Available data for October suggest that business borrowing remains weak.  Bond
issuance has been slowed by the recent rise in interest rates, and runoffs of C&I loans
have continued unabated, despite the stabilization in banks’ lending standards and
terms reported in the most recent Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.5  Commercial
paper issuance, though, appears to be strengthening somewhat.  In the household
sector, consumer credit growth picked up earlier in the third quarter, buoyed by
spending on motor vehicles.  Data from commercial banks suggest that growth of
households’ mortgage debt has slowed as the pace of mortgage refinancings has
stepped down.  Overall, debt of the household sector is estimated to have risen at a 9-
rapidly, total domestic nonfinancial debt is estimated to have grown at a 7 percent
pace last quarter, down significantly from the second quarter.
(7) M2 contracted at a 4-3/4 percent annual rate in September after surging
over the prior several months, and the weakness appears to be carrying into October.
The steep falloff in mortgage refinancing seems to have played an important role in
this reversal.6  The temporary effects of the multi-day power blackout in August,
which had immobilized large amount of funds in demand deposits, elevated the level
of M2 in that month relative to September.  In addition, some portion of the child tax
credit refunds received by households in late July and early August may have been
initially placed in M2 accounts and then spent last month.  Lastly, net inflows to equity
and bond mutual funds picked up in September and early October relative to recent
months, perhaps damping M2 growth.
Policy Alternatives
(8) Stronger-than-expected incoming data on spending have led the staff to
mark up its estimate of third-quarter growth, and the resulting higher level of real
GDP is carried forward with the general contours of the forecast little changed.
Monetary policy is still assumed to be on hold until mid-2005 and to firm only
gradually thereafter.  Longer-term interest rates are projected to be about flat for a few
quarters and then to drift a bit lower as investors conclude that monetary policy will
not need to tighten as quickly as they had thought.  The levels of equity prices and the
foreign exchange value of the dollar in the fourth quarter have been marked up and
down, respectively, to reflect their changes over the intermeeting period.  Over the
forecast interval, equity prices are again assumed to rise enough to yield risk-adjusted
returns in line with those on fixed-income instruments, while the dollar is still
assumed to edge lower at about the same rate as in the last Greenbook.  With these
accommodative financial conditions, expansionary fiscal policy, and inventory
dynamics supporting growth, real GDP is projected to expand at about a
swing in fiscal policy toward restraint in 2005 contributes to a moderation of GDP
growth to about 4 percent–still somewhat above the estimated growth rate of
potential output.  With output growth exceeding that of its potential, the civilian
unemployment rate is projected to fall to nearly 5 percent–the staff’s estimate of the
natural rate–by the end of 2005.  Cumulative slack in product and labor markets puts
a bit of downward pressure on core PCE inflation, which ends the projection period
at 1 percent.  The recent rise in oil prices is assumed to unwind gradually, causing
headline inflation to run a bit below core inflation in 2004 and 2005.
(9) If the Committee, like the staff, sees output growing briskly with
inflation staying near 1 percent for an extended period, it might choose an
unchanged target for the federal funds rate at this meeting.  The recent strength in
spending may have led the Committee to trim its assessment of the possibility of a
significant decline in inflation and, perhaps, the risk of adverse feedback to aggregate
demand should such a decline eventuate.  Moreover, financial conditions would now
seem to be providing more support for spending than at the time of the September
meeting, and possibly enough to lead the Committee to see more robust growth in
aggregate demand going forward than the staff projects.  Indeed, current estimates
place the real federal funds rate below the range of equilibrium values derived from
various staff models (Chart 5).7  Even if the Committee is concerned that economic
slack could persist for a substantial time, it might think that any additional easing
undertaken at this meeting would not–given the lags with which policy affects
spending–have a noticeable impact until the economic expansion was far enough
along to make additional stimulus undesirable.  Alternatively, Committee
members–like many private forecasters–may expect inflation pressures to emerge
faster than in the staff projection.  For instance, relative to the Greenbook, the
Committee may see less resource slack currently or be more worried that very rapid
output growth could put pressure on prices even as some slack in resources remained.
Given these possibilities, the Committee may feel that it is best to await additional
Chart 5
Actual Real Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Estimated Equilibrium Real Rates
Actual Real Funds Rate
TIIS-Based Estimate
Historical Average: 2.64
  (1966Q1-2003Q3)
Current Rate
25 b.p. Easing
Equilibrium Real Funds Rate Estimates (Percent)
September Bluebook
September Bluebook
September Bluebook
September Bluebook
September Bluebook
Statistical Filter
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data*
FRB/US Model
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data**
Treasury Inflation-Indexed Securities
* Also employs the staff projection for the current and next quarters.
** Also employs the staff projection for the current quarter.
 Note: The estimates of the equilibrium real funds rate based on Treasury inflation-indexed securities have been revised
 to cover a period from five to ten years ahead rather than ten to thirty years ahead.  The estimates based on the FRB/US
 model have been revised to take account of changes to the model and to the details of the method used.  In all of these
 cases, the values shown for the September Bluebook are on the new basis, and so they differ from the value actually shown
 in that Bluebook.  The effect of these restatements is never larger than 0.2 percentage point.
September 16 policy announcement is provided in the Appendix.
information on aggregate demand and supply before adjusting policy further.
(10) If, however, the Committee is concerned that growth may not remain
rapid enough to return output to its potential reasonably promptly and so limit any
further decline in inflation, then it might choose to cut the target for the federal
funds rate by 25 basis points at this meeting.  While the Committee may be
convinced that the economy has been growing robustly and will continue to do so
over the remainder of this year, it may fear that the expansion could sputter in 2004.
In particular, firms may remain cautious in their spending, hiring, and inventory
control, implying continued restraint on aggregate demand growth as the impetus
from this summer’s tax cuts ebbs.  Even if the Committee thinks that the most likely
outcome is one in which output growth is sufficient to reduce resource slack at an
acceptable pace, it might want to err on the side of more accommodative policy given
that inflation is low, inflation expectations are apparently well anchored, and the costs
of a further decline in inflation likely outweigh those of a modest increase.  Indeed,
Committee members may see the current level of inflation as near the bottom of the
range that they would like to achieve in the longer term, given the asymmetries caused
by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates and other possible nominal
Policy Announcement, Directive, and Assessment of Risks8
(11) The wording of the second paragraph of the policy announcement–the
portion of the announcement that provides a rationale for the Committee’s decision–
should presumably reflect the judgments about the stance of monetary policy and
economic conditions that the Committee makes in arriving at its policy decision.  If
the Committee decides to make no change in policy, then it may well want to employ
language similar to the statement issued following the September meeting.  Such a
statement would note that the accommodative stance of policy and vigorous growth
in productivity are providing ongoing support to economic activity and that incoming
data continue to show a firming of spending.  In light of the small rise in employment
in September and the somewhat lower levels of initial claims posted in recent weeks,
the Committee may want to note some evidence of stabilization in labor markets
rather than retaining the language that “the labor market has been weakening.”
(12) Even if the Committee is persuaded by the arguments for easier policy, it
may still want to start the “rationale” paragraph by noting that the accommodative
stance of policy and robust underlying growth in productivity are providing support to
economic activity and by acknowledging the recent strength in spending.  The
statement could then justify a rate cut by pointing to concerns about the sustainability
of brisk growth or the effects of faster structural productivity growth on estimates of
economic slack.  The statement might also note that the costs of a significant further
decline in inflation could be large whereas upside inflation risks seem small, helping to
tilt the balance in favor of easier policy.
(13) This Bluebook assumes that the structure of the third paragraph of the
statement summarizing the risks to the outlook follows that selected at recent FOMC
meetings–with the possible exception of the final sentence, which will be discussed in
paragraph 16.9  The first two sentences summarize the risks to the outlook for
economic growth and for the rate of inflation over the next few quarters, which
correspond to the rows and columns, respectively, of Table 1.  If the Committee, like
the staff, sees output growth as likely to trim the slack in goods and factor markets
Table 1
Possible configurations of the risks to economic growth, the risks to inflation, 
and the balance of risks
Risks to inflation
Unwelcome
fall
Balanced Unwelcome
rise
Weighted
to the
downside
Risks to sustainable
economic growth
Balanced Inflation
undesirably
low
Weighted
to the
upside
Inflation
undesirably
low
-or- 
balanced
Upside risks
to
sustainable
growth
fairly slowly in coming quarters, then it may again judge that “... the risks to the
attainment of sustainable economic growth over the next several quarters are balanced.”  Such an
assessment might reflect a view that the phrase “sustainable economic growth” is
consistent with above-trend expansion over the next several quarters so long as it only
gradually closes the output gap.  Retention of this risk assessment might also follow
from an interpretation of the phrase that focused on whether or not the growth
process appeared to be self-sustaining, especially if the Committee harbored
reservations that the expansion could falter early in 2004.  However, if the Committee
views “sustainable economic growth” as denoting the growth rate of the economy’s
potential to produce, then it might be inclined to indicate that the risks are tilted
toward the upside at this meeting.  Since such a statement might be misread by the
markets, the Committee may want to make clear in the announcement that growth
above potential would not necessarily trigger tighter policy in the near term.
(14) If the Committee remains concerned that substantial downward
pressures on prices could accumulate and that significantly lower inflation could prove
very costly, then it would likely indicate that, “...the probability, though minor, of an
unwelcome fall in inflation exceeds that of a rise in inflation from its already low level.”  However,
such concerns may have eased considerably given the tenor of the spending data since
summer, and, if the Committee believes that the more rapid growth is not likely to
prove transitory, then it might be ready to report that the risks to the outlook for
inflation over the next several quarters are about balanced.
(15) The alternatives just discussed for the first two sentences admit four
possible configurations, as shown in Table 1.  As it did at the September meeting, the
Committee might see the risks to sustainable economic growth as balanced and the
risk of an unwelcome fall in inflation as outweighing that of a rise in inflation (the blue
diagonally hatched box in the table).  In that case it would presumably conclude that
“... the risk of inflation becoming undesirably low remains the predominant concern for the foreseeable
future.”  Alternatively, the Committee might assess the risks to sustainable growth as to
the upside but remain concerned about an unwelcome fall in inflation (the yellow
horizontally hatched box).  With the level of output currently below estimates of its
potential and inflation quite low, the Committee might believe that its dual goals are
more likely to be jeopardized by a further decline in inflation than by plausible
outcomes for growth in output.  In that case, it might continue to indicate that the risk
of undesirably low inflation was predominant.  However, if the Committee feels that
the prevailing degree of economic slack is relatively modest and thinks that output
growth could well pick up to a very rapid pace, then it might want to report a neutral
balance of risks.  Conversely, the Committee might still view the risks to sustainable
growth as balanced, but now believe that the risks to inflation are balanced as well (the
red vertically hatched box).  In that case, it seems likely that the overall assessment
also would be balanced.  Lastly, if the improvement in growth prospects is seen as
sufficiently large, the Committee might believe that the risks to sustainable output
growth are tilted to the upside, while the risks to inflation are balanced (the green
cross-hatched box).  If so, it would presumably indicate that the balance of risks is
weighted toward unsustainably rapid growth.
(16) The final issue relating to the policy announcement is whether to modify
or delete the sentence “In these circumstances, the Committee believes that policy accommodation
can be maintained for a considerable period.”  This choice presumably depends upon the
same considerations that underlie the Committee’s selection of the balance of risks
statement.  If the Committee believes either that the growth of aggregate demand may
slow next year from its second-half pace or that the degree of slack in the economy is
currently considerable and will take time to work off, then it might choose to repeat
its earlier statement.  Such a decision might be especially favored if the Committee
viewed the firm anchoring of near-term policy expectations that appears to have been
the case of late as helpful in preventing market participants from anticipating
substantial policy tightening in short order.  However, with the recovery seemingly
gaining traction, the Committee might feel that tighter policy may well be needed
relatively soon to avoid a build-up in inflation pressures.  Since the Committee
presumably will want to remove the statement in its current form from the
announcement in advance of any policy tightening, it may judge that the time has
come to alter or drop it.  Relatively few market participants reportedly expect the
latter development at this meeting.  As a result, simply dropping the sentence might
well lead investors to move up the expected timing of policy tightening considerably,
prompting a sizable reaction in financial markets.
(17) Even if the Committee does not see current market expectations for
policy as unreasonable, it might be concerned that, as time goes by, repetition of the
sentence would lead investors to push back the date at which they expect tightening to
begin beyond the range that seems plausible to Committee members.  To avoid this
possibility, the statement could be made more clearly conditional on future economic
developments.  For example, the Committee could indicate that “. . . policy
accommodation can be maintained for the considerable period it currently assesses will be required to
foster the moderation of disinflationary pressures.”  Even with this modest change in wording,
interest rates would presumably rise some, since investors would see the change as
increasing the likelihood of a tightening move in the not-too-distant future.
(18) Should the Committee wish to follow the same procedure as at the last
two meetings, it could vote on the directive and on language providing guidance to
the drafters of the announcement regarding the risk assessment.  Draft language with
a range of options is provided below.
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote
sustainable growth in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the
Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal
funds rate at/TO an average of around ___ 1 percent.
(2) Risk Assessment
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available,
the Committee believes the risks to its outlook for sustainable economic
growth over the next several quarters [ARE WEIGHTED TOWARD
THE DOWNSIDE] [are balanced] [ARE WEIGHTED TOWARD
THE UPSIDE]; the risks to its outlook for inflation over the next
several quarters [are weighted to the downside] [ARE BALANCED]
[ARE WEIGHTED TOWARD THE UPSIDE]; and, taken together,
the balance of risks to its objectives [are weighted toward the downside]
[ARE BALANCED] [ARE WEIGHTED TOWARD THE UPSIDE] in
the foreseeable future.
Market Reaction
(19) Market participants expect no change in the stance of monetary policy at
this meeting, and generally do not foresee an alteration in the three-sentence
assessment of risks.  Thus, an announcement that closely followed the content of the
September statement–that is, an announcement that the target federal funds rate was
being left at 1 percent, that the risks to sustainable growth were balanced, that the
probability of an unwelcome fall in inflation exceeds that of a rise, and that the risk of
undesirably low inflation remained the predominant concern–would presumably have
minimal effects in financial markets.  Given the focus of market participants on the
overall assessment of the balance of risks, market reactions would likely be quite
modest so long as the Committee continued to point to undesirably low inflation as
the predominant concern, even if the announcement indicated that the risks to
sustainable growth were now to the upside.  If, however, the Committee chose an
unchanged policy stance but suggested that the risks to its goals of sustainable
economic growth and price stability were about equal, investors would likely move up
their expected timing of policy tightening, pushing interest rates higher and trimming
stock prices.
(20) A decision to ease policy at this meeting would surprise investors.
Short-term interest rates would follow the federal funds rate lower, and
intermediate-term rates should also decline.  If investors interpreted the easier policy
as reflecting a higher desired level of long-run inflation on the part of the Committee
than they had previously believed, then they would likely foresee an easier policy
stance in the near term, but higher nominal interest rates in the longer run.  In that
case, long-term yields could increase, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar
would likely fall.  Alternatively, market participants might see the change in policy as
reflecting a deterioration in the outlook that they had not yet observed.  If so, longer-
term yields would presumably decline, as would stock prices and the dollar.
Monetary and Credit Aggregates
(21) M2 is projected to accelerate gradually in coming months under the
assumptions of the Greenbook forecast.  The effects of the substantial drop-off in
mortgage refinancing activity on liquid deposits, which have trimmed M2 considerably
of late, are expected to diminish gradually.  Nonetheless, with the boost to M2 from
past monetary policy easings tailing off, and lower stock price volatility perhaps
encouraging some households to shift funds from M2 assets back into equities, the
expansion of M2 is expected to remain modest.  M2 is projected to be about flat from
September through December, bringing its increase for 2003 as a whole to around
flows and no change in opportunity costs, M2 growth in 2004 is forecast at 5-1/2
percent, a bit below the pace of expansion in nominal income.  The resulting increase
in M2 velocity would be the first in seven years.  M2 is projected to slow slightly
further in 2005, reflecting smaller gains in nominal income and the effects on
opportunity costs of the tightening of policy in the second half of the year.
(22) The growth rate of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is expected to
decline over the Greenbook period.  Household sector debt is projected to slow
noticeably in the current quarter, and then to decelerate a bit further in 2004 and 2005,
though it continues to expand at a slightly faster rate than disposable personal income.
A reduction in the pace of mortgage refinancing, and a consequent fall in the volume
of cash raised from such transactions, is associated with a slowing in mortgage debt
that is only partly offset by an acceleration in consumer credit.  In the corporate
sector, the pickup in investment spending in coming months is nearly matched by
rising profits, limiting business borrowing.  However, the rise in investment outlays
subsequently outstrips profits, and business debt growth picks up.  Federal borrowing
remains considerable through 2004, but it is projected to slow in 2005 as the budget
deficit narrows.  All told, debt of the domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to
expand 8-1/4 percent in 2003 and then to slow to 7 percent and 6-1/4 percent in
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
Greenbook
Ease 25 bp No change Forecast*
Growth Rates
From To
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Appendix: The September FOMC Announcement
Paragraph Text
The Committee perceives that the upside and downside risks
to the attainment of sustainable growth for the next few
quarters are roughly equal. In contrast, the probability, though
minor, of an unwelcome fall in inflation exceeds that of a rise
in inflation from its already low level. The Committee judges
that, on balance, the risk of inflation becoming undesirably
low remains the predominant concern for the foreseeable
future. In these circumstances, the Committee believes that
policy accommodation can be maintained for a considerable
period.
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Oct 
Nov 
Dec 
    
Jan 
Feb  
Mar  
Apr  
May  
Jun  
Jul  
Aug  
Sep
Aug  
Aug  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money Aggregates
Seasonally adjusted
nontransactions components
Annual growth rates(%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
  2000
  2001
  2002
Quarterly(average)
  2002-Q4
  2003-Q1
       Q2
       Q3 p
Monthly
  2002-Sep.
       Oct.
       Nov.
       Dec.
Levels ($billions):
Monthly
  2003-May
       June
       July
       Aug.
       Sep. p
Weekly
  2003-Sep.  1
             8
            15
            22
            29
Oct.  6p
            13p
Period
In M3 onlyIn M2
p    prel iminary
*        FIN 46-adjusted growth rates for non-M2 M3 and M3 in July are 12.9 and 10.7, respectively.  FIN 46 has had no material impact on M2 as yet.
†        As of July 7, includes $50 billion due to FIN 46 effects.
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 Strictly Confidential
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted) Class II FOMC
October 23, 2003
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5 
Agency total
Net  Redemptions Net Net Purchases 3  Redemptions Net  Redemptions outright Short- Long- Net
Purchases 2 (-) Change < 1 1-5 5-10 Over 10 (-) Change (-) holdings 4 Term 6 Term 7 Change
QIV 250 --- 250 --- 339 314 --- --- 653 --- 903 4,892 -304 4,588
QII 6,259 --- 6,259 2,209 1,790 234 --- --- 4,232 --- 10,491 -2,578 1,056 -1,522
QIII 2,568 --- 2,568 --- --- 1,232 150 --- 1,382 --- 3,950 1,712 -554 1,158
Jun 1,032 --- 1,032 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 1,032 -3,302 1,354 -1,948
Jul 808 --- 808 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 808 2,486 -1,548 938
Aug 981 --- 981 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 981 3,195 -935 2,259
Sep 780 --- 780 --- --- 1,232 150 --- 1,382 --- 2,162 -1,562 1,817 256
Aug 6 166 --- 166 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 166 4,612 -2,000 2,612
Aug 13 250 --- 250 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 250 -5,438 --- -5,438
Aug 20 235 --- 235 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 235 11,850 4,000 15,850
Aug 27 152 --- 152 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 152 -11,581 3,000 -8,581
Sep 3 257 --- 257 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 257 8,022 1,000 9,022
Sep 10 235 --- 235 --- --- 1,232 150 --- 1,382 --- 1,617 -9,930 -1,000 -10,930
Sep 17 347 --- 347 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 347 5,972 -2,000 3,972
Sep 24 47 --- 47 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 47 -4,707 -1,000 -5,707
Oct 1 187 --- 187 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 187 8,983 --- 8,983
Oct 8 71 --- 71 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 71 -8,795 -2,000 -10,795
Oct 15 207 --- 207 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 207 6,370 1,000 7,370
Oct 22 252 --- 252 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 252 -5,360 4,000 -1,360
Intermeeting Period
Sep 16-Oct 23 922 --- 922 --- 462 280 --- --- 742 --- 1,664 -6,234 2,000 -4,234
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
