Content last modified 05/27/2010.
Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
NOVEMBER 4, 2004
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.)     November 4, 2004 
Class I – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The FOMC’s decision at its September meeting to increase the target
federal funds rate 25 basis points to 1¾ percent, to assess the risks to sustainable
economic growth and price stability as balanced, and to retain the “measured pace”
language was widely expected and elicited only a muted reaction in financial markets.1
Despite mixed economic reports subsequently, the near-term expected path of
monetary policy moved higher (Chart 1).  Market participants apparently inferred an
increased likelihood of continued policy firming from both the minutes of the August
FOMC meeting, which noted the need for “significant cumulative policy tightening,”
and comments by the Chairman and other Federal Reserve officials, which were read
as downplaying the economic drag from elevated oil prices.  Futures market quotes
indicate that investors now place sizable odds on a quarter-point tightening at this
meeting, but expect a pause sometime soon.  The Desk’s survey of primary dealers
reveals that they uniformly expect firming at this meeting, most anticipate retention of
the measured pace language, and some see a modification of the statement to signal a
possible pause in the process of firming.  Futures quotes suggest that investors expect
the funds rate to rise to about 2¾ percent by the end of 2005.
(2) The shift in near-term policy expectations contributed to a flattening of the
term structure of interest rates, with the yield on the two-year Treasury note rising
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
Intermeeting Correlations of Oil Prices
with Treasury Yields and Stock Prices*
Jan-Mar Mar-May May-Jun Jun-Aug Aug-Sept Sept-Nov
*Correlation of daily changes in the log WTI spot oil price and the ten-year
Treasury yield (solid) and correlation of daily changes in the log WTI spot
price and in the log S&P 500 index (shaded). Red denotes statistically
significantly different from zero.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2003 2004
*Spot WTI price.
Nov. Feb. May July Oct. Jan. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
November 4, 2004
September 20, 2004
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premia and other adjustments.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2003 2004
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2003 2004
Inflation Compensation*
*Based on a comparison of an estimated TIPS yield curve to an estimated
nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2003 2004
Twelve Months Ahead
Six Months Ahead
Policy Uncertainty*
*Width of a 90 percent confidence interval for the federal funds rate
computed from the term structures for both the expected federal funds
rate and implied volatility.
Daily
FOMC
oil prices seemed to heighten concerns about the near-term prospects for inflation
and, at least at times, for output growth; both stock prices and bond yields often
moved closely and inversely with oil prices from day to day.  Treasury inflation-
indexed yields fell substantially, leaving inflation compensation over the next five
years 35 basis points higher and at the upper end of its range over the past few years.
Five-year inflation compensation five years ahead, however, edged down, and survey
measures of long-term inflation expectations remained well contained.
(3) Yields on investment-grade corporate bonds moved roughly in line with
those on nominal Treasury securities of comparable maturity, keeping risk spreads on
these securities about unchanged (Chart 2).3  In contrast, spreads on speculative-grade
debt narrowed 45 basis points.  Third-quarter corporate earnings reports ran slightly
ahead of expectations, but the rise in energy prices and news of investigations of
insurance industry practices weighed on equity prices.  In recent days, equity markets
rallied as the presidential election reached a decisive conclusion, and broad share price
indexes ended the period up 3½ to 4 percent on net.
(4) The exchange value of the dollar fell almost 5 percent on balance against a
basket of other major currencies over the intermeeting period, amid heightened
concerns about financing the deepening U.S. current account deficit (Chart 3).  At
times, market participants pointed to statements of Federal Reserve officials about
international financial developments as a factor contributing to such worries.  The
Chart 2
Capital Market Developments
Jan. June Nov. Apr. Oct. Mar. Aug.
2002 2003 2004
Wilshire
Nasdaq
Stock Prices
S&P 500 EPS
NIPA, economic
profits before tax
Corporate Earnings Growth Percent
*Change from four quarters earlier.
    Source. I/B/E/S for S&P 500 EPS.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2003 2004
S&P 500 (left scale)
Ten-Year Treasury Note (right scale)
Implied Volatility
Daily
FOMC
Long-run real Treasury yield*
* Yield on synthetic Treasury perpetuity minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year
     expected inflation.
  + Denotes the latest observation using daily interest rates and stock prices
     and latest earnings data from I/B/E/S.
Nov.
03
Jan. June Nov. Apr. Sept. Feb. July
2002 2003 2004
Basis Points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year high-yield (right scale)
Lower-Tier Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Jan. June Nov. Apr. Sept. Feb. July
2002 2003 2004
Ten-Year AA
Ten-Year Swap
Higher-Tier Corporate Bond Spreads*
*AA spread measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield
curve. Swap spread measured relative to the on-the-run Treasury security.
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2003 2004
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2003 2004
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Indexes Index(12/31/02=100)
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
FOMC  Daily
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2003 2004
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields
Percent
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2003 2004
EMBI+ Index
Basis Points
FOMC
Daily
dollar dropped most steeply against the Canadian dollar—about 6½ percent.  With
signs of further strengthening of Canadian domestic demand and concerns building
about inflation pressures, the Bank of Canada raised its official rate 25 basis points on
October 19.  Canada’s position as a net exporter of oil also seemed to provide support
to its currency.  The dollar declined 4¾ percent vis-à-vis the euro, moving close to a
record low, and depreciated 3½ percent against the yen.  Japanese authorities referred
publicly to taking action in the event that the yen continues to appreciate, but no
intervention occurred during the intermeeting period.4  Yields on long-term
government bonds edged up in Japan but fell about 10 to 20 basis points in Europe
and Canada over the intermeeting period.  Share prices in Japan dropped slightly, but
those in most other major industrial countries moved up about 2 to 3 percent on
balance.  The dollar depreciated slightly against currencies of our other important
trading partners.  In late October, the People’s Bank of China surprised markets by
increasing a benchmark one-year lending rate 27 basis points.  The move raised
uncertainties about the future pace of China’s economic expansion and prompted
speculation about possible changes in China’s fixed-exchange-rate regime.
(5) Domestic nonfinancial debt grew at a robust annual rate of about 7 percent
in the third quarter.  In the nonfinancial business sector, debt growth stepped up to
in part to the financing of a large merger transaction in the bond and commercial
paper markets (Chart 4).  Business loans at commercial banks continued to advance
last month, and results from the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey
indicate that banks have continued to ease standards and terms on these loans.
Household debt appears to have decelerated a little in the third quarter as mortgage
borrowing, although remaining quite brisk, slowed somewhat while consumer debt
Chart 4
Debt and Money
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
Monthly rate
Changes in C&I Loan Standards and Demand*
*Fraction of respondents reporting (tighter standards / increased
demand) less fraction reporting (looser standards / decreased
demand) for large and medium-sized firms.
Source. Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.
Growth of Household Debt Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
e Estimated.
Q3 e
Q3 e
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Applications
(left axis)
Originations
(right axis)
Source. Staff estimates.
Mortgage Refinancing Activity
$BillionsIndex(3/16/90 = 100)
Monthly, s.a. Monthly, s.a.
Equity Funds
Bond Funds*
Net Inflows to Equity
and Bond Mutual Funds
Monthly rate, n.s.a.
* Includes hybrid funds but excludes reinvested dividends.
e Estimated.
Velocity
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
Percent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
continued to expand at a moderate pace.  After surging in the first half, federal sector
debt advanced moderately in the third quarter.  In October, the Treasury reached the
statutory debt limit and began using extraordinary accounting devices to continue
funding government activity (see box).
(6) M2 grew at a moderate pace in September but slowed in October.  Money
growth was likely damped by a further rise in the opportunity cost of holding M2
assets, as yields paid on deposits have lagged the increases in open market rates that
accompanied monetary policy tightening.  Thus far, the increase in the opportunity
cost of holding M2 about matches the experience of recent policy tightening periods.
M2 velocity edged higher in the third quarter, roughly in line with historical
relationships among money, nominal income, and opportunity costs.
Treasury Debt Subject to Limit
On October 14, 2004, the Treasury reached its statutory debt limit of $7,384 billion.  As 
in previous debt limit episodes, the Treasury resorted to a set of extraordinary accounting 
devices to avoid violating the statute, denoted by the shaded area in the chart below.  So far, 
the Treasury has begun to underinvest the Government Securities Investment Fund (the so-
called G-fund), part of the federal employees’ thrift savings plan.  In the past, the Treasury 
also increased debt issued by the Federal Financing Bank—debt which is not subject to the 
limit—to extinguish other Treasury debt and tapped both the Exchange Stabilization Fund 
and the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund.  While the total room for borrowing 
made available by these accounting devices will depend on the Secretary’s declaration of the 
likely duration of the debt limit emergency period, staff estimates suggest that the Treasury 
will be able to maintain normal cash and debt management practices at least through late 
November; however, on November 3, the Treasury announced that it may need to postpone 
the November 18 settlement of the four-week bill if the limit has not been raised.  The 
Congress is scheduled to reconvene the week of November 15 in order to pass 
appropriations legislation for the fiscal year, and Congressional leadership has signaled an 
intention to raise the debt limit then.  In order to make its debt issuance more predictable, 
the Treasury suspended issuance of SLGS—securities purchased by municipal governments 
to comply with rules surrounding advance refunding.  To date, there has been no evidence 
that concerns about the debt limit have affected financial markets.
Policy Alternatives
(7) The staff has marked down its outlook for economic activity through the
first quarter of next year, but the broad outline of the forecast through 2006 is
otherwise similar to that prepared for the September FOMC meeting.  The staff
forecast assumes that the Committee will raise the target federal funds rate to
tighten in late 2005 and into 2006.  This trajectory for the federal funds rate runs well
below the path embedded in market yields.  In the Greenbook projection, the outlook
of investors is assumed to align gradually with that of the staff, and the resultant
downward revisions to policy expectations lead to a modest decline in long-term
yields.  The projected path for stock prices is almost identical to that of the last round
and, as in prior Greenbooks, provides investors a risk-adjusted return comparable to
that on fixed-income securities.  The staff continues to assume about a 2 percent rate
of depreciation in the foreign exchange value of the dollar, albeit from its current
lower level.  Against this financial backdrop, real GDP growth averages about
about 4 percent thereafter.  Accordingly, resource slack is gradually taken up after the
first quarter of next year, bringing the unemployment rate close to the staff’s
estimated NAIRU of 5 percent by the end of the forecast period.  Although
diminishing, resource slack should continue to put downward pressure on core
consumer price inflation.  But these pressures are expected to be offset by a slowing
in the pace of structural productivity growth and, for a time, by the delayed effects of
past increases in the prices of oil and core imports.  Core PCE inflation is forecast at
about 1½ percent in 2005 and 2006.
(8) Table 1 presents three alternatives for near-term policy, together with draft
language for the Committee’s announcement.  The rationale paragraph has been
updated to reflect recent readings on the economy as well as the passage of time,
Table 1: Alternative Language for the November FOMC Announcement
September FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 1¾ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 
2 percent, bringing the cumulative 
increase in the target rate over the past 
several months to 1 percentage point.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to  
2 percent.
The Committee believes that the stance 
of monetary policy remains somewhat 
accommodative and, coupled with 
robust underlying growth in 
productivity, is providing ongoing 
support to economic activity.
The Committee believes that the 
stance of monetary policy remains 
somewhat accommodative and, 
coupled with robust underlying 
growth in productivity, is providing 
ongoing support to economic activity.
[Unchanged from
September statement]
Output appears to be growing at a 
moderate pace, and labor market 
conditions have improved modestly.
Output appears to be growing at a 
moderate pace, and labor market 
conditions have improved modestly.
Output appears to be growing at a 
moderate pace, and labor market 
conditions have improved modestly. Rationale
Despite the rise in energy prices, 
inflation and longer-term inflation 
expectations remain well contained.
Despite the rise in energy prices, 
inflation and longer-term inflation 
expectations seem to remain well 
contained.
Although longer-term inflation 
expectations seem to remain well 
contained, rising energy prices and an 
escalation of business costs have the 
potential to contribute to upward 
pressure on prices.
[Unchanged from
September statement]
[Unchanged from
September statement]
[Unchanged from
September statement]
Assessment 
of Risk
With underlying inflation expected to 
be relatively low, the Committee 
believes that policy accommodation can 
be removed at a pace that is likely to be 
measured. Nonetheless, the Committee 
will respond to changes in economic 
prospects as needed to fulfill its 
obligation to promote price stability 
and sustainable growth.
[Unchanged from 
September statement]
[Unchanged from 
September statement]
which makes mention of developments earlier this year less relevant.  The description
of the labor market will depend importantly on the employment report released
tomorrow, but, as a placeholder, the entry in the table describes conditions as having
improved modestly.  If economic circumstances diverge significantly from this
characterization, staff will circulate alternative language in advance of Wednesday’s
meeting.  Under Alternative A, the federal funds rate target would be maintained at
might now be more inclined to pause in the process of removing policy
accommodation.  Under Alternative C, the funds rate would also be raised to
of policy at least as rapid as currently embodied in market expectations.  Under all
three alternatives, it seems likely that the Committee would view the risks to growth
and price stability as about balanced after the policy announcement.
(9) The current degree of stimulus provided by financial market prices
embodies the expectation of tightening at this meeting followed by a brief pause.  If
the Committee regarded the outlook for economic activity and inflation given these
financial conditions as striking an appropriate balance between reducing slack and
limiting inflation risks, it might wish to validate those expectations by tightening
which includes language intended to signal a possible pause in the removal of policy
accommodation.  The Committee might view a further quarter-point tightening at this
meeting as an appropriate step in the direction suggested by standard policy
benchmarks:  Such a tightening would be consonant with the prescriptions from a
battery of interest rate rules (Chart 5) and would boost the real federal funds rate
nearer to the middle of the range of various measures of the equilibrium real interest
rate (Chart 6).  The Committee’s desire to align the stance of policy more closely with
Chart 5
Actual and Assumed Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Values from Policy Rules and Futures Markets
Shaded region is the range of values from rules 1a, 2a, 4, 5, and 6, below
Actual federal funds rate and Greenbook assumption
Market expectations estimated from futures quotes
Values of the Federal Funds Rate from Policy Rules and Futures Markets
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
** Computed using average TIPS and nominal Treasury yields to date.
Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, Bt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt-yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, B* policymakers’
long-run objective for inflation, it-1 the lagged federal funds rate, gt-1  the residual from the rule’s
prescription the previous quarter, (yt+3|t-yt+3|t*) the staff’s three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap,
() yt+3|t-) yt+3|t*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less potential output growth three quarters ahead,
Bt+3|t a three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t-ut+3|t*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast of the
unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from the Greenbook and staff memoranda
closest to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Rule Specification
Root-mean-
square error
Rules with Imposed Coefficients
.83a .32a
Rules with Estimated Coefficients
it = .53it-1 + 0.47 [1.07 + 0.97(yt-yt*)
        + 1.51Bt]+ 0.48gt-1
.23 .25
it = .72it-1 + 0.28 [0.46 + 1.07(yt+3|t-yt+3|t*)
        + 1.66Bt+3|t] + 0.32gt-1
.25 .26
it = 0.49it-2 + 0.51 [0.27
        ! 2.10(ut+3|t-ut+3|t*) + 1.60Bt+3|t] .45 .61
it = 0.97it-1+ [-1.21 + 0.66Bcomp5|t] .43b .46
a RMSE for rules with imposed coefficients is calculated setting B*=2.
b RMSE for TIPS-based rule is calculated for 1999:1-2004:3.
Chart 6
Actual Real Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Estimated Equilibrium Real Rates
Actual Real Funds Rate
Historical Average: 2.7 (1964Q1-2004Q3)
TIPS-Based Estimate
Equilibrium Real Funds Rate Estimates (Percent)
*** Also employs the staff projection for the current and next quarters.
*** Also employs the staff projection for the current quarter.
*** Adjusts the five-year forward, five-year real rate by an assumed term premium of 75 basis points.
such benchmarks might be heightened by the perceived need to be vigilant in
response to the decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar and the jump in
some short-term measures of inflation compensation.  Looking forward, though, the
Committee might regard a pause following this firming action as potentially prudent
given the uncertainties attending the macroeconomic outlook.  Such a pause would
allow the Committee time to assess the underlying strength of aggregate demand and,
given relatively anchored longer-term inflation expectations, might be viewed as
imposing little cost.
(10) Regarding the announcement of Alternative B, the Committee might signal
the possibility of a pause by noting that the firming brings “the cumulative increase
in the target rate over the past several months to 1 percentage point.”  A mention of the
cumulative policy tightening would convey the sense that the Committee was
reflecting upon the extent to which accommodation had been removed.  Citing
cumulative changes is a device last employed in the FOMC statements of June and
August 2001.  The sense that the Committee was inclined to pause for a time might
be reinforced by characterizing the stance of policy as remaining “somewhat
accommodative,” rather than “accommodative” as in the September announcement, and
would seem to parallel the Committee’s decision in January 2002 when it first
characterized policy as accommodative when the funds rate was at 1-3/4 percent.
(11) The market reaction to the announcement for Alternative B is difficult to
gauge precisely.  Futures quotes indicate that market prices have largely, but not
completely, built in a quarter-point tightening at Wednesday’s meeting, suggesting that
such an action would probably impart a bit of upward pressure to near-term yields.  In
addition, options data indicate that investors attach some probability to scenarios in
which the funds rate remains at 2 percent for a few meetings.  Nonetheless, the signal
of a possible pause might cause investors to mark down the odds they currently seem
to attach to tightening over the next several months.  In such circumstances, longer-
term yields could edge lower and stock prices might tick up.
(12) Against the backdrop of higher oil prices and a weaker dollar, the
Committee might believe that inflation pressures under the Greenbook policy
assumption are unlikely to be as well-contained as in the staff forecast.  Indeed, both
market- and survey-based measures of near-term inflation expectations moved higher
over the intermeeting period.  Faced with these developments, the Committee might
wish to tighten policy a quarter-point and adopt the firmer statement language shown
for Alternative C.  Even if the Committee found the staff forecast of a gradual
decline in inflation to be both likely and generally acceptable as a modal assessment, it
might be concerned about upside risks to the outlook.  In particular, as discussed in
the “more inflation” scenario in the Greenbook, inflation could pick up markedly if
the rise in oil prices were to trigger a significant increase in long-term inflation
expectations.  Moreover, the Committee might harbor some concerns that inflation
pressures could build if—as envisioned in the “slower productivity” Greenbook
simulation—the favorable productivity growth trends witnessed in recent years fade
over time.  In such circumstances, policy might need to be tightened relatively briskly
at coming meetings, perhaps inclining the Committee to be reluctant to hint now that
it might pause in the process of firming.
(13) The announcement of Alternative C could cite the increase in the target rate
to 2 percent with no intimation of a pause any time soon.  The stance of policy might
still be characterized simply as “accommodative” and the rationale paragraph might note
that “rising energy prices and an escalation of business costs have the potential to contribute to
upward pressure on prices” so as to highlight concerns about inflation.  The Committee
could retain the measured pace language and might also continue to assess the risks to
growth and price stability as balanced, particularly if it viewed that assessment as
conditioned on an assumption of appropriate policy.
(14) Such an announcement would probably be read as suggesting that the
FOMC is placing somewhat greater weight on inflation risks than the market currently
perceives.  It seems likely then that both real and nominal interest rates would edge
higher, and stock prices would fall.  The market reaction might be more muted if the
references to mounting inflation pressures were not as explicit.  That said, it is also
possible that, without the hint of a pause, investors would be more likely to build in
expectations of tightening at each of the next several meetings given the experience of
four consecutive firmings.  In that event, the rise in interest rates and the drop in
stock prices could be more substantial.
(15) Given the disappointing data on employment and industrial production in
recent months, along with the mixed signals from other economic indicators, the
Committee’s assessment of the near-term prospects for spending and employment
might be less optimistic than in the staff forecast.  In particular, members might read
the meager pace of hiring since the spring and weak high-tech spending as evidence of
continued reluctance on the part of firms to make significant commitments in the
current environment.  The still-weak tone in labor markets also might be viewed as a
factor depressing consumer confidence and so weighing on household spending.  In
that circumstance, the Committee might see less need to continue removing policy
accommodation at this meeting and choose to keep the funds rate at 1¾ percent and
issue a statement like that shown in Alternative A.  Even if the Committee judged the
staff forecast as likely, it might consider the projected progress in working down slack
as too slow to be acceptable, especially given that core PCE inflation runs at
concerns about disinflation were acute.  The Committee might also be concerned
about possible downside risks to the forecast from high oil prices and the potential
for a deceleration in consumer spending similar to that in the “faltering expansion”
scenario in the Greenbook.
(16) The announcement of Alternative A would indicate an unchanged target
federal funds rate but otherwise might look fairly similar to the announcement for the
September meeting.  The statement might characterize policy as “somewhat”
accommodative while the final sentence would underscore the Committee’s
commitment to both its price stability and sustainable growth objectives.  Given the
actual pause in policy adjustment, the “cumulative increase” wording employed in
Alternative B would not seem necessary.  Such an announcement would come as a
surprise to market participants.  Both real and nominal yields would likely decline and
stock prices could increase.  However, if investors interpreted the announcement as
portending weaker-than-expected economic activity, the rise in stock prices might be
muted while the drop in yields could be more pronounced.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(17) Growth of M2 from the fourth quarter of last year to the fourth quarter of
this year is currently projected at about 5 percent.  Under the staff forecast, M2
growth steps down to about 2½ percent next year, owing largely to the lagged effects
of the policy tightening undertaken in recent months on opportunity costs.  Stronger
nominal income growth in 2006 contributes to a projected acceleration in M2 to a
the forecast period, primarily reflecting a decline in household debt growth as slowing
home price appreciation trims the pace of mortgage borrowing.  Growth of the debt
of nonfinancial businesses is anticipated to pick up over the forecast period as capital
spending begins to outstrip internal funds by a wider margin.  Stronger income
growth is projected to bolster federal tax revenues and reduce federal deficits, but
federal debt is projected to advance at a pace exceeding that of nominal GDP.
No change Raise 25 bp*
Monthly Growth Rates
* This forecast is consistent with the Greenbook nominal GDP and interest rate path.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Statement
(18) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
(1) Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around _______ 1¾.
(2) Risk Assessments
A. The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters to be roughly equal.  With underlying inflation expected to be
relatively low, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be
removed at a pace this is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the
Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to
fulfill its obligation to promote price stability and sustainable growth.
B. The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters to be roughly equal.  With underlying inflation expected to be
relatively low, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be
removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the
Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to
fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.
C. The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters to be roughly equal.  With underlying inflation expected to be
relatively low, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be
removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the
Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to
fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.
Appendix Chart 1
The Yield Curve
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
November 4, 2004   
September 20, 2004
Selected Treasury Yield Curves*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Appendix Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Appendix Chart 3
Stock Indexes
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
S&P 500*
Appendix Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Appendix Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
+
+
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
+
+
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
Appendix Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
Ratio scale, index (1980=100)
Journal of Commerce Index
Ratio scale, index (1967=100)
CRB Spot Industrials
CRB Futures
Appendix Chart 7
Growth of Real M2 and M3
Appendix Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2 and Two
Estimates of V*
GDP implicit
price deflator (P)
Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*), given
current M2 and constant V*
Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*) given
current M2 and V* with shift
Constant V*
V* with shift
* Change in GDP implicit price deflator over the previous four quarters.
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 Strictly Confidential
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted) Class II FOMC
November 4, 2004
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5 
Agency total
Net  Redemptions Net Net Purchases 3  Redemptions Net  Redemptions outright Short- Long- Net
Purchases 2 (-) Change < 1 1-5 5-10 Over 10 (-) Change (-) holdings 4 Term 6 Term 7 Change
QIV 3,299 --- 3,299 2,561 3,188 1,350 20 --- 7,118 10 10,407 -561 2,750 2,189
QIII 4,508 --- 4,508 1,898 4,406 1,507 434 --- 8,244 --- 12,753 -1,787 782 -1,005
Apr 3,516 --- 3,516 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 3,516 1,041 1,355 2,396
Jun 3,831 --- 3,831 --- 1,760 275 --- --- 2,035 --- 5,866 -1,738 1,824 86
Aug 83 --- 83 --- 428 568 --- --- 996 --- 1,078 -750 -1,323 -2,072
Oct 500 --- 500 1,593 2,765 1,225 400 --- 5,984 --- 6,484 -2,121 -4,443 -6,564
Aug 18 7 --- 7 --- 428 568 --- --- 996 --- 1,003 -1,806 1,000 -806
Aug 25 68 --- 68 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 68 -990 4,000 3,010
Sep 1 8 --- 8 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 8 4,740 2,000 6,740
Sep 8 18 --- 18 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 18 -5,150 4,000 -1,150
Sep 15 41 --- 41 --- 799 --- --- --- 799 --- 840 385 1,000 1,385
Sep 22 1,664 --- 1,664 --- --- 400 400 --- 800 --- 2,464 -321 -2,000 -2,321
Oct 6 1,770 --- 1,770 --- 1,198 --- --- --- 1,198 --- 2,968 296 -4,000 -3,704
Oct 13 29 --- 29 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 29 3,612 -1,000 2,612
Oct 20 200 --- 200 --- 171 823 --- --- 994 --- 1,195 -656 --- -656
Nov 3 192 --- 192 --- 1,086 118 --- --- 1,204 --- 1,396 1,739 -2,000 -261
Intermeeting Period
Sep 21-Nov 4 3,841 --- 3,841 1,593 3,951 1,973 491 --- 8,009 --- 11,849 -8,751 -7,000 -15,751
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
NOVEMBER 5, 2004
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES: UPDATE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.)     November 5, 2004 
Class I – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
An Update
Attached is an exhibit that details the market reaction to this morning’s
employment report and a revised version of table 1 from the Bluebook.  As shown in
the top panel of the market reaction exhibit, interest rates and policy expectations
registered substantial increases following the release of the employment report.  As of
structure.  Treasury inflation-indexed yields rose nearly as much as comparable-
maturity nominal yields, suggesting that much of the market response was attributable
to an upward revision in the market’s outlook for real economic activity.  The
November federal funds futures contract ticked up a half basis point, putting the
implied probability of a quarter-point tightening at the upcoming meeting at 90
percent.  Further-ahead futures rates were marked up as much as 20 basis points, as
investors evidently concluded that a more vigorous expansion would likely be
accompanied by more rapid policy tightening than they had previously expected.
The bottom left panel of the exhibit displays the option-implied probability
distribution for the employment report outcome based on the economic derivatives
auction held at 8:00 a.m. today.  As noted by the vertical line, the reported increase of
sizable market reaction.  But, as noted at the right, the market reaction was sizable
even controlling for the magnitude of the surprise.  For example, the response of the
ten-year Treasury yield—denoted by the blue square—was larger than would have
been predicted based upon a historical event-study regression (shown by the thin
black line) but was quite close to the regression line based on experience over the last
year (the red line) during which markets have appeared especially sensitive to news
bearing on labor market conditions.
In view of the sizable employment gains reported for October and the upward
revisions for the prior two months, as well as comments from several members, the
staff has revised Bluebook table 1.  The revised table eliminates alternative A and
incorporates a new variation on alternative B that is labeled alternative B’.  The new
alternative does not hint that the Committee is entertaining the possibility of a pause.
As a result, the language of alternative B’ incorporates only minimal changes to the
wording of the September FOMC statement.  Alternatives B and C in the revised
table are slightly revised for clarity, with material struck out in rows three and four.
Exhibit 1
MMS Survey Expectation: 180 Released
   Value
* Thursday close
Table 1: Alternative Language for the November FOMC Announcement (Revised)
September FOMC Alternative B Alternative B’ Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise 
its target for the federal funds 
rate by 25 basis points to 2 
percent, bringing the cumulative 
increase in the target rate over 
the past several months to 1 
percentage point.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to 
raise its target for the federal 
funds rate by 25 basis points to 
2 percent.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise 
its target for the federal funds rate 
by 25 basis points to  
2 percent.
The Committee believes that the 
stance of monetary policy 
remains accommodative and, 
coupled with robust underlying 
growth in productivity, is 
providing ongoing support to 
economic activity.
[Unchanged from
September statement]
[Unchanged from
September statement]
Output appears to be growing at 
a moderate pace, and labor 
market conditions have improved 
modestly.
Output appears to be growing at 
a moderate pace, and labor 
market conditions have 
improved modestly.
Output appears to be growing at a 
moderate pace, and labor market 
conditions have improved 
modestly.
Despite the rise in energy prices, 
inflation and longer-term 
inflation expectations seem to 
remain well contained.
Despite the rise in energy prices, 
inflation and longer-term 
inflation expectations remain 
well contained.
Although longer-term inflation 
expectations seem to remain well 
contained, rising energy prices and 
an escalation of business costs 
have the potential to contribute to 
upward pressure on prices.
[Unchanged from
September statement]
[Unchanged from
September statement]
[Unchanged from
September statement]
Assessment 
of Risk
[Unchanged from 
September statement]
[Unchanged from 
September statement]
[Unchanged from 
September statement]
