Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Content last modified 04/01/2015.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
MARCH 13, 2009
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR)                           March 13, 2009
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Although the functioning of a few financial markets showed some limited
signs of improvement over the intermeeting period, financial conditions overall
appeared to become even less supportive of economic activity.  Despite having paired
some of their earlier losses in recent days, broad equity price indexes dropped
significantly, on balance, amid continued concerns about the health of the financial
sector, uncertainty around the efficacy of government support to the sector, and a
sharp further weakening of the economic outlook.  Banks’ stock prices were
particularly hard hit, and their credit default swap (CDS) spreads rose above the peaks
recorded last fall, on anxieties about the financial conditions of the largest banks.
Unsecured short-term bank funding markets, which had improved notably late last
year, showed some renewed signs of deterioration.
(2) Yields on long-term Treasury securities increased, on net, likely pressured in
part by expectations of heavy issuance.  Long-term TIPS-based measures of inflation
compensation, which have been distorted by strained liquidity conditions in recent
months, declined over the intermeeting period.  In contrast, survey measures of long-
term inflation expectations have changed little since the end of January.  Market- and
survey-based measures of policy expectations indicate that investors anticipate federal
funds to trade within the current target range at least through the third quarter of this
(3)   Federal Reserve purchases of agency debt and MBS continued during the
intermeeting period.  Spreads of agency debt and agency MBS narrowed, on net.
Gross issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds by nonfinancial firms remained
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 2 of 60
strong in February, while shorter-term business credit appears to have contracted over
the same period.  Spreads on AAA-rated consumer asset-backed securities (ABS) have
continued to decline since late January, reportedly in anticipation of improved
conditions in securitization markets due to the upcoming launch of the Term Asset-
Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF).
(4) Major foreign central banks cut their policy rates aggressively in response to
the rapidly deteriorating global economic outlook.  The Bank of England, the Bank of
Japan, and the Swiss National Bank announced new programs to purchase assets in
financial markets.  The U.S. dollar appreciated broadly against major and emerging
market currencies.  Foreign equity prices declined sharply.
Financial Institutions
(5) Investors’ concerns about the condition of several major financial
institutions intensified over the intermeeting period.  Despite having retraced some of
the initial moves in recent days, banks’ stock prices dropped to new lows and CDS
spreads on subordinated and senior debt reached very high levels, reportedly as a
result of investor disappointment regarding the outline of the Financial Stability Plan
(FSP) announced by the U.S. government on February 10 and growing concerns that
Citigroup and Bank of America would require additional government support
(Chart 1). 1 Preferred stocks of the largest banks have generally continued to decline,
on net, since the end of January.
(6) On February 27, Citigroup disclosed a plan to strengthen its capital
structure through a conversion of a significant portion of its preferred securities to
Chart 1
Financial Institutions
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2007 2008 2009
Bank ETF
Jan.
FOMC
Mar. 
 12
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2007 2008 2009
Basis points
Mar. 
 11
Senior CDS spreads for bank holding companies
Jan.
FOMC
Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar.
2008 2009
Citigroup
JPMorgan Chase
Bank of America
Wells Fargo
Jan.
FOMC
Mar. 
 12
Preferred equity
Source. Bloomberg.
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2007 2008 2009
Insurance ETF
Jan.
FOMC
Mar. 
 12
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2007 2008 2009
Sallie Mae Corp.
Nelnet Inc.
Student Loan Corp.
Jan.
FOMC
Mar. 
 12
Selected student lender equity prices
Source. Bloomberg.
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2007 2008 2009
Jan.
FOMC
Mar. 
 11
CDS spread for GE Capital
Source. Markit.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 3 of 60
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 4 of 60
common equity with exchange offers, and the Treasury announced that it would be
willing to convert a portion of its preferred security interest in the holding company
to common equity to the extent that Citigroup reaches an agreement with its other
preferred holders and that a set of conditions are met.2  Citigroup’s stock price
remained under significant stress after the announcement, reaching a record low level
of $1, although it has recovered somewhat in recent days.
(7) Stock prices of insurance companies dropped sharply, on net, reflecting
concerns about their capitalization sparked by expectations of increased losses on
their investment portfolios.  Announcements of significant dividend cuts by insurance
companies also reportedly weighed on market sentiment toward the sector.  CDS
spreads of insurance firms reached new highs during the intermeeting period,
although they have retraced their earlier increases in recent days.    On March 2, AIG
posted a record loss of more than $60 billion for the fourth quarter of last year, and
the Treasury and the Federal Reserve announced a restructuring of the company’s
assistance program to enhance its capital and liquidity position.3
Company, two life insurance holding company subsidiaries of AIG.  In addition, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York will make new loans of up to approximately $8.5 billion to SPVs 
established by domestic life insurance subsidiaries of AIG. The SPVs will repay the loans 
from the cash flows received from designated blocks of existing life insurance policies held 
by the parent insurance companies. The proceeds of the loans will pay down an equivalent 
amount of outstanding debt under the Revolving Credit Facility.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 5 of 60
(8) Developments at some other financial institutions were also negative during
the intermeeting period.  Equity prices of the largest private providers of government-
guaranteed student loans tumbled following the release of the 2010 federal budget
proposal on February 17.  Under the proposal, Congress would eliminate all
government subsidies for financial institutions that lend to students under the Federal
Family Education Loan Program (FFELP), and require that all government-
guaranteed student loans be originated through the federal government’s Direct Loan
Program.  In addition, CDS spreads for GE Capital widened sharply, on net, and the
equity price of its parent company General Electric dropped, on balance, as investors’
concerns about the quality of assets on GE Capital’s balance sheet intensified during
the intermeeting period.  On March 12, Standard & Poor’s downgraded General
Electric's long term debt AAA rating to AA+.
(9) Financial institutions issued about $75 billion of debt under the FDIC’s
Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program (TLGP) over the intermeeting period,
bringing the total amount outstanding under the program to $200 billion.  Spreads of
yields on FDIC-guaranteed debt over those on comparable-maturity Treasury
securities changed little, on net, over the intermeeting period, remaining in the 50 to
Market Functioning
(10) There were mixed changes in the functioning of financial markets over the
intermeeting period.  Although some signs of improvement were visible in certain
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 6 of 60
areas, particularly in the commercial paper (CP) and repo markets, many other
markets remained under considerable stress.
(11) Partly reflecting pressures resulting from a large supply of newly issued
Treasury securities, the overnight general collateral repo rate increased to slightly
above 25 basis points over the intermeeting period from about 10 basis points in
January, exerting upward pressure on the federal funds rate, which increased to the
upper end of its target range.  Trading volumes in overnight repos for Treasury
collateral inched higher, but stayed at depressed levels, and volumes traded in the
overnight federal funds market were little changed at levels well below those seen
prior to the significant increase in reserve balances in the fall of last year.  Despite the
low level of interest rates, delivery fails on Treasury securities have remained moderate
since late January.  Conditions in repo markets for agency debt and CMBS showed
some signs of improvement over the intermeeting period, as bid-asked spreads
narrowed and haircuts fell.  In contrast, conditions in the repo market for private-label
residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) were mixed, and trading volumes of
repos for all collateral types remained low.
(12) In unsecured interbank funding markets, Libor fixings (and spreads over
OIS) trended higher, on net, over the intermeeting period, especially at longer
maturities, and forward spreads increased, owing to renewed concerns about the
financial condition of some large banks (Chart 2).  Consistent with some deterioration
in interbank funding markets, credit outstanding under the Term Auction Facility
(TAF) increased over the period as the more recent auctions have experienced higher
demand than the previous ones.   Nonetheless, one-month Libor changed little as it
passed quarter-end on February 27, pointing to limited market concerns regarding
pressures over the upcoming quarter-end.   The auction results of the Term Securities
Lending Facility Options Program (TOP), covering quarter-end, also pointed to
limited market expectations of quarter-end pressures, as, for the first time, bids fell
Chart 2
Market Functioning
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec.
2007 2008 2009
Spreads of Libor over OIS
Daily Jan.
FOMC
Mar. 
 12
July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr.
2007 2008 2009
ABCP
A2/P2
Mar. 
 11
Jan.
FOMC
Spreads on 30-day commercial paper
Trading volume (left scale)
Turnover (right scale)
On-the-run treasury market volume and turnover
Monthly average
Jan.
FOMC
Basis points
Treasury on-the-run premium
Monthly average
Jan.
FOMC
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2007 2008 2009
Source. LSTA/LPC Mark-to-Market Pricing.
Pricing in the secondary market for leveraged loans
Jan.
FOMC
Average bid price
(right scale)
Average bid-asked spread
(left scale)
Mar. 
 11
Oct. Dec. Feb. Apr. June Aug. Oct. Dec. Feb. Apr.
2007 2008 2009
AAA Senior
AAA Junior**
CMBX indexes*
Daily Jan.
FOMC
Mar. 
 11
*Series 4: Covers CMBS issued in late 2007.
**First loss among AAA-rated tranches.
Source. JP Morgan.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 7 of 60
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 8 of 60
short of the total offered amount, despite a reduction of the loan rate fee to 25 basis
points from 50 basis points in the most recent auction (see the box “Federal Reserve
balance sheet developments over the intermeeting period”).
(13) Conditions in the CP market continued to improve, on balance, over the
intermeeting period.  Spreads on A2/P2-rated CP trended down further, and those on
AA-rated asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) remained at the lower end of the
range recorded over the past year.  During the week of January 26, about $240 billion
of CP purchased in late October under the Commercial Paper Funding Facility
(CPFF) matured and a large portion was not renewed, as several financial issuers
reportedly paid down paper from the program using longer-term funding alternatives,
including FDIC-guaranteed debt.  Overall, the reduction in credit extended under the
CPFF accounted for most of the decline in total commercial paper outstanding over
the same period.
(14) The 3-month Treasury bill rate was slightly above the effective federal funds
rate for most of the intermeeting period, likely reflecting the large scale of bill
issuance.  Net par issuance of Treasury bills through March 12 totaled $238 billion, of
which $25 billion were issued under the Supplementary Financing Program (SFP),
leaving the total amount outstanding issued under the program at about $200 billion.4
(15) Trading conditions in the secondary market for nominal Treasury coupon
securities showed some limited signs of improvement.  Average bid-asked spreads for
on-the-run nominal Treasury notes were relatively stable near their pre-crisis levels,
and the average magnitude of fitting errors from nominal yield curve estimates
decreased notably, suggesting an increase in arbitrage activity.  Daily trading volumes
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 9 of 60
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet Developments over the Intermeeting Period
Since the last FOMC meeting, total assets on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet 
have contracted by about $60 billion to around $1,900 billion.1  More than accounting for 
the decline was a sharp contraction in foreign central bank liquidity swaps.  Reportedly, 
some foreign banks sought less expensive funding sources, while others pared their need 
for dollar funding by trimming their stocks of dollar-denominated assets.  Credit 
extended by the Commercial Paper Funding Facility edged down as 90-day paper 
purchased in the early weeks of the program continued to mature.  Only about 60 percent 
of the maturing paper issued during the early days of the program was rolled over, as 
some institutions apparently turned toward longer-term funding alternatives, including 
debt issued under the FDIC’s Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program.  Credit extended 
under the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility 
(AMLF), not shown separately, declined to about $7 billion, and the Money Market 
Investor Funding Facility (MMIFF) continued to register no activity.  Offsetting the 
downward movements, credit extended under the Term Auction Facility (TAF) and 
holdings of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities increased by about $80 billion 
each.  The expansion in TAF borrowing, which contrasted with the fall in central bank 
liquidity swaps, likely reflects in part the modestly heightened pressures in bank funding 
markets evident in the increase in term Libor over the intermeeting period.
On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, there was a steep decline 
in deposits of depository institutions, which fell by about $130 billion.  Deposits of other 
institutions, however, rose over the period.  U.S. Treasury deposits were a bit higher, on 
net.  The Treasury has essentially suspended investing excess cash in the commercial 
banking system.  Still, the Treasury General Account, which has fluctuated around a 
relatively high level, ended the period $14 billion lower.  The Supplementary Financing 
Account increased by $25 billion, on net, over the intermeeting period.  Deposits of 
GSEs (included in “other deposits”) increased $46 billion; these balances have been 
rather volatile in recent months and in particular have risen recently in anticipation of an 
upcoming principal and interest payment date.
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet 
Billions of dollars
Change 
since last 
FOMC
Current 
(3/11/2009)
Maximum 
level
Date of 
maximum
Total assets -62 1,901 2,256 12/17/2008
Total liabilities -63 1,857 2,213 12/4/2008
*Includes only mortgage-backed security purchases that have already settled.  Mortgage-backed security purchases 
totaling $155 billion are expected to settle on March 12, 2009.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 10 of 60
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 11 of 60
for on-the-run securities, however, inched lower, and spreads between the yields of
on- and off-the-run ten-year Treasury notes remained very high.
(16) Measures of liquidity in the secondary market for speculative-grade
corporate bonds worsened somewhat over the period, but remained significantly
better than in the fall of 2008.  The basis between the spread on the CDX Investment
Grade index and measures of investment-grade corporate bond spreads—a rough
measure of unexploited arbitrage opportunities in the corporate bond market—
remained at high levels.  Trading conditions in the leveraged syndicated loan market
improved slightly, although implied spreads on the LCDX index widened sharply, on
net, over the intermeeting period.  Price discovery in the CDS market continued to be
impaired, as evidenced by the wide range of CDS dealer quotes for the same reference
entities.5  The market for commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) also
remained under heavy stress.  Indexes of CDS spreads on AAA-rated CMBS (CMBX)
widened to record levels, as Moody’s downgraded a large portion of the 2006 and
Monetary Policy Expectations and Treasury Yields
(17) The Committee’s decision at the January meeting to leave the target range
for the federal funds rate unchanged and the wording of the accompanying statement
were widely anticipated by investors and had little impact on money markets.  The
path for the federal funds rate implied by futures rates shifted down somewhat, on
net, mostly on incoming news about the financial sector and the economic outlook
(Chart 3).  Based on our standard term premium adjustment of 1 basis point per
month, market quotes currently suggest that market participants anticipate that the
Chart 3
Interest Rate Developments
March 12, 2009
January 27, 2009
Expected federal funds rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
for term premiums and other adjustments.
Source. Chicago Mercantile Exchange and CBOT.
Implied distribution of federal funds rate six 
months ahead*
Recent: 3/12/2009
Last FOMC: 1/27/2009
Percent
*Derived from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, with term premium 
 and other adjustments to estimate expectations for the federal funds rate.
Source. CBOT.
Distribution of expected quarter of first rate increase
from the Desk’s Dealer Survey
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Recent: 14 respondents
Last FOMC: 15 respondents
Source. Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Nominal Treasury yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Source. Board staff estimates.
Jan.
FOMC
Mar. 
 12
Next 5 years
5-to-10 year forward
Inflation compensation*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury
yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Source. Barclays, PLC.; Bloomberg; Board staff estimates.
Jan.
FOMC
Mar. 
 12
Michigan Survey 1-year
Michigan Survey 10-year
Survey measures of inflation expectations
Source. Reuters/University of Michigan.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 12 of 60
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 13 of 60
first increase in the federal funds rate will occur in the fourth quarter of 2009, and that
the federal funds rate will reach about 1.1 percent by the end of 2010.  Six months
ahead, the option-implied distribution indicates that investors place about 45 percent
odds on the funds rate trading above the current target range.  However, term
premiums could well be higher than usual, implying a flatter path for the federal funds
rate.  Indeed, none of the respondents to the Desk’s survey of primary dealers expects
the federal funds rate to increase before the first half of 2010, and the majority of
respondents anticipate the first rate increase to occur on or after the first half of 2011.
(18) Yields on two- and ten-year nominal Treasury securities rose about 30 and
expectations for additional supply of these securities.  Option-implied measures of
uncertainty about longer-term Treasury yields increased over the period.
(19) Changes in market- and survey-implied measures of inflation expectations
were mixed.  Yields on longer-horizon inflation-indexed securities increased more
than those on their nominal counterparts, leaving five-year, five-year-ahead inflation
compensation about 30 basis points lower over the period.  Five-year inflation
compensation was, instead, little changed.  Poor liquidity in the TIPS market
continues to make these readings difficult to interpret.  Meanwhile, measures of
inflation compensation from inflation swaps, which have also poor liquidity, moved
up across different maturities.  Changes in longer-term inflation expectations from the
Philadelphia Fed and Michigan surveys were mixed but relatively small, while short-
term inflation expectations from both surveys declined modestly.  An analysis of the
deflation floor embedded in TIPS suggests that market participants see considerable
risks of cumulative deflation over the next few years (see the box “Extracting
Inflation Probabilities from TIPS”).
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 14 of 60
Extracting Deflation Probabilities from TIPS
Interest payments on TIPS are calculated based on the inflation-adjusted principal 
amount of the security, where the inflation adjustment reflects the cumulative change 
in the CPI since the bond was issued.  However, if the inflation-adjusted principal 
amount is below par at maturity, the bondholder receives a payment equal to par 
rather than the actual inflation-adjusted principal, a guarantee that is commonly 
referred to as the “deflation floor.”  Therefore, the price of TIPS comprises two 
parts:  the discounted value of the fully inflation-indexed principal and interest 
payments plus the value of an embedded put option on an inflation-adjusted discount 
bond with a strike price of par.
In the case of the most recently issued five-year TIPS (which has about four years left 
to maturity), the inflation-adjusted principal is currently slightly below par, so holders 
are fully protected against any further deflation occurring over the remaining life of 
the security.  In contrast, the protection against deflation offered by the TIPS security 
with the next closest remaining maturity—the ten year security issued on July 15, 
2003—is much less because inflation accrual over the past five years has driven up its 
inflation-adjusted principal to well above par, so that a substantial amount of 
deflation has to occur before the deflation floor is reached.  This difference means 
that the value of the embedded put option on the new five-year issue should be 
positive while that for the old ten-year will be close to zero, since it is unlikely that 
the embedded put option on the older issue will be “in the money” at maturity.  
Thus, assuming that the liquidity of the two issues is roughly similar, the difference in 
the market price of the two securities adjusted for differences in coupon payments, 
should be essentially equal to the value of the deflation floor on the recently issued 
five-year TIPS.  Performing this calculation yields a value for the embedded put in 
the 5-year TIPS of approximately $3.40 per $100 of face value.
Using this valuation, we can then back out the probability of deflation as equal to the 
likelihood that the future inflation-adjusted principal falls below par over the next 
four years, using the Black-Scholes put option formula with an assumption for the 
mean rate of inflation.  Assuming a mean rate of inflation obtained from inflation 
caps contracts (equal to 0.89 percent), we estimate a risk-neutral probability of 
cumulative deflation over the next four years of about 43 percent, and conditional on 
being in a state of deflation we also obtain an expected cumulative deflation rate of    
-4.7 percent.  Note, however, that this procedure may overestimate the probability of 
deflation and conditional expected deflation, because most investors are probably not 
risk neutral and because investors may well use different distributional assumptions 
in valuing the put option.  The average probability of deflation over the next year 
reported  in the desk’s primary dealer survey is 30 percent; the two probabilities, 
however, are not directly comparable because they are measured for different time 
horizons.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 15 of 60
Capital Markets
(20) Broad equity price indexes declined roughly 10 percent, on net, on increased
concerns about the economic outlook and the health of the financial sector (Chart 4).
Forward-trend earnings estimates for S&P 500 firms fell by similar amounts, resulting
in little change in the ratio of forward-trend earnings to the estimated real long-term
Treasury yield—a rough measure of the equity premium—from the high level
recorded over the past few months.  Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index
was little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period.
(21) In the corporate bond market, spreads of yields on BBB-rated bonds
relative to those on comparable-maturity Treasuries were little changed, while spreads
on speculative-grade bonds increased about 80 basis points.  The investment- and
speculative-grade CDX indexes widened significantly, on net, over the intermeeting
period.  Gross bond issuance by nonfinancial firms was very strong in January and
February, as investment-grade issuance more than doubled from its already solid pace
in the fourth quarter; speculative-grade issuance, however, remained sluggish.
(22) The System Open Market Account (SOMA) purchased $17.7 billion par
value of debt of the housing-related government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) over
the intermeeting period.  The Federal Reserve also purchased a net amount of $147.6
billion of agency-backed MBS between January 29 and March 11 (not all of which
have yet settled).6  Spreads on 10-year agency debt over swap rates narrowed about 20
basis points over the intermeeting period and those on agency MBS declined about 5
basis points, on net.  The interest rate on 30-year fixed-rate conforming mortgages
Chart 4
Asset Market Developments
Wilshire 5000
Dow Jones Financial
Equity prices
Source. Bloomberg.
Jan.
FOMC
Mar. 
 12
Implied volatility on S&P 500 (VIX)
Weekly (Fri.*)
*Latest observation is for most recent business day.
Source. Chicago Board of Exchange.
Jan.
FOMC
Mar. 
 12
Corporate bond spreads
Jan.
FOMC
Mar. 
 12
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov. Jan. Mar.
2008 2009
Basis points
Fannie Mae debt and MBS spreads
Jan.
FOMC
Mar. 
 11
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2007 2008 2009
FRM rate (left scale)
FRM spread (right scale)
Residential mortgage rates and spreads
Jan.
FOMC
Mar. 
 11
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec.
2007 2008 2009
Basis points
AAA ABS spreads
Jan.
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 16 of 60
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 17 of 60
was little changed over the intermeeting period, remaining slightly above 5 percent,
and its spread to the 10-year off-the-run Treasury yield narrowed about 25 basis
points.  On March 4, the Treasury announced additional details regarding the
Homeowner Affordability and Stability Plan, which sets guidelines to enable servicers
to begin modifications of eligible mortgage loans, and should help counter the
ongoing rise in foreclosures.
(23) The market for asset-backed securities (ABS) showed some tentative signs
of improvement.  The launch of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility
(TALF) was officially announced on March 3.  In the initial phase of the program, the
Federal Reserve will provide up to $200 billion of 3-year loans, on a non-recourse
basis, against AAA-rated ABS backed by newly and recently originated auto loans,
credit card loans, student loans, and SBA-guaranteed small business loans, and
potentially certain other closely related types of ABS.  Reportedly supported in part by
the upcoming launch of the TALF, indicative spreads on AAA-rated tranches of ABS
in the secondary market narrowed further during the intermeeting period; however,
issuance of student and auto loan ABS continues to be limited.  Market reports
indicate that several TALF-eligible auto transactions are currently in the pipeline and
ready to be brought to the facility at the first subscription for funding in mid-March.
(24) Conditions in the municipal bond market continued to show signs of
improvement for top-rated issuers over the intermeeting period, although issuance of
long-term municipal bonds in February remained at relatively low levels, and lower-
rated entities continued to report difficulties in raising funds.  Yields on long-term
municipal bonds decreased sharply with the passage of the fiscal stimulus bill, which
appeared to ease concerns about the credit quality of municipal bond issuers.  Despite
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 18 of 60
the yield decline, the ratio of municipal bond rates to those on comparable maturity
Treasury securities remained at elevated levels.7
Foreign Developments
(25) The deteriorating economic outlook led many central banks to cut their
policy rates over the period.  The European Central Bank and the Bank of Canada
both cut policy rates 50 basis points in March.  The Bank of England cut its target by
a cumulative 100 basis points and secured permission to purchase up to £150 billion
of government and corporate debt.  Ten-year sovereign yields in the United Kingdom
fell nearly 60 basis points following the announcement that the Bank of England
would purchase government bonds (Chart 5).8  The British government also initiated
its Asset Protection Scheme, insuring £325 billion of assets placed by Royal Bank of
Scotland and £260 billion placed by Lloyds while taking larger ownership shares in
both banks.  The Bank of Japan left its policy target unchanged, but announced plans
to purchase equities held on banks’ balance sheets as well as up to ¥1 trillion in
corporate bonds.  The Swiss National Bank cut its target for the 3-month Swiss franc
Libor rate by 25 basis points and announced that it would purchase both domestic
corporate debt and foreign currency to increase liquidity.
Chart 5
International Financial Indicators
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-year government bond yields (nominal)
Source. Bloomberg.
Jan.
FOMC
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal trade-weighted dollar indexes
Source. FRBNY and Bloomberg.
Jan.
FOMC
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock price indexes
Industrial countries
Source. Bloomberg.
Jan.
FOMC
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock price indexes
Emerging market economies
Source. Bloomberg.
Jan.
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 19 of 60
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 20 of 60
(26) The dollar has broadly appreciated since the January FOMC meeting as
foreign economic activity appears to be weakening much more than market
participants had anticipated.  The major currencies index of the dollar rose 5¾
percent on net as the dollar appreciated 3 to 10 percent against the euro, Canadian
dollar, and yen.  Foreign equity price indexes once again declined sharply, particularly
those for financial stocks.  Weak earnings reports and mounting concerns about losses
on loans to Eastern Europe led bank shares in the euro area to decline by a third of
their value.  Despite this, conditions in foreign currency interbank funding markets
were little changed on net, perhaps bolstered by the numerous government actions
taken over the past year to help support liquidity in those markets.
(27) The dollar appreciated 3 percent against the currencies of our other
important trading partners, rising nearly 6 percent against the Mexican peso and
support the peso, and South Korean officials also acknowledged selling dollars against
the won.  Equity indexes rose more than 7 percent in China as the government’s
stimulus package helped boost spending in key segments of the economy, and rose
modestly in Brazil and Korea, but stock prices declined 2 to 12 percent in the other
major emerging Asian and Latin American countries.  EMBI spreads for countries in
emerging Europe have risen in recent weeks as concerns about the economic outlook
in these countries have grown.  Foreign investment in emerging European equity
funds has declined more than 10 percent. The World Bank, European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and European Investment Bank (EIB)
announced plans to provide up to €24.5 billion in aid to help central and eastern
European banks weather the financial crisis, but further attempts to coordinate a
larger aid package from western European nations have thus far failed.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 21 of 60
Debt, Bank Credit, and Money
(28) Private sector debt growth has been quite weak.  The debt of the domestic
private nonfinancial sector was about flat in the fourth quarter of last year and is
projected to have remained so in the current quarter (Chart 6).  Household debt is
estimated to have contracted for the second quarter in a row, owing to declines in
both consumer and home mortgage debt that stem from very weak household
spending, the continued drop in house prices, and tighter terms and standards for
loans.  Business debt is projected to have expanded at a moderate pace in the current
quarter, largely owing to the burst of corporate bond issuance.  However, we do not
expect that the recent pace of issuance will be sustained.  Reflecting heavy borrowing
by the Treasury, total debt of the domestic nonfinancial sector is projected to have
expanded at a roughly 4½ percent annual rate in the first quarter, a deceleration from
the pace recorded in the fourth quarter of last year.
(29) Bank credit fell at an average annual rate of 4 percent in January and
February, and has now declined for four consecutive months (the first such
occurrence since 1948).  C&I loans have decreased at an annual rate of 7¾ percent
since the beginning of the year.  The February Survey of Terms of Business Lending
indicated that C&I loan rate spreads over comparable-maturity market instruments
rose modestly overall from the November survey, although spreads increased sharply
for lower-risk loans, especially those not made under previous commitment, a
category that reflects recent pricing.   Commercial real estate loans outstanding have
also declined thus far in 2009.  By contrast, consumer loans on banks' books jumped
over the first two months of the year, reflecting sizable increases at a few banks that
purchased loans from their affiliated finance companies.  In addition, some banks
brought consumer loans back onto their books that had previously been securitized.
After twelve consecutive months of contraction, residential mortgage loans on banks’
books increased in February, likely reflecting the pickup in refinancing activity.  In
Chart 6
Debt and Money
Growth of debt of nonfinancial sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Growth of debt of household sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Q1p
Q1p
Consumer
credit
Home
mortgage
Source. Flow of Funds, Federal Reserve G.19 release.
FHFA purchase-only index
S&P Case-Shiller national index
Growth of house prices
Annual rate, s.a.
Source. Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA),
Standard & Poor’s.
C&I loans
Commercial paper
Bonds
Changes in selected components of debt of
nonfinancial business sector*
Monthly rate
*Commercial paper and C&I loans are seasonally adjusted, bonds are not.
Source. Securities Data Company, Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation,
and Federal Reserve H.8 release.
Other
Home equity lines of credit
Credit card lines
Growth of unused commitments at commercial banks
Percent
Annual rate, n.s.a.
Source. Call reports.
Growth of M2
Source. Federal Reserve.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 22 of 60
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 23 of 60
contrast, the growth of home equity loans slowed noticeably in January and February.
According to Call Report data, unused loan commitments for the major loan
categories—consumer, business, and real estate loans—plunged in the fourth quarter
of last year, as banks cut new and existing loan commitments.
(30) M2 grew at an annual rate of about 4½ percent in February, a sharp
deceleration from the very rapid pace recorded over the past few months.  Liquid
deposits, while slowing considerably, continued to expand fairly briskly.  Savings
deposits surged while demand deposits decreased, owing in part to one large
institution’s resumption of its sweep program when it was clarified that swept funds
would be covered under the FDIC’s guarantee program.  Retail money funds fell
sharply in February, reflecting sizable outflows from Treasury-only funds, which have
very low yields.  Small time deposits also contracted noticeably, as the institutions that
had been bidding aggressively for these retail funds stopped doing so.  Currency
growth remained robust in February, with much of the strength reflecting foreign
demand, according to staff estimates.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 24 of 60
Economic Outlook
(31) Information received since the January Greenbook has confirmed that
the economy is undergoing a severe recession.  Real GDP is now estimated to have
contracted during the final quarter of 2008 at an annual rate of 6¾ percent—a
downward revision of nearly 2 percentage points since January—and is projected
to contract at a similar pace during the current quarter.  Over the intermeeting period,
broad equity price indexes fell about 14 percent, house prices continued to drop, and
measures of consumer confidence reached historical lows.  Incoming data on foreign
economies indicated that major U.S. trading partners have also fallen into recession.
(32) Looking ahead, the staff projection assumes that the fiscal stimulus package
approved last month will boost real GDP growth by about 1 percentage point this
year and by a similar amount in 2010.  The staff outlook assumes that the Federal
Reserve will not be implementing any further liquidity or credit programs beyond
those that have already been announced.  Because market participants now appear
to place significant odds on an eventual expansion of Federal Reserve acquisitions
of agency debt, agency-backed MBS, and possibly long-term Treasury securities,
this assumption implies that over time investors will be surprised by the lack of
further policy action—a factor that helps explain the gradual rise in Treasury yields
and mortgage rates anticipated in the staff forecast.  Risk premiums on private
securities are projected to decline gradually in response to lessened financial market
strains and diminished investor uncertainty; as a result, investment-grade corporate
bond spreads narrow by about 130 basis points over the projection period while
equity prices rebound at an annual rate of about 11 percent.  The real foreign
exchange value of the dollar—which rose about 3 percent over the intermeeting
period—is expected to start moving down later this year and to decline about
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 25 of 60
unchanged at around $42 per barrel since late January but is projected to increase
to about $55 per barrel by the end of next year.
(33) Against this backdrop, real GDP is projected to contract at an annual rate
of about 1 percent over the next three quarters, reaching a trough at the end of this
year.  Subsequently, real GDP accelerates gradually but growth remains below that of
potential through 2010.  As a result, the output gap widens to more than 8 percent by
the end of next year, nearly 3 percentage points more than in the January Greenbook;
this gap is projected to narrow thereafter but remains substantial through 2013.
The unemployment rate is projected to rise to 9¼ percent by the end of the year,
edge up a bit further next year, and decline gradually towards the NAIRU over the
subsequent few years.  With such large and persistent slack in resource utilization,
core PCE inflation drops from about 1 percent this year to about ½ percent
in 2010—about ¼ percentage point lower than in the January Greenbook—and
remains below 1 percent for several years thereafter.  In light of these projections
for economic activity and inflation, the federal funds rate is assumed to stay very close
to zero over the next five years.
Monetary Policy Strategies
(34) Reflecting the severe deterioration in the staff outlook for aggregate
demand, all the estimates of short-run r* are significantly lower than those shown in
the January Bluebook (Chart 7).  The Greenbook-consistent measure now stands at -
downward revision mainly reflects recent weak readings on the labor market and
many spending and production indicators, the significant reduction in broad equity
price indexes, the appreciation of the dollar against major and emerging-market
currencies, and much weaker foreign demand.  Model-based estimates of short-run r*
span a wide interval, but all now fall substantially below zero.  The estimate from the
Chart 7
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
The actual real funds rate based on lagged core inflation
Range of model-based estimates
70 Percent confidence interval
90 Percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
Single-equation model -2.0 -0.1
Small structural model -10.0 -6.2
Large model (FRB/US) -8.6 -6.8
Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
Greenbook-consistent measure -5.2 -3.0
Medium-Run Measures
Single-equation model (1.4 (1.7
Small structural model (0.3 (0.7
Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
TIPS-based factor model (2.0 2.0
Actual real federal funds rate -1.4 -1.7
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 26 of 60
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 28 of 60
small structural model is -10.0 percent, about 3¾ percentage points lower than in the
last Bluebook; this revision reflects the recent widening of the output gap as well as
the sharp drop in equity prices.  The FRB/US model estimate of r* is now -8.6
percent, down 1¾ percentage point from January; that drop mainly reflects the lower
equity prices, the higher dollar, and weaker near-term domestic and foreign real
activity.  The estimate of the single-equation model—which does not depend on
equity prices—is not as low as the other estimates; it now stands at -2.0 percent, about
recent weakening in real activity, which translates into a larger negative output gap.
All these measures of short-run r* are well below the current level of the actual real
federal funds rate.
(35) To provide another perspective on the economic outlook and possible
monetary policy strategies, optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model were
conducted using the long-run staff forecast as a starting point.9  Chart 8 shows the
simulation results for an inflation goal of 2 percent—a level that is broadly consistent
with the longer-run inflation projection in the February Summary of Economic
Projections.  As in recent Bluebooks, optimal monetary policy is severely constrained
by the zero lower bound and holds the nominal funds rate close to zero through 2013
(black solid lines); an almost identical path was shown in the January Bluebook (red
dashed lines).  In fact, the severity of the zero bound constraint is even worse now
because of the deterioration in the economic outlook, and as a result the period of
very low policy rates now extends well beyond 2013, unlike the case in January (not
shown).  In the simulation, financial market participants recognize this downward
revision to the long-run path of the funds rate—an expectation that provides some
modest support to real activity and inflation over the next few years through lower
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 29 of 60
long-term interest rates.  However, the additional stimulus is not enough to offset the
more pronounced underlying weakness of spending in the current staff projection, as
evidenced by the downward revisions to the estimates of r*.  Thus, the civilian
unemployment rate is about 1½ to 2 percentage points higher from 2010 onwards
than in the January simulations, and core PCE inflation is somewhat lower.
(36) To illustrate the severity of the zero lower bound constraint, Chart 8 also
displays results without imposing the zero bound on the nominal interest rate (blue
dotted lines).  Under this unconstrained policy, the optimal funds rate path would fall
to -6½ percent late next year, rising back above zero only in 2013.  In the
unconstrained optimal policy scenario, the additional stimulus that can be achieved in
the absence of the zero bound shows through to the real federal funds rate.  In the
case where the zero lower bound holds, the real federal funds rate hovers around -1
percent through the entire simulation period.  But in the hypothetical case in which
nominal interest rates are free to turn negative, the real funds rate decreases to -7¾
percent by the end of 2010.  Relative to the constrained case, such a policy would
allow the civilian unemployment rate to run about 1 percentage point lower over the
next few years, and would put core PCE inflation on a steep upward trajectory from
about 1¼ percent in mid-2010 to 2½ percent by the end of 2013.10  This
overshooting of the inflation target—which is only temporary—is desirable from the
standpoint of optimal policy, because it leads to more favorable financial conditions
early in the simulation period, thereby providing more initial support to real activity.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 30 of 60
(37) The additional monetary easing associated with the counterfactual
unconstrained optimal policy can provide a useful benchmark in judging the stimulus
provided by nontraditional policy actions.  The extra monetary stimulus resulting
from removing the zero bound constraint reduces the ten-year Treasury yield, the
conventional mortgage rate, and the yield on investment-grade bonds by about 1½
percentage point relative to their trajectories under the constrained policy (not
shown).  As presented in the box entitled “Large-Scale Asset Purchases and
Unconstrained Optimal Policy,” some of the benefits of such an unconstrained policy
can likely be attained by a policy of large-scale purchases of long-term Treasury
securities and agency MBS.
(38) As depicted in Chart 9, the outcome-based policy rule prescribes a funds
rate at its effective lower bound through mid-2012—about a year longer than shown
in the January Bluebook.  In contrast, the trajectory of the funds rate that appears to
be anticipated by financial market participants is significantly higher; it rises above 1
percent by the end of 2010 before reaching a plateau of about 2¾ percent in 2012.11
Compared with the January Bluebook, medium-term uncertainty regarding the path
for policy has decreased, and the confidence intervals are now tighter for 2009 and
simple policy rules prescribe setting the nominal funds rate at the lower bound.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 31 of 60
Large-Scale Asset Purchases and Unconstrained Optimal Policy
This box analyzes the extent to which a combination of a conventional optimal policy 
and nontraditional policy measures could generate unemployment and inflation outcomes 
similar to those associated with the unconstrained optimal policy discussed in the text.  In the 
charts below, we use simulations of the FRB/US model to show the implications for the 
outlook of different scenarios for expanding the Federal Reserve’s current program of large-
scale asset purchases.1
The first scenario (dotted red lines) considers additional MBS purchases of $500 billion.  
The second scenario (dash-dotted green) assumes purchases of $500 billion of long-term 
Treasury securities as well as an additional $500 billion of MBS.  The third program (dash-
dotted magenta) considers an even larger package, totaling $2.0 trillion, evenly split between 
purchases of MBS and long-term Treasury securities; this program would involve purchases 
equivalent to about 30 percent of the current publicly held stock of nominal coupon Treasury 
securities and about 80 percent of the stock with terms greater than five years.  Given the 
current configuration of market interest rates and the staff’s estimates of the relative 
macroeconomic effects of operations across assets, tilting the composition of asset purchases 
toward a larger share of MBS may be viewed as a desirable option.  On the other hand, in light 
of the considerable uncertainty about the quantitative effects of these policies, it may be 
prudent to include a significant share of Treasury securities.2
The efficacy of any asset purchase program is quite uncertain and hinges on the extent 
to which the program directly affects the yields of the asset purchased as well as whether those
Large-Scale Asset Purchases and Unconstrained Optimal Policy (cont.)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 32 of 60
effects spill over to other asset markets. In the simulations, it is assumed that the full effects of 
the programs on Treasury, mortgage, and corporate bond rates are felt in the second quarter 
of 2009 when the programs are first announced; these shifts persist through 2011 and then 
begin to fade in 2012 as the Federal Reserve’s positions in MBS and Treasury debt are 
assumed to be gradually unwound.
As shown in the chart on the previous page, depending on the size of the program, the 
unemployment rate is reduced on average by ½, ¾, or 1¼ percentage points, respectively.  
The largest program comes close to replicating the counterfactual outlook shown for the 
unconstrained optimal policy.  As shown in the chart above, these unconventional programs 
boost inflation somewhat over coming years but fail to bring inflation to the assumed 2 
percent target by the end of 2013.  Nonetheless, inflation returns to about 1¾ percent under 
the most aggressive program by the end of the forecast period.3
Although these simulations suggest that sufficiently large asset purchases can generate 
unemployment paths similar to those under the unconstrained policy, there is substantial 
uncertainty about this analysis.  Given that financial market participants currently put 
substantial odds on an expansion of the current program of large-scale asset purchases, the 
announcement of such an extension may not have as large an effect on the near-term 
economic outlook as suggested in the simulations.  Moreover, the currently heightened level 
of uncertainty could make firms and households reluctant to invest even if credit conditions 
improve substantially.  Nonetheless, lower real long-term interest rates might increase house 
prices as well as mortgage refinancings by more than in the FRB/US analysis, thereby 
providing a greater stimulus to aggregate demand.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 34 of 60
Policy Alternatives
(39) This Bluebook presents three policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized by the draft statements on the following pages.
The draft statements for Alternatives A and B incorporate a new organizational
structure in which the statement begins not by referring to the federal funds rate
target but by characterizing the Committee’s outlook and then goes on to describe
the Federal Reserve’s policy strategy.  The draft statement for Alternative C uses
the same structure as in the January FOMC statement.   A somewhat different
approach to structuring these statements is discussed at the end of this section.
(40) All three alternatives maintain an unchanged target range of 0 to ¼ percent
for the federal funds rate and provide forward policy guidance; as in January,
Alternatives B and C indicate that the funds rate is likely to remain exceptionally
low “for some time” whereas Alternative A signals a somewhat longer duration
by substituting the phrase “for an extended period.”  All of the alternatives refer
to the recent launching of the TALF and note that the range of eligible collateral
for that program is likely to be expanded to include other financial assets.  As in the
January statement, each alternative indicates that the Committee will continue to
monitor the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and will
assess whether lending facilities should be expanded or modified.
(41) In characterizing the outlook for economic activity, Alternatives A and B
indicate that the economy is undergoing “a severe contraction” and that financial
conditions “have generally worsened.”  Both alternatives state that policy measures
to stabilize financial markets and institutions, along with stimulus from fiscal and
monetary policy, will contribute to “a gradual resumption of sustainable economic
growth,” but neither alternative makes any specific reference to the timing of
economic recovery or to the balance of risks to the economic outlook.  In contrast,
Alternative C characterizes the incoming information as indicating that economic
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 35 of 60
activity “has slowed further” but follows the language of the January FOMC
statement in pointing to a gradual economic recovery starting later this year and
in noting significant downside risks to that outlook.
(42) Alternatives A and B indicate that inflation is likely to remain subdued
in light of “the growing margin of economic slack here and abroad,” and both
alternatives make note of the risk that inflation could remain persistently below rates
consistent with the dual mandate.  As in January, Alternative C refers to last fall’s
drop in energy and commodity prices and to “prospects for considerable economic
slack” as factors explaining the outlook for inflation, which is expected to remain
subdued “in coming quarters” before returning to rates consistent with the dual
mandate; this alternative does not give an assessment of risks to the inflation outlook.
(43) All three alternatives emphasize that the Federal Reserve will employ
“all available tools” for promoting economic recovery and preserving price stability,
but the alternatives differ regarding which new policy measures, if any, should be
initiated at this meeting.  Alternative A indicates that the Federal Reserve’s balance
sheet will be expanded further this year by the purchase of $500 billion in longer-term
Treasury securities and by the acquisition of an additional $500 billion of agency
mortgage-backed securities (MBS), bringing total MBS purchases to $1 trillion.12
Alternative B expands agency MBS purchases by $500 billion but does not initiate any
acquisition of Treasury notes or bonds; as in the January statement, this alternative
indicates that the Committee is prepared to purchase longer-term Treasury securities
“if evolving circumstances indicate that such transactions would be particularly
effective in improving conditions in private credit markets.”  Under Alternative C,
no new policy actions would be taken at this meeting; instead, as in January, this
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 36 of 60
alternative states that the Federal Reserve stands ready to expand its purchases of
agency debt and MBS and is prepared to purchase longer-term Treasury securities
in light of evolving circumstances.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 37 of 60
January FOMC Statement
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to keep its target range for the federal funds 
rate at 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee continues to anticipate that economic conditions are likely 
to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for some time.
Information received since the Committee met in December suggests that the economy has 
weakened further.  Industrial production, housing starts, and employment have continued to 
decline steeply, as consumers and businesses have cut back spending.  Furthermore, global 
demand appears to be slowing significantly.  Conditions in some financial markets have 
improved, in part reflecting government efforts to provide liquidity and strengthen financial 
institutions; nevertheless, credit conditions for households and firms remain extremely tight.  The 
Committee anticipates that a gradual recovery in economic activity will begin later this year, but 
the downside risks to that outlook are significant.
In light of the declines in the prices of energy and other commodities in recent months and the 
prospects for considerable economic slack, the Committee expects that inflation pressures will 
remain subdued in coming quarters.  Moreover, the Committee sees some risk that inflation 
could persist for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability in the 
longer term.
The Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote the resumption of sustainable 
economic growth and to preserve price stability.  The focus of the Committee's policy is to 
support the functioning of financial markets and stimulate the economy through open market 
operations and other measures that are likely to keep the size of the Federal Reserve's balance 
sheet at a high level.  The Federal Reserve continues to purchase large quantities of agency debt 
and mortgage-backed securities to provide support to the mortgage and housing markets, and it 
stands ready to expand the quantity of such purchases and the duration of the purchase program 
as conditions warrant.  The Committee also is prepared to purchase longer-term Treasury 
securities if evolving circumstances indicate that such transactions would be particularly 
effective in improving conditions in private credit markets.  The Federal Reserve will be 
implementing the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility to facilitate the extension of credit 
to households and small businesses.
The Committee will continue to monitor carefully the size and composition of the Federal 
Reserve's balance sheet in light of evolving financial market developments and to assess whether 
expansions of or modifications to lending facilities would serve to further support credit markets 
and economic activity and help to preserve price stability.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 38 of 60
Alternative A
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 39 of 60
Alternative B
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 40 of 60
Alternative C
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 41 of 60
The Case for Alternative B
(44) If policymakers judge that the economy is undergoing a severe economic
contraction and that the subsequent recovery is likely to be feeble, and if they believe
that a further increase in the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet would
provide additional monetary stimulus and thereby improve the economic outlook,
the Committee could decide at this meeting to expand its purchases of agency
MBS and to reiterate the possibility of purchasing longer-term Treasury securities
depending on evolving circumstances, as in Alternative B.  Incoming information
over the intermeeting period may have led policymakers to mark down their
projections for economic activity and inflation and hence to anticipate a deeper
recession and a weaker recovery—perhaps lasting five years or more—in the absence
of any additional policy stimulus.  For example, the Greenbook-consistent measure of
short-run r* has fallen sharply since January and is now almost 4 percentage points
below the actual real federal funds rate, indicating that a substantial further increase
in the degree of policy stimulus would be required to close the output gap over
a three-year period.  This policy alternative might also be appealing to members
who already considered the economic outlook to be quite bleak in late January but
preferred at that time to postpone consideration of further monetary policy easing
until after Congress had approved the fiscal stimulus package and the administration
had announced its plans for stabilizing the financial system and the housing sector.
Even members whose modal forecast is more optimistic than that of the staff
might nonetheless believe that additional monetary stimulus would be appropriate
to provide impetus to the economy and to help alleviate the risk of an accelerating
feedback loop between financial conditions and economic activity that might lead to
even more severe macroeconomic outcomes.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 42 of 60
(45) While predictions of the stimulative effects of expanded agency MBS
purchases are subject to considerable uncertainty, especially under present economic
and financial circumstances, event studies and model simulations may be helpful
in providing a very rough gauge.  For example, yields on agency MBS fell nearly
that it would purchase up to $100 billion in agency debt and up to $500 billion in
agency MBS—while yields on longer-term Treasury securities and investment-grade
corporate debt declined by about 20 basis points.  Since then, agency MBS yields
have fallen further, on net, to rates more than 100 basis points below those prevailing
in mid-November, while conventional mortgage rates have declined nearly 100 basis
points.  In light of that event study and other evidence, the staff currently estimates
that expanding agency MBS purchases by an additional $500 billion over the course
of this year could push down agency MBS yields and conventional mortgage rates
by about ¾ percentage point, while spillover effects might tend to reduce yields
on corporate bonds and longer-term Treasury securities by about ½ percentage point
and ¼ percentage point, respectively.13  Assuming that the policy measure has these
direct effects on longer-term interest rates, simulations of the FRB/US model indicate
that the unemployment rate in late 2012 would decline by nearly ½ percentage point
relative to baseline.14  Of course, the magnitude of that impact is subject to numerous
uncertainties, in part because the FRB/US model abstracts from some specific
characteristics of the transmission mechanism—including house prices, distributional
effects of mortgage refinancing, and credit market frictions—that might well magnify
or dampen the actual stimulus from this policy measure.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 43 of 60
(46) A significant consideration in deciding whether to move ahead with
a $500 billion expansion of agency MBS purchases would be the extent to which
policymakers are comfortable that this policy measure would not be likely to constrain
the future conduct of monetary policy.  Substantial balance sheet adjustments may
well be needed once the Committee judges that the funds rate should be raised above
its current target range—an eventuality that does not take place until after 2013
in the Greenbook projection but that might arise sooner if the economy recovers
more briskly or inflation picks up more quickly than expected by the staff.  Last fall’s
developments in the federal funds market showed that paying interest on reserve
balances held by depository institutions may not be sufficient to provide a firm
floor for the funds rate in an environment with a very high level of excess reserves
and with some major market participants—such as the GSEs—ineligible to receive
interest on reserves.  If a reduction in reserve balances was needed to attain a specific
value of the federal funds rate, the staff currently anticipates that the Desk would
be able to absorb some reserve balances by selling agency MBS or Treasury securities
or by engaging in reverse repos using those securities as collateral; such operations
can be conducted under the Federal Reserve’s existing authority.15  However, selling
large quantities of longer-term securities might induce strains in debt markets and
could result in substantial capital losses for the Federal Reserve, while large reverse
repo operations would avoid the realization of capital losses but might severely strain
the capacity of the repo market; in any case, the overall scale of these operations could
not exceed the market value of Federal Reserve holdings of longer-term securities.
Of course, the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet may not pose any
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 44 of 60
substantial constraints on the conduct of monetary policy if statutory authority
is obtained for the Federal Reserve to issue its own interest-earning obligations
(“Fed bills”) or for the Treasury, at the request of the Federal Reserve, to issue
Supplementary Financing Bills; in either case, these securities would be exempted
from the federal debt ceiling.16
(47) A number of distinct factors might motivate a decision not to initiate
purchases of longer-term Treasury securities at this meeting but to preserve
the option of pursuing such purchases at a later date.  Policymakers may be skeptical
that large-scale purchases of Treasury notes and bonds would be the most efficient
means of improving private sector credit conditions, especially in an environment of
elevated credit frictions and incomplete arbitrage across different financial markets.
Indeed, the Committee may see a substantial risk that purchases of longer-term
Treasury securities could have detrimental effects on financial market functioning,
perhaps by diminishing the value of Treasury notes and bonds as hedging vehicles.
Moreover, the Committee may be concerned that the Federal Reserve’s credibility
could be undermined if investors perceived this program as oriented towards
monetizing the federal debt rather than as a tool for preserving price stability and
promoting the resumption of sustainable economic growth; such a weakening of
Federal Reserve credibility could push up inflation risk premiums and thereby raise
the cost of longer-term credit for households and businesses.  Finally, the recently
announced expansion of the TALF is likely to increase the size of the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet, and expanded purchases of agency MBS would generate a
substantial further increase in the size of the balance sheet that at some stage would
need to be reversed; thus, even if policymakers conclude that large-scale purchases
of Treasury notes and bonds would be helpful in providing additional economic
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 45 of 60
stimulus, they may prefer to hold off on initiating an even larger balance sheet
expansion at the current juncture.
The Case for Alternative A
(48) If policymakers judge that a substantially greater degree of monetary
stimulus is warranted to help promote a resumption of sustainable economic growth,
the Committee could decide at this meeting to initiate large-scale purchases of
$500 billion in longer-term Treasury securities and to expand purchases of
agency MBS, as in Alternative A.  Committee participants may concur that the
Federal Reserve’s current liquidity and credit facilities are crucial for stabilizing
the financial system and providing the prerequisites for economic recovery, but
they may nonetheless view the monetary and fiscal policy measures currently in train
as unlikely to foster an acceptably rapid pace for that recovery.  Indeed, in the absence
of any further macroeconomic stimulus, the Greenbook projects that in mid-2012
the unemployment rate will still be above 7 percent and the core inflation rate will be
less than ¾ percent.  As noted above, a $500 billion expansion in purchases of agency
MBS could be helpful in improving that outlook but still would not be likely to bring
the economy to its potential even after five years.  Moreover, participants’ projections
for economic activity and inflation might be considerably worse than that of the
Greenbook if they anticipate that credit market frictions are likely to generate
further sharp declines in spending and employment in coming quarters, as in the
Greenbook’s “Intensifying Financial Strains” scenario, and hence they might see an
even stronger rationale for providing additional monetary stimulus to the economy.
(49) The stimulative impact of large-scale purchases of Treasury notes and
bonds is very difficult to predict because such a monetary policy measure would be
unprecedented for the United States.  Nevertheless, various sources of evidence shed
some light on the likely response of longer-term Treasury yields and other longer-term
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 46 of 60
interest rates.17  A staff review of the empirical literature indicates that a Federal
Reserve program to purchase $500 billion in longer-term Treasury securities would
be likely to push down the 10-year Treasury yield by about 20 to 100 basis points;
staff analysis of Treasury issuance surprises over the past decade suggests that the
impact could be near the upper end of this range, whereas analysis of high-frequency
order book data implies that the response could be near the bottom of this range.
Earlier this month, yields on U.K. long-term government securities declined nearly
be purchasing a substantial amount of those securities; adjusting for the size of
the announced purchases relative to the outstanding stock, this event suggests that
a Federal Reserve program to purchase $500 billion in U.S. government notes and
bonds would reduce longer-term yields by a similar amount.  Of course, predicting
the magnitude of spillovers to private interest rates is subject to a great deal of
additional uncertainty.  During times of normal financial market functioning, weekly
changes in longer-term Treasury yields and in private interest rates exhibit correlations
exceeding 90 percent, suggesting that a decline in Treasury yields would be matched
by a roughly similar decline in yields on private debt instruments of comparable
maturity.  In contrast, the linkages across financial markets appear to be much weaker
under present market conditions.  For example, since the onset of the financial crisis,
weekly changes in the 10-year Treasury yield have exhibited correlations of about
(50) Given specific assumptions about the impact of large-scale purchases
of Treasury notes and bonds on a range of longer-term yields, FRB/US model
simulations can be employed to gauge the impact of such purchases on the broader
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 47 of 60
economy.18  In light of the available empirical evidence, it seems plausible that a
Federal Reserve program to purchase $500 billion in Treasury notes and bonds
would push down longer-term Treasury yields by about 50 basis points and that
spillover effects would lead to a 30 basis point decline in conventional mortgage
rates and longer-term corporate bond yields.  Assuming that the program has
those effects on longer-term interest rates, simulations of the FRB/US model
indicate that this program would reduce the unemployment rate in late 2012 by
nearly ½ percentage point relative to the Greenbook baseline.  Thus, as shown in the
box on “Large-Scale Asset Purchases and Unconstrained Optimal Control Policies,”
if this initiative is combined with a $500 billion expansion in purchases of agency
MBS, the model implies that the unemployment rate would be close to 5 percent
by 2013 while core inflation would be about 1¼ percent and heading towards rates
consistent with the dual mandate.
(51) In an environment of exceptionally high uncertainty, policymakers may
judge that Alternative A provides the most appropriate balance between downside
risks to the economic outlook over the next several years and the risk that excessive
expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet could hamper the conduct of
monetary policy at longer horizons.  Members may interpret recent data as providing
a strengthened rationale for taking further action to alleviate downside risks to
economic activity and price stability.  For example, with the trajectory for core
inflation now expected to be even lower over the next few years, participants
may perceive a greater risk that the longer-run inflation expectations of households
and businesses could drift downward over time, as in the Greenbook’s “Deflation”
scenario.  Indeed, as discussed in the box on “Extracting Deflation Probabilities
from TIPS,” investors evidently perceive a significant probability that the price level
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 48 of 60
will decline over the next five years; a substantial increase in monetary stimulus
might help ameliorate those concerns.  Moreover, to the extent that the
extraordinarily high level of corporate bond spreads reflects investors’ worries
about an even steeper macroeconomic downturn, participants may conclude that
expanding agency MBS purchases and initiating purchases of longer-term Treasury
securities could reduce these spreads by reassuring investors about the economic
outlook.  Finally, policymakers may be reasonably optimistic about the prospects
for receiving new tools for managing the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and hence
they may be comfortable that a further sizable expansion in the balance sheet would
not pose significant risks in terms of imposing constraints on the future conduct of
monetary policy.
The Case for Alternative C
(52) If policymakers anticipate a more robust economic recovery than in the
staff outlook and perceive that further expansion in the size of the Federal Reserve’s
balance sheet would be associated with substantial risks to the future conduct of
monetary policy, they may prefer not to initiate any new policy measures at this
meeting, as in Alternative C.  Committee participants may foresee that government
actions to stabilize the financial system, together with the monetary and fiscal policies
already in train, are likely to foster a stronger pace of economic activity later this year
and in 2010, as in the Greenbook’s “Faster Recovery” scenario.  Participants may also
judge that some portion of the current economic downturn reflects a falloff in trend
productivity growth, perhaps reflecting the costs of adjustment associated with
sectoral reallocation of capital and labor, as in the Greenbook’s “More Adverse
Supply Conditions” scenario; in that case, the extent of economic slack would be
substantially smaller than in the staff projection, and inflation could stay much closer
to rates judged to be consistent with the dual mandate.  Even if policymakers see the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 49 of 60
economy as likely to follow a trajectory similar to that of the staff projection, they
may see fiscal policy as the most appropriate tool for providing additional stimulus.
Finally, policymakers may be particularly concerned about the risk that constraints
arising from the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet could constrain the
future conduct of monetary policy; if so, they may be reluctant to adopt measures
that would further expand its assets and liabilities, at least until the Federal Reserve
receives new tools for managing the size and composition of its balance sheet.
An Alternative Structure for the FOMC Statement
(53) The draft statements for Alternatives A and B begin by characterizing
the outlook for economic activity and inflation, and the draft statement for
Alternative C starts by indicating the Committee’s decision to maintain the target
range for the federal funds rate.  However, participants may instead prefer that
the FOMC statement begin by pointing to new policy measures that the Committee
has approved, as illustrated in Alternatives A' and B' below, or to reaffirm the existing
policy strategy, as in Alternative C'.  The substance of these three alternatives is
identical to those of Alternatives A, B, and C, respectively.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 50 of 60
Alternative A'
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 51 of 60
Alternative B'
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 52 of 60
Alternative C'
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 53 of 60
Bank Credit, Debt, and Money Forecasts
(54) Bank credit is expected to remain flat in 2009 amid weak loan demand
from both businesses and households and tight credit standards and terms at banks.
Core loans—the sum of commercial and industrial, real estate, and consumer
loans—are forecasted to contract modestly, as continued paydowns more than
offset new originations.  In contrast, securities holdings are expected to grow
moderately this year, as banks continue to park deposits and other sources of funds
in safe and liquid investments.  In 2010, with positive nominal GDP growth and
waning effects from tighter lending standards and terms, bank credit is projected
to expand at a rate of around 4¼ percent, led by continued expansion of securities,
reduced runoffs of C&I loans, and a modest pickup in loans to households.
(55) In the Greenbook outlook, the debt of the private domestic nonfinancial
sector is projected to contract slightly in 2009; if realized, this would be the first
annual contraction since data were first compiled in 1945.  A significant drop in home
mortgages contributes to the reduced debt of the household sector, while nonfinancial
business debt expands at a weak pace that reflects subdued capital expenditures.
Private sector debt is expected to increase next year at a rate of about 1 percent,
reflecting some improvement in credit conditions and the resumption of growth
in nominal GDP.  Federal debt is projected to bulge—growing about 27 percent
this year and about 15 percent in 2010, reflecting the need to finance the fiscal
stimulus package and government programs aimed at reducing financial market
strains.  Overall, total domestic nonfinancial debt is projected to expand 5 percent
this year and 4½ percent in 2010.
(56) Despite the anticipated contraction in nominal GDP over the course of
this year, M2 is projected to expand nearly 3 percent, boosted by heightened demands
for safety and liquidity in response to the ongoing turmoil in financial markets as well
as the lagged effects of the previous decline in the opportunity costs of holding M2
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 54 of 60
assets.  M2 growth is expected to moderate next year to a rate of about 2¼ percent,
roughly in line with the projected growth of nominal GDP, reflecting the gradual
recovery of financial markets and waning effects of lower opportunity costs.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 55 of 60
(57) Draft language for the directive is provided below.
Directive Wording
Alternative A:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
To further its long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee
directs the Desk to purchase GSE debt and agency-guaranteed MBS during the
intermeeting period with the aim of providing support to the mortgage and housing
markets.  The timing and pace of these purchases should depend on conditions in the
markets for such securities and on a broader assessment of conditions in primary
mortgage markets and the housing sector.  The Desk is expected to purchase up to
$100 billion in housing-related GSE debt by the end of the second quarter
of this year.  The Desk is expected to purchase at least $500 billion in
agency-guaranteed MBS by the end of the second quarter of this year and is expected
to purchase up to $1 trillion of these securities by the end of this year.  The
Committee also directs the Desk to purchase long-term Treasury securities during the
intermeeting period.  By the end of this year, the Desk is expected
to purchase up to $500 billion of long-term Treasury securities, with the aim
of improving conditions in private credit markets.  The System Open Market Account
Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing
developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the attainment
over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
Alternative B:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 56 of 60
To further its long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee
directs the Desk to purchase GSE debt and agency-guaranteed MBS during the
intermeeting period with the aim of providing support to the mortgage and housing
markets.  The timing and pace of these purchases should depend on conditions in the
markets for such securities and on a broader assessment of conditions in primary
mortgage markets and the housing sector.  The Desk is expected to purchase up to
$100 billion in housing-related GSE debt by the end of the second quarter
of this year.  The Desk is expected to purchase at least $500 billion in
agency-guaranteed MBS by the end of the second quarter of this year and is expected
to purchase up to $1 trillion of these securities by the end of this year.
The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the
Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet
that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
Alternative C:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
To further its long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee
directs the Desk to purchase GSE debt and agency-guaranteed MBS during the
intermeeting period with the aim of providing support to the mortgage and housing
markets.  The timing and pace of these purchases should depend on conditions in the
markets for such securities and on a broader assessment of conditions in primary
mortgage markets and the housing sector.  By the end of the second quarter of this
year, the Desk is expected to purchase up to $100 billion in housing-related GSE debt
and up to $500 billion in agency-guaranteed MBS.  The System Open Market Account
Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 57 of 60
developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could
affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
Measure Description
Single-equation 
Model
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and 
its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.
Small Structural 
Model
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for six variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, the 
real bond yield, and the real federal funds rate.
Large Model 
(FRB/US)
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.
Greenbook-
consistent
The FRB/US model is used in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook 
forecast to derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that 
its simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is 
run off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the 
output gap.
TIPS-based 
Factor Model
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’ expectations of 
the future path of real interest rates, but also include term and liquidity premiums.  The 
TIPS-based measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven-year-ahead 
instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the Bluebook publication 
date.  This forward rate is adjusted to remove estimates of the term and liquidity 
premiums based on a three-factor arbitrage-free term-structure model applied to TIPS 
yields, nominal yields, and inflation.  Because TIPS indexation is based on the total CPI, 
this measure is also adjusted for the medium-term difference—projected at 40 basis 
points—between total CPI inflation and core PCE inflation.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 58 of 60
