Under Alternative A, the Committee decides not to set a target for the federal funds rate, states that it anticipates that weak economic conditions are likely to warrant funds rates near zero for some time, and makes clear that its main policy tool going forward will be actions that make use of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  Under Alternative B, the Committee instead announces a target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent and states that it will use all available tools to promote the resumption of sustainable economic growth and price stability.  Under Alternative C, the target rate is cut 50 basis points to ½ percent and the possibility of a further downward adjustment, should conditions warrant, is left open.  Under Alternative D, the federal funds rate target is left unchanged at 1 percent under the view that recent policy actions should help promote acceptable economic growth over time; as in Alternative C, the possibility of future policy easing is left open.

In view of the large amounts of reserves being provided by the Federal  Reserve’s various liquidity facilities, Alternatives C and D recognize that federal funds may trade below the target rate for at least some time.

Alternatives A, B, and C note that the Committee expects inflation to moderate in coming months and even sees some risk that inflation could drop below levels consistent with price stability; Alternative D uses the same language on inflation as the October statement.

Alternatives A, B, and C also explicitly refer to the possibility of further using the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to support financial markets and economic activity, including by purchasing Treasury securities.

(29)   If the Committee agrees that the economic outlook has deteriorated  significantly since the October meeting and thinks that substantial monetary stimulus  will be needed to support a recovery in economic activity, it may be inclined to favor  Alternative A or Alternative B.

(30) Against this backdrop, the Committee may decide not to announce a target  for the federal funds rate at this meeting and signal instead that its focus has shifted to  the use of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as an especially important policy tool  going forward, as in Alternative A.  The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has already expanded considerably in recent months and will continue to expand in the immediate future as the Federal Reserve begins to purchase agency debt and mortgage-backed securities in volume, as already announced, and as the TALF becomes operational.

As incorporated in the third paragraph of  Alternative A, the Committee could explicitly state that it anticipates that short-term interest rates will remain low for some time.

To  mitigate this concern, the Committee could phrase the commitment in implicitly  conditional terms by indicating its anticipation that “weak economic conditions are  likely to warrant federal funds rates near zero for some time,” as suggested in the  statement accompanying Alternative A.10  In addition, if members were concerned that even increased use of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as a policy tool and a 10 The Committee may feel that a commitment that is conditioned on too precise a set of events may also be undesirable because, in the future, a need to tighten policy may arise well before those specific events materialize.

The statement suggested for Alternative A begins by acknowledging the further weakening of the outlook for economic activity rather than with a sentence about the federal funds rate.

(34) If the Committee shares the staff view that the economic outlook has  deteriorated markedly and thinks that, given the circumstances, moving the federal  funds rate near the zero bound on nominal interest rates is desirable, but it wants to  continue to provide an explicit target for the federal funds rate, then it might choose  to establish a target range of 0 to ¼ percent as in Alternative B.  Continuing to set a target that encompasses very low federal funds rates would not compromise the Committee’s ability to resort to unconventional policy measures.

As in Alternative A, the Committee may also be concerned that the sharp contraction in economic activity and the steep declines in the prices of energy and other commodities may cause inflation to fall to an uncomfortably low level.

The rationale section of the statement under Alternative B begins by noting the recent deterioration in economic conditions and in the outlook for economic activity.

As in Alternative B, market participants may also be surprised by the reference to unconventional policy measures, and medium- and long-term Treasury yields might edge lower.

Alternative C for a number of reasons.

As a third motivation for favoring Alternative C, members may view a decision to reduce the target rate by 50 basis points as an intermediate step towards reaching a level of rates closer to the zero bound at a later date.

The rationale section of the statement accompanying Alternative C begins by acknowledging that economic activity is contracting in the fourth quarter and by pointing to deterioration in labor markets, household and business spending, and industrial production.

The paragraph on inflation reiterates, as in October, that the  Committee expects inflation to moderate because of the weaker economic outlook  and the decline in the prices of energy and other commodities, but also, as in  Alternatives A and B, that there are risks that inflation will fall to rates below those that would best foster economic growth and price stability.

(42) Since most primary dealers see a 50 basis point policy easing as the most  likely outcome at this meeting, and since a majority see ½ percent as the trough for  the target federal funds rate this cycle, the market reaction to an announcement like  that for Alternative C is likely to be muted, with short-term interest rates, equity prices, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar all changing little.

As in Alternative B, longer-term interest rates may decline a little, but probably not by much, because investors may be somewhat surprised by the language on the use of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as a means of further supporting credit markets and economic activity.

(43) If the Committee’s view of the economic outlook is appreciably more  optimistic than the staff’s, and, in particular, if members believe that past policy  actions, along with those announced but not yet implemented, will be sufficient to  return the economy to a path of moderate economic growth before too long, the  Committee may wish to leave the target rate unchanged at this meeting as in  Alternative D.  Committee members may have a somewhat more upbeat outlook for 2009 and 2010 that the staff and may believe, for example, that the recovery from the present recession, starting in the second half of next year, will be more robust than anticipated by the staff, as in the “faster recovery” alternative scenario in the Greenbook.

The language on inflation remains unchanged from the  October meeting, and the last paragraph acknowledges, as in Alternative C, that federal funds may continue to trade below the target for some time.

As noted earlier, the  proposed statement for Alternatives C and D acknowledge that the same will likely be true in the future, at least so long as the amount of excess reserves in the system remains elevated.

(49) If the Committee wants to keep a target for the federal funds rate of either  ½ percent as in Alternative C or 1 percent as in Alternative D, and agrees that the options available to drain reserves from the system and enable the Desk to meet the target are either unlikely to materialize or are likely to be otherwise undesirable, it may wish to change the wording of its directive to the Desk to recognize that it does not expect the target to be consistently met given the circumstances.

If it were to choose  Alternative C, the Committee may also want to direct the Desk to purchase $100 billion in housing-related GSE debt and up to $500 billion in agency-guaranteed MBS, as already announced, and to do so by the end of the second quarter of next year to provide a more specific time frame than the “several quarters” indicated in the November 25 press release.

Under Alternative B, the Committee would direct the Desk to seek conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a range of 0 to ¼ percent.

If the Committee decides not to set a target at all, as in Alternative A, it could specify to the Desk that it has suspended setting a target and that it anticipates that the reserve conditions associated with its open market operations and the liquidity programs put in place by the Federal Reserve will result in federal funds rates near zero.

It may also direct the desk to purchase GSE debt and agency-guaranteed  MBS over the next intermeeting period, as under Alternative B, and subject to the same limits.

Directive Wording  Alternative A:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.

Alternative B:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.

Alternative C:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.

Alternative D:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.

