Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONEY MARKET AND RESERVE RELATIONSHIPS
Recent developments
With bill rates declining further and other money market
conditions easing slightly, total member bank deposits (bank credit
proxy) expanded at an annual rate of 3.4 per cent in December, the
first monthly increase since July; after considering bank borrowing
abroad, the proxy rose by about 5 per cent. Yields on Treasury bills
of all maturities have fallen below 5 per cent, with the 3-month
bill recently hovering around 4.80 per cent. Yields available on
short-term Federal agencies also declined sharply, while rates on
bankers' acceptances and finance company paper were reduced moderately.
The recent declines in bill rates have apparently contained
a large expectational component, particularly since market demand
for bills tended to taper off after mid-December when funds appeared
to be diverted increasingly to CD's and other short-term instruments.
Dealer bill positions have risen further from earlier high levels;
dealers also continue to carry a sizable amount of coupon issues
maturing in over a year, and have built up holdings of Federal agency
issues and CD's.
Conditions in the Federal funds and dealer loan markets
eased only modestly in December; indeed, they tightened briefly in
connection with year-end money market churning. Very large dealer
January 9, 1967.
FINANCIAL MARKET RELATIONSHIPS IN PERSPECTIVE
(Monthly averages, and, where available, weekly averages of daily figures)
Money Market Indicators Bond Yields Flow of Reserves. Bank Credit and Money
Free Borrow- Federal 3-month Corporate Munici- Non- Total Bank
Reserves ings Funds Treas- U.S. New pal borrowed Re- Credit oy i
Period (In millions Rate ury Gov't. Issues (Aaa) Reserves serves Proxy upply Deposits 2/
of dollars) Bill (20 yn) (Aaa) / (In millions (In billions of dollars)
of dollars)
p - Preliminary.
he first week shown.
January 6, 1967.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) -2- January 9, 1967.
financing requirements during the past month have contributed not
only to maintenance of pressure on the money markets, but also to
expansion in bank credit since a good part of these financing needs
have been accommodated through increased lending by money market banks.
Partly in consequence, these banks have experienced an enlarged basic
reserve deficiency, which they have financed by actively bidding for
Federal funds and in some cases coming to the discount window for
temporary assistance.
Federal funds traded over a fairly wide range of rates
during the past four weeks and have averaged about 5-3/8 per cent as
compared with an average of about 5.60 per cent in the preceding four
weeks. Net borrowed reserves fluctuated between $93 million and
$276 million in the latest 4-week period, but averaged about $170
million, down from an average of $215 million in the preceding four
weeks. Member bank borrowings averaged $560 million in the latest
period, unchanged from four weeks ago.
The decline in bill rates last month enabled banks to bid
more successfully for CD's, and the total outstanding rose contra-
seasonally by $150 million during the month. Total time and savings
deposits began to grow rapidly in the second week of December, and
contributed importantly to the continuing week to week increases in
bank credit proxy during the month. Between the last statement weeks
of November and December, the bank credit proxy expanded by almost
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) -3- January 6 , 1967.
from the end of October to the end of November. The December rise
in bank credit included substantial additions to bank holdings of
short-term U.S. Government securities, as banks made efforts to restore
their liquidity position; business loans of banks showed no net
expansion in December.
Expansion in the money supply, which resumed in mid-November,
continued in December. Private demand deposits rose by about 9 per
cent during the month on average, but this increase in large part
represented a short-run response to declines in U.S. Government
deposits. With respect to reserve aggregates, both nonborrowed and
total reserves showed only a very slight expansion in December, as banks
economized on excess reserves (after seasonal adjustment) during the
Prospective developments
Bank credit expansion is likely to continue in January,
but at a slower pace than indicated by the large recent week to week
increases. The increase in the January average of outstanding bank
credit over the December average may be in a 7-9 per cent (annual
rate) range, but this includes the carry-over effect on the monthly
averages of the strength in the latter part of December. From the
end of December through the end of January, a growth rate in the 4-6
per cent range appears likely.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) -4- January 6, 1967.
These projections assume that the 3-month bill rate stays
roughly within the recent 4.75-4.85 per cent range over the period
ahead, that net borrowed reserves fluctuate around $100 million, and
that Federal funds and dealer loan rates back down somewhat from
recent high levels of around year-end. The 3-month bill rate might
move toward the upper limits of the range assumed if dealer attitudes
should lead to a reversal of the large build-up in bill positions
that was recently an important factor pulling bill rates down relative
to other short-term rates. Upward bill rate pressures are most likely
to develop if dealer financing costs do not come down from recent
levels (when they were generally in a 5-3/4 - 6-1/2 per cent range
in New York and around 5-1/2 per cent outside New York), and if the
usual seasonal reflow of corporate money into bills does not come up
to expected proportions. However, market psychology will remain an
important influence on bill rates, with the continuance of bullish
market attitudes dependent partly on interpretations of monetary
policy and of the fiscal implications of the forthcoming Federal
With respect to credit demands, it is assumed that business
loans resume a moderate growth related in part to accelerated payments
by corporations of withheld individual income tax payments in January;
and, as a partial offset, that banks become less active in lending
to dealers as the latter's positions are reduced somewhat and as
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) -5- January 6, 1967.
financing from corporations through repurchase agreements becomes
more available.
The interest rate and credit demand assumptions appear
consistent with expansion of time and savings deposits at all
commercial banks by about 12 per cent in January on a monthly average
basis. This projection assumes that banks will be able to add about
$500 million to outstanding CD's despite the large $5.5 billion of
maturities in January and that the somewhat more rapid increase in
other time deposits that has recently developed will continue. It
further assumes that banks generally will not move to reduce interest
rates paid on CD's until their liquidity positions are more comfortable
or until they are more convinced that loan demand is fading.
Money supply in January is expected to show little or no
net change on average. Private demand deposits may decline somewhat,
partly because of a projected rise of almost $1 billion in U.S.
Government deposits. But private demand deposits are not assumed
to decline by as much as Government deposits rise, in contrast to
what has often been their past short-run behavior. The decline in
private demand deposits is likely to be limited by renewed business
loan growth.
These deposit projections imply a sizable expansion in
aggregate reserves in January on average--in the order of 10-12
per cent for nonborrowed and total reserves. For December-January
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) -6- January 6, 1967.
together, nonborrowed reserves may show an increase around the 5-7
per cent range. The December-January increase in such reserves,
together with related monetary variables, is shown in the table
below in comparison with other periods (all figures being annual
rates of increase for the period including terminal months).
Dec. '66- Calendar
Jan. '67 Aug. '66- Feb. '66- Aug. '65- years
If the Committee wishes to continue a gradual reduction
in the degree of monetary restraint, it might call for open market
operations to achieve a set of money market conditions that might
include a net borrowed reserve position averaging close to zero and
Federal funds averaging near 5 per cent. This would, in all likelihood,
bring the 3-month bill rate down to a 4.60-4.75 per cent range. It
would also encourage gradual relaxation of bank loan policies.
Such an easing of money market conditions--given the current
economic outlook indicated in the Green Book--would be likely to
encourage further bank credit expansion through the winter months,
although possibly not at a trend rate much above the December-January
average indicated in the table. Long-term yields would be more likely
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) -7- January 6, 1967.
to decline further as banks increased their acquisitions of municipals
and long Governments. And, with long-term rate declines, mortgages
would become increasingly attractive to institutional investors.
Finally, it should be noted that if further signs of
substantial economic weakness are noted by the market, the level of
interest rates could move sharply down, even if net borrowed reserves
are not very different from their recent range. But such a movement
of interest rates might not necessarily be accompanied by any greater
expansion of bank credit than projected--and possibly less--as banks
might begin reducing CD rates and might see some immediate sizable
declines in demand deposits associated with loan repayment. Main-
tenance of bank credit expansion would under the circumstances
depend on a relatively rapid growth in nonborrowed reserves, which
would permit banks to repay debt to the Federal Reserve and perhaps
to others and to liberalize portfolio investment policies and lending
terms markedly.
Table A-1
MARGINAL RESERVE MEASURES
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on period averages of daily figures)
Monthly (reserves
weeks ending in):
Jan. 4
Excess Member banks
reserves borrowings
As revised
Free reserves
to date
I - -
- 22
- 51
As first
published
each week
As
expected
at
conclusion
of each
week's
open
market
opeations
_____________________ 4.
I - Preliminary
p - Preliminary
I 1
TABLE A-2
AGGREGATE RESERVES AND RELATED M ASURES
Retrospective Changes, Seasonally Adjusted
(In per cent, annual rates based on monthly averages of daily figures)
Res e r v e Ag r e a t e s Moneta r y Variables
Required reserves Total Member Time Money Suppl
Total Against Deposits PrivateReserves onborrowed Bank Deposits o Ti tReserves Total Demand (comm. Total Demand
ReereDeposits (cedit) banks) Deposits
Monthly:
1965--July + 3.7' + 4.1 + 4.8 - 2.0 + 7.4 +15.0 + 5.2 + 4.7
August + 0.4 + 1.5 - 1.8 - 4.0 + 6.8 +18.3 + 4.4 + 2.8
September -- 1.2 - 3.9 - 2.2 - 6.8 + 3.6 +13.7 + 8.1 + 9.4
October + 3.7 + 7.3 + 9.7 + 5.1 +12.5 +17.8 + 8.0 + 7.5
November + 0.6 + 5.0 - 2.0 - 3.9 + 5.1 +15.0 + 2.9 + 1.9
December +13.8 + 9.8 +13.7 + 8.2 + 9.7 +11.5 +11.6 +13.0
p - Preliminary.
Table B-1
MAJOR SOURCES AND USES OF RESERVES
Retrospective and Prospective
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on weekly averages of daily figures)
Factors affecting sup ly of reserves = Change = Bank use of reserves
Period Federal Reserve Gold Currency Technical in Required Excess
credit (excl. outside factors total reserves
float) / stock banks net 2/ reserves 3/ reserves
ACTUAL
lr :
--
For retrospective details, see Table B-4.
For factors included, see Table B-3.
For required reserves by type of deposits, see Table B-2.
See reverse side for explanation of projections.
p - Preliminary.
Table B-2
CHANGES IN REQUIRED RESERVE COMPONENTS
Retrospective and Prospective Seasonal and Nonseasonal Changes
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on weekly averages of daily figures)
Total Supporting _Supporting private deposits
U. S. Gov't. Other than
Period required demand Total Seasonal changes seasonal chan
reee demand Total seasonal changes
rese s deposits Demand Time Demand Time
Weekly:
1966--Nov. 30 p + 32 + 52 - 20 - 19 + 5 - 5 - 1
in July and September.
Table B-3
TECHNICAL FACTORS AFFECTING RESERVES
Retrospective and Prospective Changes
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on weekly averages of daily figures)
Technical Foreign Other
Period factors Treasury Float deposits nonmember
(net) operations and gold deposits and
loans F. R. accounts
Table B-4
SOURCE OF FEDERAL RESERVE CREDIT
Retrospective Changes
(Dollar amounts in millions of dollars, based on weekly averages of daily figures)
- r:
1965 (12/30/64 - 12/29/65)
1966 (12/29/65 - 12/28/66)
Year-to-date:
(12/29/65 - 1/5/66)
(12/28/66 - 1/4/67)
Weekly:
1966--Oct. 5
Total Federal
Reserve credit
(Excl. float)
+4,035
+3,149
* - Includes effect of change in special
of the week of December 21, 1966.
U.S. Government securities
1*
+3,145
+2,158
- 24
+ 434
+916
+474
Total
holdings
+3,916
+3,069
Repurchase
agreements
+ 10
- 10-i
+ 79
- 18
+132
- 43
+ 26
+ 1
+ 53
+ 19
certificates of +$72 million of the week of December 14, 1966, and
Member banks
borrowings
+ 16
+ 17
+ 17
-$72 million
... ..,.
Chart Reference Table C-1
TOTAL, NONBORROWED AND REQUIRED RESERVES
Seasonally Adjusted
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on monthly averages of daily figures)
Total Nonborrowed Reuired reservesTotal NJ Toaowed
Period reserves reserve Total Against rivate deposits
eserves reserves TotalDemand
Total 1 Demand
S1/
S1/
I -
p - Preliminary.
1/ Reserves have been adjusted for redefinition of time deposits effective June 9.
Table C-2
DEPOSITS SUPPORTED BY REQUIRED RESERVES AT ALL MEMBER BANKS
Seasonally Adjusted
(Dollar amounts in billions, based on monthly averages of daily figures)
Total member Private U.S. Gov't.Time
Monthly bank deposits demand demand
(credit) 1/ deposits deposits 2/ deposits
TABLE C-2a
DEPOSITS SUPPORTED BY REQUIRED RESERVES AT ALL
Seasonally adjusted
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on weekly averages
MEMBER BANKS
of daily figures)
Total member Time Private U. S. Gov't.
Week ending: bank deposits deposits demand demand
(credit/ _____deposits 2/ deposits
-July 6*
13*
20*
27*
Aug. 3*
10*
17*
24*
31*
Sept. 7*
14*
21*
28*
Oct. 5*
12*
19*
26*
Nov. 2*
9*
Dec. 7p*
14p*
21p*
28p*
Jan. 4p*
p - Preliminary.
1/ Includes all deposits subject to reserve requirements--i.e., the total
of time, private demand, and U.S. Government demand deposits. Move-
ments in this aggregate correspond closely with movements in total
member bank credit.
* - Deposits have been adjusted for redefinition of time deposits effective
June 9, 1966.
TABLE C-3
MONEY SUPPLY AND TIME DEPOSITS AT ALL COMMERCIAL BANKS
Seasonally adjusted
(Dollar amounts in billions, based
on monthly averages of daily figures)
Private
Monthly Money Supply Currency I/ Demand Time Deposits
SDeposits 2/ Adjusted
p - Preliminary.
TABLE C-3a
MONEY SUPPLY AND TIME DEPOSITS AT ALL COMMERCIAL BANKS
Seasonally Adjusted
(Dollar amounts in billions, based
on monthly averages of daily figures)
Private Time Deposits
Week Ending Money Supply Currency ./ Demand adusted
SDeposits 2/ adjusted
* - Deposits have been adjusted for redefinition of time deposits effective
June 9, 1966.
p - Preliminary.
