Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) March 29, 1968.
MONEY MARKET AND RESERVE RELATIONSHIPS
Recent developments
In March, following the further move toward restraint in open
market policy and the midmonth rise in the Federal Reserve discount rate
from 4½ per cent to 5 per cent, money market conditions became tighter,
longer-term interest rates rose, and the rate of bank credit expansion
moderated further. The average effective rate on Federal funds during
the past two statement weeks was about 5¼ per cent, with trading
frequently at 5-3/8 -- 5-1/2 per cent; over this period, net borrowed
reserves averaged $370 million, and member bank borrowings $660 million.
The 3-month bill rate momentarily reached a peak of 5.45 per
cent on Thursday March 14, at the height of the gold crisis and at a
time when some market participants had come to expect a discount rate
hike of more than 1/2 percentage point. Subsequent to the announcement
that evening of a 1/2 percentage point rise in the discount rate and
following the accord affecting the gold market, the 3-month bill rate
declined. The bill was most recently quoted around 5.15 per cent,
about 15 basis points above its level just before the March 5 meeting
of the Committee.
The relatively moderate reaction of bill rates thus far to
the recent monetary policy moves has been partly seasonal, reflecting,
among other factors, recent and prospective re-investment demand from
holders of maturing March and April tax bills not turned in for taxes.
Bill rates were also influenced by the continuing demand for liquidity
FINANCIAL MARKET RELATIONSHIPS IN PERSPECTIVE
('onthly averages and, where available, weekly averages of daily figures)
Money arket Indicators Bond Yields Flow of Reserves. Bank Credit and Money
Free Borrow- Federal 3-month Corporate Munici- Non- Total Bank
Period teserves ings Funds Treas- U.S. New pal borrowed Re- Credit Money DesiPeriod Supply Deposits
(In millions Rate ury Gov't. Issues (Aaa) Reserves serves Proxy 2/
of dollars) Bill (20 yr) (Aaa)I/ (I million (In billions of dollars)
(Seasonally Adjusted)
Ave ages Annual rates of increase 3/
Includes issues carrying 5-year and 10-year call protection;
Time denosits adiusted at all commercial banks.
** issues carry a 5-year call protection.
deposits effective at mid-month, January 1968.
p - Preliminary. March 29, 1968.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
instruments in view of the variety of uncertainties afflicting inter-
national exchange and domestic security markets, and by the absence
of strong loan demands on banks that might have forced even more
aggressive solicitation of CD funds.
The supply of bills available for trading in the market
became quite small during the past two statement weeks. At the same
time, the System was confronted with an unexpectedly large need to
provide reserves because of gold outflows that drained $1.4 billion from
reserves during the three statement weeks ending March 27. System net
bill purchases in this period, however, amounted to only $440 million (most-
ly from foreign accounts). In the week ending March 27 some reserve
needs were accommodated through purchases of coupon issues in order
to avoid accentuating downward bill rate pressures, and a substantial
amount of reserves were also supplied by a decline in the Treasury
balance at Federal Reserve Banks.
System and Treasury operations served to offset only part of
the reserve draining effect of gold outflows. In March, nonborrowed
reserves declined by about 9 per cent, annual rate. There was only
a small increase in total reserves during March, at a 3 per cent
annual rate, and this increase was due entirely to an increased use
of the discount window by member banks.
Although bill rates in the second half of March retreated from
their peak levels, other short-term rates moved up somewhat further, on
balance, following the discount rate increase. In particular, new
dealer loan rates in New York moved generally into a 5-3/8 -- 5-5/8 per
March 29, 1968.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
cent range, and the relatively high cost to dealers of financing
positions served to keep bill rates from declining even more. Other
short-term rates--such as on bankers' acceptances, finance company
paper, Federal Agency issues, and CD's--have moved up about 25 to 35
basis points on balance since the March 5 meeting of the Committee.
Many short-term rates are currently around previous peaks reached near
year-end, with very short rates at these peaks or somewhat higher
(except for 3-month finance company paper), and yields in the 6-month
to 1-year area somewhat lower.
The tightening of monetary policy and rise in short-term rates
have made it more expensive and more difficult for banks to roll over
maturing CD's and have helped retard growth in bank credit. Over the
course of March, outstanding CD's declined by an estimated $550 million,
and banks were forced to pay the 5½ per cent ceiling rate for 30-60
day maturities. Net inflows of consumer-type time and savings deposits
were somewhat larger than in the previous two months, however, and total
time and savings deposits rose at an annual rate of 10 per cent. The
money supply rose by a 4 per cent annual rate in March, with currency
growth accounting for over half of the increase, and with a relatively
small increase in private deposits partly reflecting a reduction in
U.S. Government deposits on average in the month. Over the past four
months, time and savings deposits and the money supply have risen at
annual rates of 6 per cent and 3 per cent respectively, well below
the pace of May-November 1967; and experience at nonbank savings
institutions has been similar.
March 29, 1968.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) -4- March 29, 1968.
The sharp decline in the annual rate of growth of the bank
credit proxy, from 10 per cent in February to 4 per cent in March,
reflects for the most part the absence of Treasury cash financings
during the past month. Overall, since the initiation of a more
restrictive monetary policy late last year, the annual rate of growth
of the bank credit proxy has dropped to a 5½ per cent annual rate
(measured over the 4 months December '67 - March '68 inclusive).
The behavior of key monetary variables over the past four
months, in comparison with the previous seven months, is shown below:
May '67- Dec. '67-
Nov. '67 Mar. '68
With investors cautious, bank credit expansion under continuing
restraint, and costs to banks of borrowed funds increasing, there has
been a noticeable rise recently in long-term interest rates. A recent
Aaa-rated utility issue has been marketed at 6.67 per cent (with 5-year
call protection), up about 40 basis points from a month ago, and municipal
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
yields have risen further. Yield increases have been intensified by
exchange market uncertainties and continued doubts about the likelihood
of effective fiscal action--factors which have led many investors to
stay short and have brought a few new borrowers into the bond market.
Prospective developments
Even with a pick-up in business loan demand around the mid-
April tax period projected, outstanding bank credit in April is likely
to show little change on average in the absence of Treasury cash
financings. The average annual rate of change in the bank credit proxy
is projected to be within a range of -2 to +2 per cent, given prevailing
money market conditions. However the proxy is expected to rise from the
last week in March to the last week in April. In view of this rise
in bank credit over the course of April (part of which is expected
to be repaid in May), and with the Treasury assumed to raise around
$2 billion of cash in connection with the mid-May refunding, bank credit
on average in May would rise. The annual growth rate may be only in a
as currently prevailing.
As best prevailing money market conditions can be defined in
view of the still evolving reactions of major banks and dealers to the
recent monetary policy moves and to the still unsettled atmosphere
surrounding exchange markets and fiscal policy, such conditions may be
taken to include the following: net borrowed reserves in a $250 - $400
million range, the Federal funds rate most frequently in a 5-3/8 --
March 29, 1968.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) -6– March 29, 1968.
Relationships among the various money market variables could
well continue shifting about during the next few weeks depending on
how banks choose to adjust their money positions. For example, major
banks ordinarily run a sizable basic reserve deficit around mid-April,
and this could, at least temporarily, put further upward pressure on
the Federal funds rate, dealer loan rates, and hence the Treasury bill
rate. If these money market indicators show signs of firming, net
borrowed reserves might be allowed to move more toward the shallow
end of the projected range. On the other hand, it is not at all
clear that major banks will want to run a large basic deficit this year,
or if they do, it is not clear what their attitude toward use of the
discount window will be; if banks decide to resort more to the window,
pressure on the Federal funds market could be relatively moderate.
Our projection of bank credit for April assumes that banks
are significantly affected by a diversion to market instruments of
negotiable time CD funds and also to some extent consumer time and
saving deposits. Attrition in outstanding negotiable time certificates
of deposit is projected to be in the order of $750 million to $1 billion,
of which about half represents seasonal contraction. Bill rates at the
lower end of the range--which could result from continued liquidity
demands and seasonal downward rate pressures--may provide enough leeway
for banks to make a better showing than this. But any rise in bill rates
into the upper half of the range would cause considerable concern among
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) -7- March 29, 1968.
bankers for the Regulation Q ceiling, especially as it pertains to large
CD's and especially on the part of non-prime banks. All things
considered, total time and savings deposits in April are expected to
rise in only a 2 - 5 per cent annual rate, range, showing a considerable
drop-off from the month before.
Growth in the money supply may spurt to a 7 - 9 per cent,
annual rate, range on average in April, largely in consequence of a
sharp further drop from the March average to the April average in U.S.
Government deposits. The inflow of tax receipts will result in some
build-up in Government deposits after midmonth, but the Treasury will
have to borrow cash in the market some time before the mid-June tax
date and in preparation for the large deficit that normally develops
in July. As a result, a large amount of Treasury cash borrowing can
be expected in the not too distant future, with the mid-May refunding
presenting a convenient opportunity for raising some cash, and with
further cash borrowing needed in June and July, some of which could
be in the form of additional bill issues.
Given existing pressures on banks and the money market, long-
term interest rates may tend to remain around current advanced levels,
unless effective fiscal action suddenly emerges or prospects for peace
negotiations improve. In the absence of any move on the fiscal front,
the market may begin to react to prospects of large Treasury financings,
and if at the same time business loan demands do begin to show a sus-
tained surge, longer-term interest rates could show a sharp further rise.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Policy alternative. If the Committee should wish to achieve
more restrictive monetary conditions during the coming period, it may
want to consider adjusting open market operations with a view to
attaining the following ranges of money market variables: net borrowed
reserves, $400 - $500 million; the Federal funds rate most frequently
trading 5-1/2 -- 5-3/4 per cent and occasionally higher; new dealer
loan rates in New York, 5-3/4 -- 6 per cent; and member bank borrowings,
$650 - $850 million. The 3-month bill rate under these conditions is
likely to move into and toward the upper end of a 5-1/4 -- 5-1/2 per
cent range, partly as expectations of a further discount rate increase
begin to take hold in markets.
Under the circumstances, the question of Regulation Q ceilings
will become of immediate and urgent concern to banks. Without any rise
in such ceilings, interest rates could rise sharply further as market
participants expect banks to withdraw more or less completely from
the municipal market and sense that corporate borrowers may have to
move back into the bond markets. The development of pressures in long-
term markets, in conjunction with the further diversion of saving flows
away from financial institutions, would also likely be accompanied
by intensification of short-term market pressures as banks, nonbank
institutions and Federal Home Loan Banks reduce their liquidity in
order to sustain outstanding loan commitments.
Without a rise in the Regulation Q ceiling, and with the
foregoing money market conditions, bank credit in April is likely to
decline in a 1 to 4 per cent annual rate range, as banks liquidate
March 29, 1968.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
securities further in light of greater CD run-offs. The end-of-
quarter reinvestment period will generally be over before the full
impact of the tighter monetary conditions is felt in markets, but
there is likely to be some little further slowing of inflows of consumer-
type deposits as market yields rise in the course of the month.
While time and savings deposits are likely to show only
limited, if any, growth, it is possible that demand deposits could
expand somewhat more. Anticipatory borrowing at banks and in the
market might lead to more demand deposit growth as the proceeds from
these loans and security offerings--some of which may have come out
of time accounts--are at least temporarily added to demand balances.
March 29, 1968.
Table A-
MARGINAL RESERVE MEASURES
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on period averages of daily figures)
Monthly (reserves
weeks ending in):
Weekly
1967--
V--- -- ---
Excess Member banks
reserves borrowings
As revised
I.
Free reserves
to date
As first
published
each week
expected
at
conclusion
of each
week's
open
market
operations
_____________________ 9
p - Preliminary
TABLE A-2
AGGREGATE RESERVES AND RELATED MEASURES
Retrospective Changes, Seasonally Adjusted
(In per cent, annual rates based on monthly averages of daily figures)
Res erve Ag gregates 2/ M o n e t arv Va r i ab 1e s
Required reserves Total M Time Money Supply
Total Nonborrowed Against Deposits Private
Reserves Total Demand k De its (comm. Total Demand
Reserves Deposits (credit) /2 banks) _ Deposits
Annually:
Monthly:
1967--Jan. +19.2 +26.0 +14.4 +14.0 +16.1 +16.5 - 0.7 - 2.7
p - Preliminary.
Table B-1
MAJOR SOURCES AND USES OF RESERVES
Retrospective and Prospective
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on weekly averages of daily figures)
Factors affecting supply of reserves = Change = Bank use of reserves
Period Federal Reserve Gold Currency Technical in Required Excess
credit (excl. outside factors total reserves
float) stock anks net 2/ reserves reserves
float) 1/ banks net 2/ reserves 3/
Year:
1966 (12/29/65 - 12/28/66)
1967 (12/28/66 - 12/27/67)
Year-to-date:
(12/28/66 - 3/29/67)
(12/27/67 - 3/27/68) 5/
Weekly:
1968--Feb. 7
Mar. 6 p
13 p
20 p
27 p
+3,149
+4,718
- 29
- 72
+ 1
- 274
- 737
- 388
+ 993
+1,145
+1,085
+1,522
- 836
- 355
+1,111
+1,517
- 784
- 85
- 26
+ 5
S 52
- 270
For retrospective details see Table B-4.
For factors included, see Table B-3.
For required reserves by type of deposits,
See reverse side for explanation.
p - Preliminary.
see Table B-2.
Includes increase in reserve requirements of $360 million effective Jan. 11, 1968, and $190 million
effective January 18, 1968.
Explanation of Projections in Table B-1
Treasury bill auctions through May 15; $ 0.7 billion, April 8; $ 2.0 billion, May 15.
Table B-2
CHANGES IN REQUIRED RESERVE COMPONENTS
Retrospective and Prospective Seasonal and Nonseasonal Changes
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on weekly averages of daily figures)
Total Supporting _Supporting private deposits
U. S. Gov't. Other thanPeriod required demand Total Seasonal changes seasonal changes
reserves deposits Demand Time Demand Time
p - Preliminary.
Table B-3
TECHNICAL FACTORS AFFECTING RESERVES
Retrospective and Prospective Changes
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on weekly averages of daily figures)
Technical Foreign Other
Period factors Treasury Float deposits nonmemberPeriod factors Float
(net) operations and gold deposits and
loans F. R. accounts
ACTUAL (Sign indicates effect on reserves)
Weekly:
1968--Feb. 7 + 387 +221 + 2 + 19 +145
May 1 - 150 -- - 150 --
p - Preliminary.
Table B-4
SOURCE OF FEDERAL RESERVE CREDIT
Retrospective Changes
(Dollar amounts in millions of dollars, based on weekly averages of daily figures)
Total Federal I U.S. Government securities Federal Bankers' Member banks
Period Reserve credit Total Bills Repurchase Agency acceptances borrowings
(Excl. float) holdings agreements Securities
Year:
1966 (12/29/65-12/28/66)
1967 (12/28/66-12/27/67)
Year-to-date:
(12/28/66 - 2/29/67)
(12/27/67 - 3/27/68)
Weekly:
1968--Jan. 3
+3,149
+4,718
+3,069
+5,009
+2,158
+4,433
+ 474
+1,153
+ 101
+ 317
+ 66
+ 11
+ 22
+ 95
+ 53
+ 43
+ 27
- 57
+ 34
+380
- 23
+ 26
- 19
- 20
- 7
+ 52
- 69
- 78
- 12
+ 43
- 84
+ 1
+ 48
- 32
- 28
+ 26
- 27
- 4
- 1
- 1
+ 47
+143
+ 21
+ 37
Chart Reference Table C-1
TOTAL, NONBORROWED AND REQUIRED RESERVES 1/
Seasonally Adjusted
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on monthly averages of daily figures)
Total Nonborrowed 
Required reserves
Period reserves reserves Total Against private depositsreserves reservTotal Demand
Total Demand
p - Preliminary.
held against net demand deposits effective at mid-month, January 1968.
une 9, 1
S. 1
Table C-2
DEPOSITS SUPPORTED BY REQUIRED RESERVES AT ALL MEMBER BANKS
Seasonally Adjusted
(Dollar amounts in billions based on monthly averages of daily figures)
Total member Private U.S. Gov't.
Period bank deposits Time demand demand
(credit) 1/2/ deposits2 deposits 3/ deposits
TABLE C-2a
DEPOSITS SUPPORTED BY REQUIRED RESERVES AT ALL MEMBER BANKS
Seasonally adjusted
(Dollar amounts in billions based on weekly averages of daily figures)
Total member Time Private U. S. Gov't.
Week ending: bank deposits deposits demand demand
(credit 1 /2/ 2/ deposits 3/ deposits
p - Preliminary.
1/ Includes all deposits subject to reserve requirements--i.e., the total
of time, private demand, and U.S. Government demand deposits. Move-
ments in this aggregate correspond closely with movements in total
member bank credit.
TABLE C-3
MONEY SUPPLY AND TIME DEPOSITS AT ALL COMMERCIAL BANKS
Seasonally adjusted
(Dollar amounts in billions, based
on monthly averages of daily figures)
Private I
Monthly Money Supply Currency 1/ Demand Time Deposits
Deposits 2 Adjusted 3/
domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government, less cash items in process of
collection of Federal Reserve float; and (2) foreign demand balances at Federal
Reserve Banks.
3/ Deposits have been adjusted for redefinition of time deposits effective June 9, 19
p - Preliminary.
TABLE C-3a
MONEY SUPPLY ANL TIME DEPOSITS AT ALL COMMERCIAL DANKS
(Dollar amounts in
on weekly averages
billions, based
of daily figures)
I Private Time Deposits
Week Ending Money Supply Currency 1/ Demand
SDeposits 2/ adjusted 2/
domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government, less cash items in process of
collection and Federal Reserve float; and (2) foreign demand balances of Federal
Reserve Banks.
3/ Deposits have been adjusted for redefinition of time deposits effective June 9, 1966.
p - Preliminary
