Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 1, 1970
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent Developments
(1) Both the money supply and the adjusted bank credit proxy
have grown at a faster pace from March to April on average than was
indicated as consistent with the target path adopted at the last FOMC
meeting. At present, the money supply is estimated to have increased
in April at a 12.5 per cent annual rate, compared with a 4.0 per cent
rate specified earlier. And the average annual rate of growth of the
adjusted proxy for the month is estimated at about 14 per cent, compared
with a rate of 8 per cent indicated earlier.
(2) The greater strength in the money supply resulted mainly
from a private demand deposit bulge at the end of March--partly reflecting
statistical aberrations--that turned out to be larger than estimated on
the basis of preliminary data available at the previous FOMC meeting.
Subsequently, more than two-thirds of the bulge eroded, but this was not
quite as rapid a pace as earlier anticipated. The higher average level
of the money supply also appeared to be related to a larger than expected
demand for cash balances (for more detail see paragraph (7)). Time deposits
appeared to be growing more than expected in early April, but around
mid-month time deposit growth showed a pronounced slowing reflecting
in part the recent rise in short-term interest rates. Treasury
bill rates (on an investment yield basis) generally moved
back above ceiling rates on large CD's in the latter part of the
month. Growth in deposits was associated, on the asset side of
bank balance sheets, with bank financing of an advanced level
of Government securities dealers' Treasury bill positions in late
March and early April and in bank acquisitions of municipal
Weekly Path of Monetary Aggregates
Compared with Estimated Results
Adj. Cred. Proxy Money Supply
Apr. 7 Current Apr. 7 Current
Target Estimate Target Estimate
Annual rates of change:
P/ Preliminary.
e/ Estimated.
(3) Soon after the April 7 meeting it became clear that the
money supply and adjusted bank credit proxy paths were running ahead
of the desired patterns for April and also, though to a lesser extent,
for the second quarter as a whole (which was taken to be midway between
the paths of alternatives A and B in the previous blue book). Conse-
quently, the Desk moved toward achieving a somewhat firmer atmosphere
in the money market. Over the 4 statement weeks ending April 29, the
Federal funds rate averaged about 8-1/8 per cent, compared with an
average of 7-3/4 per cent in the preceding 4-week period. Dealer loan
rates rose commensurately to 9 per cent or above. Over the same period
weekly average net borrowed reserves fluctuated in a wide $300-$950 million
range, while average member bank borrowings ranged between about $500
million and $1 billion--but toward the upper end of these ranges in the
later weeks of the period. As money market conditions tightened, both
the adjusted credit proxy and the money supply moved back toward the
April 7 target path, as can be seen (in the table above) from the
narrowing differences as the month progressed between current estimates
and target levels.
(4) The increase in the cost of day-to-day funds came at
a time when dealer bill inventories were very large and when market
demands for bills were not strengthening as much as expected. Moreover,
the market interpreted the rise in day-to-day financing rates as indicat-
ing that the System's concern with monetary aggregates might lead to
tighter credit conditions than had been earlier anticipated. Under
these circumstances, and with the outlook for the economy also appear-
ing a little stronger and fiscal policy seeming to shift toward less
restraint, dealers sought aggressively to lighten their positions.
Treasury bill rates adjusted sharply higher; the 3-month Treasury bill,
for example, was most recently bid around 6.85 per cent, some 40 basis
points higher than its April 7 level, while the 6-month and 1-year
bills were about 7.20 per cent, representing a rise of around 8C-90
basis points.
(5) Long-term market interest rates since early April have
risen under the influences noted above combined with a continuing
record volume of new issues. Yields on corporate,municipal and long-
term U.S. Government securities are now close to their 1969 highs.
The upward adjustment in yields in the Treasury coupon market also
reflected anticipation of the Treasury refunding of about $5 billion
of publicly-held mid-May maturing issues at a time when the market
was somewhat uncertain as to the meaning of "even keel". The Treasury
announced a "rights" exchange into two outstanding intermediate-term
issues--one maturing in three years (and priced to yield 7.98 per cent)
and the other in just under seven years (yielding 8 per cent)--plus
a simultaneous cash offering of $3-1/2 billion of a 7-3/4 per cent
is being offered with 50 per cent tax and loan credit.
(6) The following table summarizes recent seasonally adjusted
annual rates of change in major reserve, deposit and credit aggregates
in comparison with selected earlier periods:
Past Past Past
Year 6 months 3 months
(April over (April over (April over
April) / October) / January) p/ April,
Savings accounts at nonbank 1/ 1/ 1/
thrift institutions 2.1- 2.1- 5.4- n.a.
Member bank deposits and
related sources of funds
Commercial bank credit
(month end)
/ Preliminary.
n.a. Not available.
Prospective Developments
(7) If the Committee wishes to continue on the policy course
adopted at the previous meeting, it may wish to renew the second para-
graph of the directive issued then, with certain modifications, as
To implement this policy, the Committee desires
to see moderate growth in money and bank credit over
the months ahead. System open market operations until
the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted
with a view to maintaining BANK RESERVES AND money
market conditions consistent with that objective, tak-
ing account of the CURRENT [DEL:forthcoming] Treasury
Moderate growth in money and bank credit at the last meeting of the
Committee appeared to encompass an annual rate of increase for the
money stock of around 3 per cent over the second quarter and a 5-1/2
per cent annual rate of growth for the adjusted bank credit proxy--
although comments at the Committee meeting indicated that a reasonable
range of variation around such a growth path was tolerable. Develop-
ments since the last meeting of the Committee suggest that the demand
for money in the second quarter, at the given prospective growth in
GNP, may have been underestimated. If so, the interrelationships among
money growth, interest rates, and bank credit expansion contemplated
at the time of the previous meeting may not be mutually consistent--but,
in view of short-run instabilities in financial flows, it is extremely
difficult to evaluate how permanent emerging relationships may prove to
be. Money demand may be larger than assumed partly because of greater
demands for precautionary balances on the part of the public in an
uncertain financial market atmosphere, particularly as reflected in the
stock market, and perhaps, as the quarter progresses,because of greater
transitory holdings of cash balances as a result of the Government pay
raise and retroactive social security payments to the public.
(8) If in fact the demand for money is stronger than previously
assumed, maintenance of the April 7 target path for money for the second
quarter would imply higher interest rates and,therefore, smaller bank
credit expansion than targeted on April 7. Conversely, maintenance
of the April 7 target path for bank credit would imply more rapid
growth in money and lower levels of interest rates. Given below for
Committee consideration is an adjusted set of target paths which
compromises between these alternatives by allowing for somewhat
greater growth in money and somewhat slower growth in bank credit
than called for at the April 7 meeting.
Adjusted Bank
Credit Proxy
As of Adjust
April 7 Path
Annual percentage rat
Money
Supply
:ed As of Adjusted A
April 7 Path Ap
Levels in billions of dollars
:es of change (rounded to nearest
Total
Reserves
s of Adjusted
ril 7 Path
per cent
I/ March includes 4 days in which transactions through foreign agencies and
Edge corporations reduced cash items and thus raised the reported money
supply. June will not include such a period. An adjustment to remove the
resulting bias in the rate of change over the second quarter would add about
1 percentage point to the quarterly rates shown in table.
(9) The adjusted pattern shown in the paragraph above allows
for greater money stock growth over the quarter as a whole than earlier.
But in May and June money stock growth drops off sharply, partly in
reflection of the reduction in outstanding money stock that has been
occurring over the course of April as the late March bulge has been
worked off and, in June, partly because of a rise in U.S. Government
deposits. In contrast to somewhat greater growth in the money stock
over the quarter, the adjusted bank credit proxy rises 1-1/2 percentage
points less than specified earlier. This growth rate for the proxy
assumes that Treasury bill rates decline from current advanced levels
March
April
May
June
into a range of about 6-1/2 -- 6-3/4 per cent for the 3-month bill between
now and mid-year. It is conceivable that the 3-month bill rate might drop
temporarily lower in this interval because of transitory supply scarcities,
but it is likely that longer bill rates would not decline as much as short
rates over the period ahead since that area of the market will be influenced
by the $3-1/2 billion of 18 month notes being offered for cash by the
(10) A weekly path for the May monetary aggregates consistent
with the monthly "adjusted path" shown in paragraph (8) would be as
Week Adjusted Bank Money Time Total
Ending Credit Proxy Supply Deposits Reserves
eJ Estimated from partial data.
(11) The weekly pattern shown above assumes that "even Keel"
considerations will be important until the mid-May settlement date for
the Treasury financing. Thus, the Federal funds rate is expected to
remain in the 8 to 8-1/2 per cent range that has prevailed recently.
After the even keel period, somewhat more fluctuation in the Federal
funds rate may be expected, perhaps in a 7 to 9 per cent range, as the
Desk reacts to possible off-target developments in the monetary aggregates.
Net borrowed reserves may fluctuate widely in an $0.5 to $1.0 billion
range, with member bank borrowing in a $0.6 to $1.1 billion range.
(12) The weekly behavior of the monetary aggregates and
money market conditions subsequent to the even keel period will depend
heavily on the results of the Treasury financing. The weekly path of
aggregates shown in paragraph (10) assumes an attrition of $2.5 billion
(or a shade above 50 per cent); net new cash borrowing by the Treasury,
therefore, would amount to $1.0 billion. If the attrition is larger and
the Treasury obtains less new cash than estimated, a different weekly
pattern in the path of the aggregates would be likely, with money supply
perhaps strengthening as Government deposits increase less than expected,
(13) Time deposit growth over the quarter is likely to be
significantly slower than contemplated four weeks ago. The rate of
increase in such deposits would be expected to diminish sharply to about
a 5-1/2 per cent annual rate in May and June from the rapid 18 per cent
March-April rate. Banks would not be able to attract much in the way
of additional domestic CD money at the interest rate levels noted above.
Consumer-type time deposits are still likely to be a source of funds,
but growth is estimated to be modest in light of the need to pay for the
AT&T issue and in view of the competition from the new 18-month Treasury
cash issue (which is sold in minimum denominations of $1,000). The
time deposit pattern implicit in the target path for bank credit suggested
in paragraph (8) is shown below:
Time and Savings Deposits
Levels Annual rate
($ billion) of change
Second Quarter 11
(14) With time deposit growth more constrained, banks once
again will probably be adding to nondeposit sources of funds--perhaps at
around a $100 million per week rate for Euro-dollar and commercial paper
taken together. Since these are relatively costly funds, however, the
extent to which they will in fact add to such borrowings would appear to
depend heavily on loan demands. Loan growth is assumed to strengthen
from the relatively weak pattern indicated for March and April partly
because the 8 per cent prime rate has become relatively more attractive
to borrowers.
(15) Given the adjusted pattern of monetary aggregates, it
is likely that the pressure of credit demand in long-term markets will
keep bond yields at relatively advanced levels through mid-year. Recep-
tion of the Treasury financing will be an important factor affecting
credit markets; for instance, an unusually strong aversion to the longer
options in the exchange would suggest that even current market rates are
not sustainable. On the other hand, once the AT&T offering is settled
and the Treasury financing is digested, there may be room for longer-term
rates to edge down, particularly if some of the recent pressures in short-
term markets abate and banks are not inhibited from active participation
in the municipal securities markets.
Table 1
MARGINAL RESERVE MEASURES
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on period averages of daily figures)
Member Banks Borr owings
Period free I Exess R e s e r v e C i t y iPeriod Free Excess IReserve C ty
reserves i reserves Total Major banks Other CountrN
8 N.Y. Outside N Y.
Monthly (reserves weeks
ending in):
p - Preliminary.
AGGREGATE RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
Retrospective Changes, Seasonally Adjusted
(In per cent, annual rates based on monthly averages of daily figures)
Re e rvt e Ag retes l Monetary Variable
Total Mo y S u pp y mrercial Credit Proxy +
Period Total onborrowed Required Member ank rivte Demand bank time Euro-dllar +
Rarves Reserves Reservesss Total Currency deposits other nondep
e DepositP aDposit adjusted sources ol tunds
let Quarter 1970 p - 2.9 - 0.4 - 2,5 + 0.5 + 3.8 + 7.0 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 0.7
December +12.1 + 5.3 +10.2 +13.0 + 7.4 + 5.6 + 7.2 +16.6
September - + 7.7 - 0.8 + 1.7 -- - 2.6 - 0.8 - 2.5 + 1.6
November + 9.7 + 5.5 + 9.3 + 9.7 + 1.2 + 7.9 - 1.6 - 0.6 +12.7
December + 6.3 +12.1 + 6.9 -- + 1.8 -- + 2.3 + 4.3 + 1.6
March -- + 7.5 + 0.6 +14.0 +11.2 + 7.8 +14.1 +14.4 +10.7
April p +19.0 +22.9 +22.2 +17.6 +12.5 +10.3 +12.4 +21.6 +14.1
p - Preliminary.
Table 3
AGGREGATE RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
Seasonally Adjusted
(Based on monthly averages of daily figures)
;~~~~~~ . . . .. ...
Monthly:
1968--January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Reserve Aggregates 5/ Member Bank DepositsCunnnrtdA br Rn. uira4 DOe ruas
Total Nonborrowed Required Total Time Private U.S. Cov't.|
Total Required member bank dpi Idemand demandreserves reserves reserves
b e r ba n k  deposits demand dem i
deositsfi IdeDosits 1/ denosi ts
(In millions of dollars)
( In b i
L o n
Money Supply
SPrivate
lotal Currency. demand
Commercial Credit Prcy +
bank time Euro-dollars +
deposits other nondep.
adjusted sources of
Private demand deposits include demand deposits of individuals, partnerships, and coporations and not interbank deposits
Includes currency outside the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and the vaults of all commercial banks
Includes (1) demand deposits at all commercial banks, other than those due to domestic commercial banks, and the U S Government, less
process of collection and Federal Reserve float; and (2) foreign demand balances at Federal Reserve Bnks.
Excludes interbank and U.S. Government time deposits.
Includes increases in required reserves due to changes in Regulations M and D of approximately $400, million since October 16, 1969.
cabh Items in
. . .. U -r-
v
- LY q":1- s .
~ rI
Table 4
AGGREGATE RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
Seasonally Adjusted
Resc% egregat s
Total Nonbol rowed Required
reserves reserves I ese ves me
T -it i
Membet Bank Deposits
Sun'torted b\ Renulred Resev-
Tine
embor hank
dno desitsnni r s
Private U.S. Gov't
demand 1 d mand
,dnnosits 1/I de osi s
I i
Money SuppI)
I ' Private
lotJl Currency demand
2/ ideposits
Commercial Credit Proxy +
bank time Euro-dollars +
deposits other nondep.
adjusted sources of
S / funds
process of collections and Federal Reserve float; and (2) foreign demand balances at Federal Reserve Banks.
4/ Excludes interbank ar U.S. Government time deposits.
5/ Includes increases in required reserves due to changes in Regulations M and D of approximately $400 million since October 16, 1969.
p - Preliminary.
.deosis W densit I
