Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 22, 1970.
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent Developments
(1) In the first three weeks of May, figures for both the money
supply and the adjusted credit proxy appear, on balance, to have run
significantly above the paths targeted in the last blue book. As a result,
for the month of May the money supply is now estimated to grow at about
a 9-1/2 per cent annual rate on average, and the adjusted credit proxy to
decline at only about a 1-1/2 per cent annual rate, compared with rates
of plus 3-1/2 and minus 7-1/2 per cent specified earlier. The higher
May growth rates reflect in some part, and particularly for the money
supply, shortfalls of the aggregates in April from their targets. Still,
taking April and May together, the growth in both the money supply and
bank credit is running about 2 - 3 percentage points (annual rate) more
rapidly than targeted. It should be pointed out, however, that this
estimate is based on data for May which are relatively firm for only
the first half of the month, with figures partial for the third week.
Weekly Path of Monetary Aggregates
Compared with Estimated Results
(Daily average levels in billions of dollars)
Credit Proxy
Current
Money Supply
May 5 Current
Target Estimate
Week ending
April 29
May 6
May 13
May 20
May 27
Monthly averages
March
April
May
Annual rates of change:
March to May
April to May
(est.)
(proj.
(2) The faster-than-expected increase in the money supply for
May has reflected a considerably stronger than targeted performance of
private demand deposits. Consumer cash balances have probably been
augmented by the receipt of lump-sum retroactive increases in social
security benefits and Federal pay, and probably also by a build-up in
liquidity associated with the sharp decline of the stock market. But this may
also have been partly due to the active reserve supplying operations under-
taken by the System to lend support to the Treasury's May financing. With
respect to the adjusted credit proxy, its smaller-than-targeted decline
May 5
Target
in May has also been influenced by the fact that the Treasury received
more cash than expected in its mid-May refunding, partly paid through
credits to tax and loan accounts.
(3) Commercial bank time deposits rose moderately in the last
half of April, but thus far in May growth has been at a very slow pace,
possibly influenced by withdrawals from consumer-type time deposits to
pay for the recent AT&T and Treasury offerings. Moreover, at recent
relatively high levels of short-term market rates, the earlier fairly rapid
net expansion in outstanding CD's has come to a halt. In May, time
deposits are now estimated to rise at an 8-1/2 per cent annual rate, on
average, mainly reflecting rapid growth in the last half of April. With
respect to nondeposit sources of funds, Euro-dollar borrowings through
foreign branches have shown little net change on balance over recent
weeks, as expected, but growth in bank-related commercial paper has been
considerably more than anticipated.
(4) Desk operations since the last meeting were shaped by
"even-keel" considerations as the Treasury financing was imperilled by
market reactions to Cambodian and related developments. During the
statement week ending May 6--when books were open on the financing--net
borrowed reserves declined to about $425 million, about $400 million
below the average of the preceding three statement weeks. In the
following two statement weeks net borrowed reserves rose to $790 million
and $1,064 million, respectively. In terms of the flow of reserves,
there was a sizable $420 million rise (seasonally adjusted) in the
daily average of nonborrowed reserves during the week ending May 6--a
period in which the System bought $1.2 billion of securities (on a
daily average basis)--but outstanding nonborrowed reserves were reduced
sharply in the ensuing two weeks partly as a result of action to increase
substantially the Treasury balance of the Federal Reserve in the week
ending May 13. Over the past three statement weeks, the effective
weekly average Federal funds rate has fluctuated bttween 7-7/8 and
million and $1.2 billion.
(5) The Treasury's May financing raised about $2 billion in new
money from the public, or about $1 billion more than expected. This was
almost entirely the result of lower-than-expected cash redemptions of
publicly-held "rights" to the exchange. The cash offering of 18-month
full coverage. Dealers have been rather reluctant to rebuild their
reduced positions from the levels to which they had been reduced after
the recent sizable System bill purchases. With the market supply of
bills thin, bill rates have fluctuated widely in response to shifting
short-run market pressures. The 3-month bill has ranged from 6.56 to
bid at around 6.85 per cent. Long-term interest rates have edged higher
in the inter-meeting period, carrying yields on corporate and municipal
bonds to levels slightly above their previous highs of late December.
And stock market prices have dropped sharply further.
(6) The following table summarizes recent seasonally adjusted
anhual rates of change in major reserve deposit, and credit aggregates in
comparison with selected recent periods:
Past 1970
Year to date May
(May over (May over over
May) December) April
Member bank deposits and
related sources of funds
Proxy plus Euro-dollars
and other nondeposit
sources n.a. 2.7 - 1.5
Commercial bank credit
(month end)
Total loans and investments 1/ 2/ 3/
of all commercial banks 1.2- 1.4" 6.0"
able for a long enough time to make seasonal adjustments. Data for May
are partly projected.
1/ April over April.
2/ April over December.
3/ April over March.
n.a. Not available.
(7) If the Committee decides to aim at a continuation of the
policy course adopted at the previous meeting, it may wish to renew the
directive issued then, excluding the reference to the Treasury financing,
as follows:
To implement this policy, the Committee desires
to see moderate growth in money and bank credit over
the months ahead. System open market operations until
the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted
with a view to maintaining bank reserves and money
market conditions consistent with that objective;-taking
[DEL: account of the current Treasury financing;] provided,
however, that operations shall be modified as needed to
moderate excessive pressures in financial markets, should
they develop.
(8) The following table compares the target paths for money
supply and the adjusted bank credit proxy adopted at the last FOMC meeting
for the second quarter with current estimates and projections. The pro-
jections are based on an assumption of a Federal funds rate around the
seasonal decline in the 3-month bill rate during the next four weeks into
a 6-3/8--6-5/8 per cent range.
Adjusted Bank
Credit Proxy
As Currently
of estimated or
May 5 projectedMonths
Money Supply
As Currently
of estimated or
May 5 projected
Total Reserves
As Currently
of estimated or
May 5 projected
Daily average levels in billions of dollars
March
April
May
June
Week
Endingi/
June 3
June 10
June 17
June 24
(9) The annual rates of change (rounded to the nearest
half per cent) which go with the preceding levels are shown below for June
and the second quarter:
Adjusted Bank
Credit Proxy
As Currently
of estimated or
May 5 projected
Money Supply
As Currently
of estimated or
May 5 projected
Total Reserves
As Curren.ti
of estimated or
May 5 projected
Second Qtr.
(June over
March)
1/
Some analysts prefer to view quarterly changes in the money stock as
measured by the average daily amount outstanding during the current quarter
over the average daily amount outstanding in the preceding quarter. On
this basis the second quarter increase in the money stock consistent with
the 4 per cent target shown in the table above would be at a 6-1/2 per cent
annual rate, while the figure consistent with the 7 per cent projected
increase would be around 7-1/2 per cent. The first quarter rise in the
money stock on a quarter-over-quarter basis was around 2-1/2 per cent.
(10) An extrapolation into the third quarter of the moderate
growth path for the monetary aggregates voted by the FOMC on May 5 might
look as follows:
Adjusted Bank Money Total
Credit Proxy Supply Reserves
Annual 7 rate of change:
September over
The path for the adjusted proxy allows for sizable Treasury third quarter
cash financing, with about $8-1/2 billion of new cash raised in July and
August. Staying with this path, however, would probably mean that a
substantial part of the Treasury cash requirements would have to be financed
outside the banking system, assuming that business and other loan demands on
banks pick up from their recent depressed pace as would be consistent with
staff projections of renewed expansion in real GNP.
(11) Since both the bank credit proxy and the money supply
are currently running above target, it seems clear that the Manager
would have to provide less reserves and to tighten up money market
conditions in order to move back toward the targeted path. One of the
factors the Committee may wish to take into account in determining the
speed with which the Manager attempts to move back toward the path
presumably would be the fragility of market conditions. Assuming the
excess of projections over targets shown in paragraph (8) is roughly
correct, a gradual movement back toward the moderate growth path might
be fostered, between now and the next meeting of the Committee, with a
Federal funds rate around 8-1/2 per cent or somewhat above, member bank
borrowing averaging about $1 to $1.1/4 billion, and net borrowed reserves
averaging around $900 million to $1 billion. Such a movement in the
money market would inhibit, at the least, potential seasonal downward
pressures on bill rates during June, and would probably add to upward
pressures on long-term rates over the short-run. As the System holds
back on the provision of nonborrowcd reserves, a slower rate of deposit
growth can be expected, with time deposits becoming even less competitive
relative to securities and holders of cash balances moving into high-
yielding market instruments.
(12) Should the Committee--for example, because it wishes
to accommodate what appears to be increased liquidity demands in the
economy--wish to move onto a path that allows for somewhat greater
rates of growth in the monetary aggregates than Alternative A, the
following language for the second paragraph might be considered:
To implement this policy, the Committee desires to
see [DEL: moderate] SOMEWHAT GREATER growth in money and bank
credit over the months ahead THAN PREVIOUSLY SOUGHT.
System open market operations until the next meeting of
Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining
bank reserves and money market conditions consistent with
that objective, [DEL:taking account of the current Treasury
financing;] provided, however, that operations shall be
modified [DEL: as needed to moderate] IF excessive pressures
DEVELOP in financial markets, [DEL: should they devlop OR
IF IMPLEMENTING ACTIONS ARE LEADING TO UNDULY EASY MONEY
MARKET CONDITIONS.
(13) A target path that fosters somewhat greater growth in
money and bank credit over the months ahead might be as follows:
Adjusted
Credit Proxy
May
June
July
August
September
June
Second Qtr.
(June over March)
Third Qtr.
(Sept. over June)
(Daily average levels
Annual percentage
in bil ions of dollars)
rates of change
Movement onto this path might temporarily--over the next few weeks--require
keeping money markets toward the tight end of recently prevailing ranges,
although not as tight as in paragraph (11), perhaps with a Federal funds
rate averaging around 8-1/4 per cent, member bank borrowings averaging
a little under $1 billion, and net borrowed reserves falling in a $650
million to $900 million range. Money market conditions such as contemplated
here might well mean that there would be only a quite moderate decline in
the 3-month bill rate in June to a level averaging somewhere in a 6-1/2 -
relation to the aggregates should help to moderate upward short-term rate
pressures resulting from the Treasury's larger-than-usual July-August
financing operations. Long-term interest rates also would be under less
upward pressure, and might actually decline, as banks were put in a better
position to purchase municipal securities and if the size of the corporate
calendar were to abate as expectations of rising interest rates faded.
Money
Sup ly
Total
Re erves
Table 1
MARGINAL RESERVE MEASURES
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on period averages of daily figures)
Meirber anka Borro w n s
Period Free Excess R e s e r v e C t
reserves reserves Total Major banks Country
p - Yrelminary.
Table 2
AGGREGATE RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
Perspective Changes, Seasonally Adjusted
(In pr ten . annual r.tes bascL or monthls aver uvI of dJll\ .urs)
Res, I , . 1
Mem- n ar* P'lvt | -at li -c
a,- c
-- . - t - - - - +1. +22.:
Sl I iI
p - Preliinar
pp - Partl projected
Table 3
AGGREGATE RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
Seasonally Adjusted
(Based on monthly averages ot daillv igII, I
Resbe\e Aggregates i/
Total Nonboirowed Required
leserves ileerves reseiver
Member Bank Deposit
SIppot ted b\ Requiied Ke);~'i v\'
Total Time
Time
member hank d
depos i s
PI '.lv te l t , .. \ '
Jeposits I/ d . I I i
P[ I v.ite l id , iJthli n n e.hp.
lo l .I 'd I 1 I'd Flunrls.
,d l", nI , 11 *, 1F-8n .
'ntl ly
168-- January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
Oct obe r
November
December
May
June
July
August
Sept L-mer
O toher
November
December
March
April p
May pp
millions of dollait)
( In b
I 0 II
.I , 1l I I I
process of collection and Federal Reserve float, and (2) foreign demand balances at Federal Reserve Bank.
pp -,Partly proule t ed
Ib i.8
I 4 .I
ca.sb items in
. = .
iI I - =
I i . I_ _~
Table 4
AGGREGATE RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
Seasonally Adjusted
Per ilod
Apr. I
8
May o p
20 p
20 p
Total
reserves
Reserve Aggregates
r I
Nonborrowed Required
reserves reserves
-I. ________ C______
millions of dol
Member Bank Deposits
Supported by Required Heserv
Total Tim
member bank deposi
depoits depostsdepusits
Private
demand
deposits I /
In bi
d>, I
I I 0 I
* .
I .'
(I ,lnercial Credi Proxy +Muom, y S"'*i' y _ bl ink time Euro-dollars +
Private dLLposits other nondep.
I d
tl00. I192.7
,')1 .0
I 'I'). 7I
'lll). 6
.9l)i. I
I i r s
45.7
'1.6.746. ItIb. 946.46.
Private demand deposits include demand deposits of individuals, partnerships, and corporations and not interbank 
deposits.
Includes currency outside the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and the vaults of all commercial bank
Includes (1) demand deposits at all commercial banks, other than those due to domestic commercial 
bank, and the U S Government, less
process of collection and Federal Reserve float, and (2) foreign demand balances 
at Federal Reserve Banks.
Excludes interbank and U.S. Government time deposits.
<ash items in
-I I
m I m = -
I
