Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
December 15, 1972
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 15, 1972
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) The money supply aggregates now appear to be growing at
annual rates about 1-1/2 and 1 percentage points in excess of the
Committee's November-December ranges of tolerance, as shown in the table
below. However, during most of the interval, growth rates appeared to be
running at or only slightly above their acceptable ranges. During
November, growth in M1 was at about a 6-1/2 per cent annual rate--nearly
double the low October rate. While growth in M2 was at about the same
rate as in October, it too was at a faster pace than desired. 1/ It is
possible that the recent strength in the money supply partly reflects
Growth in Money and Credit Aggregates and RPD
During November-December Period
(SAAR in Percentage Points)
Ranges of Current
Tolerance Estimates
RPD 6-10 13
M1 4-7 8-1/2
M 5-8 9
Federal funds 4.75--5.-50 5,29 Week ending December 13
1/ More detail on recent changes in the reserve and monetary aggregates is
provided by Tables 1 and 2 attached at the end of the Blue Book and in
Appendix 1.
technical problems of measurement and seasonal adjustments flowing from the
change in Regulation J, although our adjustments made for the effects of
this change: appear to us to be reasonably accurate. The most likely
explanation of the overshoot would seem to be that money growth is again
beginning to respond in a more nearly usual relationship to the rapid
rate of economic expansion.
(2) Intermeeting estimates of the growth in RPD's during
the November-December target period have been substantially above the
Committee's 6-10 per cent range of tolerance, with the most recent estimate
close to a 13 per cent annual rate. However, about 3 percentage points
of this overshoot reflects an increase in the reserve multiplier, as
deposit growth has been greater than anticipated at large banks subject
to high marginal reserve requirements and less than anticipated at smaller
banks (including our estimates for non-member banks). The recent regula-
tory changes have made the multiplier unusually difficult to predict.
(3) As evidence developed that the monetary aggregates were
tending to run near the top or above the Committee's ranges of tolerance,
the Desk provided RPD's more reluctantly. As a result, member bank
borrowing rose substantially over the intermeeting period, and bank
bidding for Federal funds intensified. From the 5 per cent level pre-
vailing at the time of the last Committee meeting, the average Federal
funds rate rose in successive statement weeks to 5.03, 5.17, and 5.29 per
cent. Most recently, funds have traded around 5-1/2 per cent, the upper
limit of the Committee's range of tolerance.
(4) The advance in the Federal funds rate was accompanied by
rate increases ranging generally from 10 to 30 basis points in short-term
markets and from 5 to 20 basis points in longer-term markets. The rate
on the 3-month Treasury bill reached a high of around 5.10 per cent in
the most recent auction held today--roughly 30 basis points above the
level prevailing at the time of the last meeting. The Treasury has just
announced the offering of a $2 billion, 2-year, 5-7/8 per cent note to be
auctioned December 20 and paid for December 28. In addition, it reveal-
ed plans to offer $500-$750 million of 20-30 year bonds in early
(5) The table on the following page compares recent changes
in the money and credit aggregates (at seasonally adjusted annual rates)
with those for selected earlier periods.
Most Recent
two
Calendar Past Past 6 Past 3 Past
Years Year Months Months Month
Dec. '71 Nov. '72 Nov. '72 Nov. '72 Nov. '72
over over over over over
Dec. '69 Nov. '71 May '72 Aug. '72 Oct. '72
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term market paper
(Actual $ change in
billions)
Prospective developments
(6) Three alternative sets of relationships among monetary
aggregates and money market conditions (with figures for aggregates
representing seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth) are shown in
summary form below for FOMC consideration. More detailed monthly and
quarterly figures are shown in the table on the following page.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Longer-run targets for
aggregates(represented
by average growth rates
for first half of 1973) 1/
Credit Proxy
Associated range for
December '72-January '73
Nonborrowed RPD 10-14
RPD 8-1/2--12-1/2
M1 7-1/2--10-1/2
M2  8-11
Federal funds rate 4-7/8--5-1/2
Alternative Longer-Run Targets
for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A
Quarters
1972 4th Q.
1973 let Q.
Jan. 1973
M 1
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B
Rates of Growth
8.5 8.5
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. C
Alt. A
RPD
Alt. A Alt. B
Rates of Growth
9.5
8.0
7.0
Credit Proxy
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. C
(7) The December-January ranges of tolerance for the aggregates
range above the associated longer-run targets. Accordingly, the Committee
may wish to specify that shortfalls of some dimension should not be taken
as indicating a need to provide reserves more actively to ease money market
conditions. The 2-month ranges are high mainly because of the substantial
increase of the monetary aggregates that seems already in train for December;
the January growth rates for M1 are indicated to be closer to longer-run
targets. Also, in both December and January the $5. 4billion of revenue
sharing payments may have a transitory effect in increasing growth in M1
for any given level of interest rates.
(8) The three alternatives shown for longer-run targets include
annual rates of growth in M1 for the first half of 1973 of 7, 6, and 5 per
cent. This is the same range of targets as presented to the FOMC at its
previous meeting. At that meeting, the Committee adopted a longer-run target
path for the aggregates (for the fourth quarter of '72 and first quarter of
'73 combined) as indexed by M1 growth of 6 per cent. Recent figures, as
desires. We expect that growth in M1 for the fourth quarter of 1972 will be
about 7 per cent, give or take 1/2 of one percentage point.
(9) None of the paths presented indicates a first quarter growth
rate for M1 consistent with a 6 per cent average growth rate for the fourth
and first quarters combined. To achieve that objective the required first
quarter growth would have to be at around a 5 per cent annual rate. The
staff believes that efforts to obtain such a growth rate would lead to a
very sharp rise in the funds rate during the winter, followed by a drop in
the funds rate during the spring unless the Committee were willing to tolerate
considerably slower growth rates in the aggregates as the year progressed.
(10) Of the alternatives presented, alternative C--which encompasses
a 5 per cent M1 target for the first half of 1973--does involve a slowing of
M1 growth that eventually compensates for recent overshoots. Because of
factors affecting money demand, the slowing of M1 growth is indicated to be
most marked in the second quarter. In that period, money demand is expected
to be moderated by disappearance of the transitory upward effect on M 1 of
unusually large tax refunds in late winter and early spring. In addition,
demand for money would be reduced,with a lag, by the substantial rise of
interest rates indicated for that alternative. It is thought that attainment
of the alternative C aggregate targets would be accompanied by a rise in the
Federal funds rate to around 6 per cent over the next few weeks, with perhaps
some modest further increase developing later in the winter.
(11) Alternative B encompasses a 6 per cent M1 growth rate over
the first half of 1973, while alternative A involves a 7 per cent rate.
The 6 per cent target appears consistent with little further change in money
market conditions, but the higher target would seem to involve some easing.
In any event, money demand is likely to be weaker in the second quarter than
the first, partly because of the effect of the tax refunds noted in the
previous paragraph. In addition, under alternative B, Treasury bill and other
short-term market rates are likely to rise a bit over the first quarter, even
given prevailing money market conditions, and thereby work to retard money
demand later.
(12) Over the next few weeks, because the market has not yet
adjusted to a 5-1/2 per cent Federal funds rate, persistence of the rate
around that level could lead to a rise in the 3-month bill to around 5-1/4
per cent. However, bill purchases by the public in recent days, partly
related to revenue sharing, have improved the technical position of the bill
market and may moderate very near-term rate adjustments. A movement of
the Federal funds rate above 5-1/2 per cent--as would be contemplated under
alternative C and is possible under alternative B--would set off larger
short-term market rate adjustments. Questions about the discount rate would
become more pressing. And if the funds rate were to penetrate the 6 per cent
level, the accompanying rise in short-term market rates could bring into
question the substainability of ceiling rates on consumer-type time deposits
as net inflows of such deposits decelerated markedly.
(13) Long-term interest rates may show only little, if any,
increase under alternative B in view of the moderate size of long-term
credit demands. The more substantial rise in short rates anticipated under
alternative C, however, probably would exert considerable pressure on
longer-term markets. This would be expected on anticipatory grounds alone,
but would be reinforced as unfavorable rate relationships put savings inflows
to banks and other institutions increasingly under downward pressure.
Proposed directives
(14) Presented below are three alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive, which might be taken to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in
the preceding section. In all three alternatives a reference to
Treasury financing operations is proposed in light of the forthcoming
auction of $2 billion in notes and the announced plans for a 20-30
year bond offering in early January. Deletion of the reference to
bank regulatory changes is suggested on the grounds that banks have
adjusted to the new regulations. For alternatives B and C, a reference
to credit market developments is suggested should the Committee wish to
take account of the possible reaction to a further rise in the funds
rate while the market is still adjusting to the rise that has already
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of TREASURY
FINANCING OPERATIONS [DEL: the effects of recent bank regulatory changes],
the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market con-
ditions that will support [DEL: more moderate] growth in monetary aggre-
gates over the months ahead [DEL: than recorded in the third quarter] AT
ABOUT THE RATES THAT APPEAR INDICATED FOR THE SECOND HALF OF THIS
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of TREASURY
FINANCING OPERATIONS [DEL: the effects of recent bank regulatory changes]
AND POSSIBLE CREDIT MARKET DEVELOPMENTS, the Committee seeks
to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that will
support [DEL: more] moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the
months ahead [DEL: than recorded in the third quarter].
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of TREASURY
FINANCING OPERATIONS [DEL: the effects of recent bank regulatory
changes] AND POSSIBLE CREDIT MARKET DEVELOPMENTS, the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that
will support [DEL: more moderate] SLOWER growth in monetary aggregates
over the months ahead than [DEL: recorded in the third quarter] APPEARS
INDICATED FOR THE SECOND HALF OF THIS YEAR.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
12/15/72
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
i
/13/72)
*Break in Series, Actual Level of Total Reserves After Reduction in Reserve Requirements Effective November 9, 1972
Table 1
Bank Reserves
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
December 15,1972
Reserves Availale for Private Nonbank Deposits Aggregate Reserves Required Reserves
Seasonally Adjusted Not Seasonally Adjusted Seasonally Adjusted
Actual Actual Time U.S. Gov't.
and and Total Nonborrowed Private and and
Period Projected Projected Reserves Reserves Demand Nondeposits Interbank
Annual Rates of Change
1971-*4th Qtr.
Weekly.
1972--Aug. 2
Nov. 1
8
Dec. 6
13
(11.5)
(11.5)
(17.0)
(13.0)
(17.0)
(13.5)
Table 2
Monetary Aggregates
(Actual and current projections, seasonally adjusted)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
December 15, 1972
Narrow Broad Adjusted U.S. Total Time deposits Nondeposit
Mononey ney Credit Govt. Time and other Negotiable Sources of
Supply (M) Supply (M2) Proxy Deposits Savings than CD's CD's Funds
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Monthly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
(245.1) (512.5) (401.1) (5.3) (310.0) (266.8)
Annual Percentage Rates of Change-quarterly and Monthly
(7.0) (8.5) (8.5) (iiiiiiii 12.5) (10.0)
(10.5) (10.0) (5.0) i iiiiliiiiii (16.0) (10.0)
(8.5) (9.0) (8.5) i il ifil : (13.0) ( 9.5)
Weekly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
Sept.
13
20
27
Dec. 6 p
13 pe
flL S A ......................... -
(7) (8)
:::::;::::::; :::::::::::::::;::::::::::::: ............
;::: ::::: :: ...... ......
pe - Partially estimated.
Per id
- .II
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
DECEMBER 15, 1972
Table 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Marke.t Operations 1/ Daily Average Reserve Effect 2/ . Ain reserve categores . .aret
Bills Coupon Agency RP' s3/ Ttal Open Market AMember Other 4/ req. res. against available res. 5/ available
& Accept. Issues Issues Net Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S,G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) reserves 5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
Dec. 6 229 - -- 193 422 671p 15p -4 7 1p 3 19p -104p
13 288 -- -14 1,939 2,213 -42 8p 220p 287p 60p 19p
20
27
I/ Represents change in System's portfolio from end-of-period to end-of-period; includes redemptions in regular bill auctions.
2/ Represents change in daily average level from preceding period.
3/ Includes matched sale-purchase transactions as well as RP's.
4/ Sum of changes in vault cash, currency ih circulation, Treasury operations, F.R. float, gold and foreign accounts, and other FR accounts.
5/ Reserves to support private nonbank deposits. Target change for November and December reflects the mid-point of the target range adopted at the
November 21, 1972 FOMC meeting. Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with the mid-points of target
ranges that were adopted during the month,
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
DECEMBER 15, 1972
Table 4
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK RESERVES
Millions of Dollars
U.S. Govt. Security Other Security Member Bank Reserve Positions
Period Dealer Positions Dealer Positions
Bills Coupon Issues Corporate Municipal Excess Borrowings Net Free Basic Reserve Deficit
Bonds Bonds Reserves at FRB Reserves 8 New York 38 Other
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
. . .e..o - -- l -- - --- .. . .. ..- -- a& t - J -- J . .s . .:L 1 J . ... .•I _ t . .
Government Security uealer trading positions are of a colmtitment oasis. Lrading posil ons, wnicn excLuoe Ireasury Dills rlnance oy repurcnase
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings available for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions
are debt issues still 'n syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserve
less net Federal funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syidicate which
are Friday figures.
*STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
DECEMBER 15, 1972
Table 5
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per Cent
Short-term ... _ Lon -term
Treasury bills 90-119 day 90-119 day New IsMunicipal S. Gov't. FNMA AuctionPeriods Federal Funds 9T-day [ -year Commercial CD's Ut ey* BMnniBuper (10-Yr. Constant YiPoFeerale-nd -day -year Prie-NYC Aaa Utility* Bond Buyer Maturty Yields
I Paper Pri-NYC Maturlty
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
NU.O... . .... o .y l.. ti ~ W UWC * L & ~~~lU L.~U t U ....
IoLumn j is a one-oay weanesuay quote. ror columns o an o a Le
weekly data is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Columh 7 is a one-day quote for the Thursday following the
end of the statement week. Columft 9 gives FIA auction data for the Monday preceding the end of the statement week. The FNMA auction yield is
the implicit yield in weekly or bi-weekly auction for short-term forward commitmehts for Government underwritten mortgages.
*NCw spries--Corporate New Issues Aaa series discontinued.
