Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
June 16, 1972
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) June 16, 1972
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Through mid-June reserves available to support private
nonbank deposits (RPD) have been running below the mid-point of the
path specified at the last meeting of the Committee. Partially pro-
jected data for required reserves for the last half of June suggest a
somewhat larger shortfall unless excess reserves rise substantially.
If excess reserves in the last two weeks of the month were to average
no more than the $150 million expected at the time of the last FOMC
meeting, the May-June RPD growth would be 7 per cent at an annual rate,
slightly below the Committee's 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 per cent target range,
as shown in the attached Table 1.
(2) Growth in all of the key money and credit aggregates fell
a little short of expectations in May but, as the attached Table 2 shows,
deviations were not very significant. M1 increased at about a 4 per
cent annual rate, M2 at nearly a 9 per cent rate, and the adjusted credit
proxy at about a 15 per cent rate. Shortfalls appear to have continued
in the first half of June.
(3) The Federal funds rate haS averaged just under 4-1/2 per
cent in the two most recent statement weeks. This is close to 25 basis
points above the level prevailing at the time of the last meeting, and
still in the low end of the 4-1/4 to 5-1/2 per cent range that was
thought to have been consistent with growth in RPD at the mid-point of
its targeted range. Borrowings from the discount window--averaging about
$135 million during the past three statement weeks--have also been moderately
below levels thought necessary to restrain growth in the aggregates within
targeted ranges. In the absence of any indications of a slowing in economic
growth, it seems probable that there has been an only temporary shortfall in
private demand for cash balances relative to GNP. However, the possibility
that there has been some overestimation of the basic intensity of demands for
cash associated with GNP growth cannot be ruled out.
(4) The increase that had developed in the Federal funds rate
following the last Committee meeting was not immediately reflected in short-
term rates generally. The relative absence of upward pressures on short rates
was probably attributable largely to the combination of sizable Federal debt
repayment in June and market expectations that the Treasury would not borrow
new funds until the latter part of July. However, most recently bill rates
have risen, with the 3-month bill rate around 3.95 per cent.
(5) This outlook on Treasury financing along with some lightening
of new issue calendars in both markets, contributed to a general strengthening
of corporate and municipal bond markets during May. Encouraged by this im-
proved atmosphere, underwriters bid rather aggressively for new issues, and
bond yields declined generally. These May declines have since been erased,
however, as investor resistance to aggressive underwriting pricing forced
snydicate terminations.
(6) The following table compares seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change in major financial aggregates for recent periods.
Fourth and First
Quarters Latest
Combined 2 months
Total Reserves
Nonborrowed Reserves
Reserves available to support
private nonbank deposits
Concepts of Money
M1 (currency plus demand
deposits) 1/
M2 (M1 plus time deposits at
commercial banks other
than large CD's)
M3 (M2 plus deposits at thrift
institutions)
Bank Credit
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy adj.)
Loans and investments of
commercial banks 2/
Short-term market paper
(Actual $ change in billions)
Large CD's
Nonbank commercial paper
$ 7.9
Other than interbank and U.
Based on month-end figures.
S. Government.
Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
Prospective developments
(7) The three alternative patterns of monetary aggregates and
money market conditions summarized below differ little from those presented
at the time of the last FOMC meeting. Given recent deposit flows, growth
in M1 for the second quarter is less than earlier indicated, but the
alternatives proposed for third quarter rates of growth in M 1 are unchanged.
We have reduced the range of member bank borrowings and lowered the bottom
end of the Federal funds rate range,since pressures on the money market and on
the discount window in the past several weeks have been less than anticipated
for given increases in the monetary aggregates. But we have not lowered the
top end of the funds rate ranges because we still feel that basic money demands
will be strong, given the vigorous GNP growth projected, and that, therefore,
there are some odds--not trivially small--that restraint of growth in the
aggregates can require a considerable tightening of the money market. More
detailed monthly and quarterly figures, including data for total reserves and
RPD, are shown on the next two pages.
A B C
Growth in M1 (SAAR)
June 6% 6% 6%
Near-term growth in
RPD (SAAR)
June 8% 7-1/2% 7%
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly Patterns
for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Alt. A
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly Patterns
of Reserve Aggregates
Total Reserves _RPD /_
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt.-B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
to support private nonbank deposits.I/ Reserves available
(8) The first two alternatives encompass recently prevailing
money market conditions, taken to be typified by a Federal funds rate
aroung 4-3/8--4-1/2 per cent. But under alternative A, the staff would
expect the funds rate to edge down from current levels, while under
alternative B it is likely to edge up as reserve provision through open
market operations is held back in the face of strengthening demand for money.
M1 growth is expected to be largest early in the third quarter--with the
July rise estimated at around a 9 per cent annual rate--as U. S. Government
deposits decline sharply on balance.
(9) For several weeks the 3-month bill rate has been seasonally
low relative to the Federal funds rate. Over the course of July the bill
rate normally rises relative to the funds rate. The seasonal rise--or at
least the full extent of it--may be delayed this year if the Treasury does
not begin its third quarter cash borrowing until late July or early August.
We have assumed a fairly sizable cash borrowing around mid-July. And we
would expect significant upward pressures on the bill rate to begin emerging
it least by the latter part of July, with the full force of such pressures
possibly not developing until later in the summer. Between now and the
July 18 FOMC meeting, a 3-month bill rate in a 3-3/4--4-1/2 per cent range
might be anticipated, assuming money market conditions around those currently
prevailing, but with the rate moving higher if the funds rate were to move
above 4-3/4 per cent.
(10) As the third quarter progresses, growth in time deposits
other than large CD's is expected to slow, reflecting rising short-term
market interest rates. The slowdown does not look as if it will be as
sharp as we had earlier expected in view of the strong performance of
such deposits in recent weeks and the failure of short-term market rates
thus far to show significant increases. Even so, M2 is projected to grow
more slowly in the third quarter than in the second under alternatives B
and C, and at just about the same rate under alternative A.
(11) The recent strong business loan demand at banks is
expected to persist in the summer. And with diminished net inflows of
time deposits other than large CD's, banks can be expected to bid fairly ag-
gressively for large negotiable CD funds. Nevertheless, bank credit
expansion--as measured by the proxy--may be very slow in June and July
as continued declines in U. S. Government deposits divert funds from
banks. Over the third quarter as a whole, bank credit growth is likely
to be somewhat slower than in the second quarter.
(12) Between now and the next meeting of the Committee,
there is unlikely to be much upward pressure on long-term interest
rates, given the moderate credit demands in prospect, unless money
market conditions become significantly firmer. If the Treasury should
elect to undertake an advance refunding in the latter part of June,
some modest near-term increase in Treasury yields might be expected,
but the spill-over of such yield increases to other long-term markets
would probably not be very large. Taking a somewhat longer view, as
the summer progresses the expected rise in short-term rates, fueled by
the increased cash needs of the Treasury, will probably lead to some
increase in long-term interest rates generally.
Proposed directive
(13) Three alternative formulations for the operational
paragraph of the directive are presented below. They might be associated
with the correspondingly lettered patterns of growth in the aggregates
described in the preceding section.
(14) Alternative A.
"To implement this policy, while taking account of
[DEL: capital market developments and] possible Treasury [DEL: refunding]
FINANCING, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve
and money market conditions that will support [DEL: somewhat slower]
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead AT SOMEWHAT
FASTER RATES THAN IN RECENT MONTHS."
(15) Alternative B.
"To implement this policy, while taking account of
[DEL: capital market developments and] possible Treasury [DEL: refunding]
FINANCING, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and
money market conditions that will support [DEL: somewhat slower]
MODERATE growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead."
(16) Alternative C.
"To implement this policy, while taking account of
capital market developments and possible Treasury [DEL: refunding]
FINANCING, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and
money market conditions that will support [DEL: somewhat slower]
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead AT
SOMEWHAT SLOWER RATES THAN IN RECENT MONTHS."
(17) Deletion of the reference to capital market develop-
ments is proposed for alternatives A and B in view of the recent and
prospective moderation of credit demands in capital markets. However,
the Committee might wish to consider including such a reference in
association with alternative C because of the stronger upward pressures
in long-term markets that could develop under that alternative.
(18) The other differences in language among these alter-
natives are in the descriptions of desired growth in monetary aggre-
gates. In alternative A the words "at somewhat faster rates than in
recent months" are designed to place an accent on the objective under
this alternative of achieving some pick-up from the average rates of
May and June. In B the term "moderate" is suggested in place of the
previous "somewhat slower" to avoid any implication that the Committee
seeks a continued slowing of monetary growth from the rates recently
achieved. As indicated, it is proposed to retain the phrase "somewhat
slower" in alternative C.
Table 1
Bank Reserves
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
June 16, 1972
Reserves Available for Private Nonbank Deposits Aggregate Reserves Required Reserves
Seasonally Adjusted Not Seasonally Adjusted Seasonally Adjusted
Target and Actual Target and Actual Time U. S. Gov't.
Associated and Associated and Total Nonborrowed Private and and
Period Patterns Projected Patterns ProJected Reserves Reserves Demand Nondeposits Interbank
Annual Rates of Change
Quarterly:
1971--3rd Qtr.
Weekly:
1972--Apr. 5
May 3
June 7
ooj ..o ,.,,..,oHij..i..,......ii
(7.5)
(7.0)
(0.5)
(1.0)
growth in these reserves from April to June
B in the Bluebook of May 19, 1972.
thought to be consistent with
I 0::,.;;;;.S; ~r ---------- ;----- IQII i I DO ........ WV-Wvvvw-rw
Annual Growth Rates con-
sistent with Alternative B 1/
Table 2
Monetary Aggregates
(Actual and current projections, seasonally adjusted)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
June 16, 1972
Narrow Broad Adjusted U.S. Total Time deposits Nondeposit
Money Money Credit Govt. Time and other Negotiable Sources of
Period Supply (M1) Supply (M2) Proxy Deposits Savings than CD's CD's Funds
(1)
Monthly Pattern ir
Weekly Pattern in
(3)
Dollars
(10.5) (4.0)
I/ As shown in the May 19, 1972 Bluebook.
(4) (5)
rly and Monthly
::::::::::::: : ::::
pe - Partially estimated.
st are rounded to nearest half per cent.
