Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
November 17, 1972
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) November 17, 1972
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) During recent weeks the monetary aggregates have continued to
show quite moderate growth. In October, expansion of the narrowly defined
money supply slowed to a 4 per cent annual rate, somewhat below growth rates
for August and September, but M2 grew at close to an 8 per cent annual rate,
little changed from August and September. More detail on the recent performance
of the aggregates is contained in Table 2 attached and Appendix Table 1.
(2) For October and November combined, data now available suggest that
growth in M1 is in the lower half of the 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 per cent range accept-
able to the Committee--as shown in the table below. M2, however, appears to
be running slightly above the mid-point of its acceptable range. In the case of
RPD's, the October-November growth rate appears to be falling substantially below
the Committee's 9-14 per cent range of tolerance, although during most of the
inter-meeting period the estimates available remained within but near the low
end of the range. The drop in RPD below the range of tolerance for the most
part reflects misspecification of the multiplier relationship between reserves
and deposits that has apparently evolved after the new Regulation D went into
effect.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates and RPD
During October-November Period
(SAAR in percentage points)
Ranges of Current
Tolerance Estimates
RPD 9-141/ 5-1/2
M2  5--8 
7
four weeks)
1/ Adjusted upward from 6-11 per cent range actually adopted by the Committee
to allow for the effect of implementing changes in Regulations D and J--which
had not been assumed in the last blue book.
(3) For the combined two-month period, the slower than anticipated
growth in M1 may in part be attributable to the fact that Government deposits
in November are running some $2 billion higher on average than assumed in the
last blue book. This change reflects the decision to defer $2.7 billion of
Federal revenue-sharing payments from the end of October to early December.
Although deferral of these payments substantially reduced early November drains
on its cash balances, the Treasury still raised new money at mid-month and
scheduled an additional cash borrowing for payment right after Thanksgiving
in order to spread out its fourth quarter financings and minimize their market
(4) With RPD and M1 both tending toward the low ends of their ranges
of tolerance over most of the inter-meeting period, Desk reserve supplying
operations resulted in an average Federal funds rate of a little over 5 per cent,
little different from the level prevailing when the Committee last met. Near
the end of the first few statement weeks within the period, however, the funds
rate tended to rise rather substantially as reserve settlement pressures on
banks unexpectedly cumulated. During the statement week just past, on the
other hand, the effective funds rate dropped sharply toward the end of the week,
as reserve management and float estimates--at both the Desk and banks--were
complicated by the changes in Regulations D and J.
(5) The continuing moderate growth of the monetary aggregates and
the underlying stability of the Federal funds rate at levels little higher than
sentiment already being generated by the better prospects for peace in Vietnam
and other expectational factors described in the Greenbook. While yield
declines have been widespread over the period, the largest changes--about 20-25
basis points--have occurred in bond markets. Treasury bills in the 1-year
maturity range also dropped about 20 basis points, as changing investor ex-
pectations led to a flattening of the bill yield curve. The 3-month bill has
recently traded around 4.75 per cent, down only about 5 basis points since
the last meeting. Other short-term rates are off generally about 1/8 of a
percentage point.
(6) The table on the following page compares recent changes in the
money and credit aggregates (at seasonally adjusted annual rates) with those
for selected earlier periods.
Most Recent
Two
Calendar Past Past 6 Past 3 Past
Years Year Months Months Month
Dec. '71 Oct. '72 Oct. '72 Oct. '72 Oct. '72
over over over over
Dec. '69 Oct. '71 Apr. '72 July '72 Sept. '72
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term market paper
(Actual $ change in
billions)
Prospective developments
(7) The table below shows three alternative sets of relationships
among aggregates and money market conditions for FOMC consideration in setting
its monetary policy targets (with figures for aggregates representing seasonally
adjusted annual rates of growth). The table on the following page contains,
for a larger number of aggregates, figures for end-of-quarter levels and annual
rates of growth for the fourth and first quarters shown separately.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Longer-run targets for aggregates
(represented by average growth rates
for 4th and 1st quarters combined) 1/
Credit Proxy
Associated ranges for
November-December '72
Nonborrowed RPD 11-1
Federal funds rate 4
(8) The alternatives shown are similar to those presented in the
previous blue book. However, the relationships suggest a somewhat lower level
of interest rates for any given expansion of the aggregates. We would expect
Alt. A
M
1
Alt. B
Total
Alt. A
Alt. C
Reserves
Alt. B
Alternative Longer-Run Targets
r Key Monetary Aggregates
M
2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. C
of Growth
Alt. A
Adjusted Predit
Alt. A Alt. B
RPD
Alt. B
Alt. C
Rates of Growth
Proxy
Alt. C
that the alternative B aggregate objectives could be attained with little
change in money market conditions, while the objectives of alternative A would
entail easing and those of C tightening.
(9) The strong growth in GNP for the fourth quarter is still expected
by the staff to lead to some pick-up in money demand relative to experience
of the preceding few months, which included an October growth rate for M 1 of
toward year-end, and may lead to a temporary bulge in a money growth. Such
developments are reflected in the ranges for M1 and other aggregates shown
for the Nov.-Dec. period in the table in paragraph (7). These ranges represent
the staff's best judgment with respect to a path for attaining longer-run
objectives while keeping money market conditions from fluctuating unduly.
(10) The specifications for the various alternatives, including
accompanying interest rate movements, assume: (a) continued strong business
loan demands; (b) fairly aggressive bank efforts to seek funds through CD's,
but a slower rate of growth in the outstanding volume of such instruments
following the unusually rapid growth of the second and third quarters; and
(c) slight further slowing in the rate of growth of time and savings deposits
other than CD's in the fourth and first quarters under prevailing money
market conditions (although toward the end of the first quarter some of the
tax refund money could begin to show up in time deposits).
(11) As noted above, the alternative B targets appear to be con-
sistent with about prevailing money market conditions. Even with little change
in the Federal funds rate, though, the 3-month bill rate might be expected
to rise between now and the next Committee meeting. In that period, it may not
quite reach the recent 5--5-1/8 per cent funds rate range, but the bill rate
could move above that range by the end of the first quarter of 1973 as the
Treasury undertakes large contra-seasonal cash borrowing. However, recent
greatly improved market psychology, as indicated by the ease with which the
market appears to be preparing for the announced auctions totaling $4-1/2
billion of new tax bills, may continue to limit interest rate increases.
(12) Even with some limited rise in short-term rates, long-term
rates would be expected to remain generally stable between now and early
corporate new issue volume, and the improved market atmosphere. The Treasury
may take the opportunity presented by favorable markets to undertake some
further debt extension around the end of the year.
(13) Under alternative A, the staff would anticipate a decline in
the funds rate, and an accompanying reduction in member bank borrowing, between
now and the next meeting of the Committee. This would very likely lead to
reductions in the bill rate, despite the increase in Treasury borrowing, and
to further declines in long-term rates.
(14) Under alternative C, the funds rate might be expected to rise
in a 5 to 6 per cent range over the next few weeks. Attainment of a 5 per
cent growth rate for M1 by the first quarter would probably imply a little
further upward movement in the funds rate in the early part of 1973. Short-
term interest rates generally would be tending to rise as the funds rate moved
consistently above 5-1/4 per cent; the rally in long-term markets would
certainly end and there could be some sympathetic rise in rates there; and
inflows of consumer-type time deposits would begin to slow more noticeably.
Under these circumstances, there would undoubtedly be renewed market
anticipations of a near-term rise in the discount rate.
Proposed directives
(15) Presented below are three alternative formulations
for the operational paragraph of the directive, which might be taken
to correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed
in the preceding section. In all three alternatives, it is proposed
to retain a reference to bank regulatory changes in light of continu-
ing uncertainties about the multiplier relationship as banks adapt to
the new regulations. Deletion of the reference to credit market develop-
ments is suggested because of the continuance of the more favorable
climate in security markets that had emerged at the time of the last
Committee meeting. Deletion of the reference to Treasury financing
operations is proposed since the only offerings in prospect between now
and the next meeting are the two already announced tax-anticipation bill
auctions, which would not ordinarily require even-keel consideration.
If the Treasury were to offer a long-term bond over the next few weeks,
it would most likely involve an auction and probably a small issue.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of the
effects of RECENT [DEL: possible] bank regulatory changes, [DEL: Treasury
financing operations, and developments in credit market,] the
Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market con-
ditions that will support SOMEWHAT more moderate growth in
monetary aggregates over the months ahead than recorded in the
third quarter.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of the
effects of RECENT [DEL: possible] bank regulatory changes, [DEL: Treasury
financing operations, and developments in credit markets,] the
Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market con-
ditions that will support more moderate growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead than recorded in the third
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of the
effects of RECENT [DEL: possible] bank regulatory changes, [DEL: Treasury
financing operations, and developments in credit markets,] the
Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market con-
ditions that will support [DEL: more] moderate growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead [DEL: than recorded in the third
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
11/17/72
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- 340
TOTAL RESERVES
(11/15/72 *
®
Table 1
Bank Reserves
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
November 17,1972
Reserves Available for Private Nonbank Deposits Aggregate Reserves Required Reserves
Seasonally Adjusted Not Seasonally Adjusted Seasonally Adjusted
Actual Actual Time U.S. Gov't.
and and Total Nonborrowed Private and and
Period Projected ctejected Reserves Reserves Demand Nondeposits Interbank
Annual Rates of Change
1971--3rd Qtr.
Weekly
1972--June 7
(7.5)
(5.5)
(5.0)
(10.0)
( 9.0)
(10.0)
Regulations J and D, now effective on November 9, would raise this range to 9 to 14 per cent.
Table 2
Monetary Aggregates
(Actual and current projections, seasonally adjusted)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
November 17, 1972
Adjusted U.S. Total Time deposits Nondeposit
Credit Govt. Time and other Negotiable Sources of
) Proxy Deposits Savings than CD's CD's Funds
(3) (4) ) (6) (7) f)
Nov. 1 p
8 p
(1) , (2)
Monthly Pattern in Billions
(243.4) (507.8)
(5.0) (6.0)
(4.5) (7.0)
Weekly Pattern in Billions
(7 .5)
(10.0)
f Dollars
inge--Quarter
9.7
and Month
- e~arcia±iy es~saLeu.EIOTES: Data shown in parentheses are c:rrent projections. p
Annual rates of change other t1in those for the past are rounded to nearest half per cent.
Narrow
Money
Supply (M1)
Broad
Money
Supply (M2
pe - Partially esilmaea .
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
NOVEMBER 17, 1972
Table 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations I/ .Daily Average Reserve Effect 2/ , hin reserve categors Targ
Bills Coupon Agency R's Total Open Market tMember Other 4/ req. res. against available res. 5/ avallable
Accet. Issues Issues Net rations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)(8)-(9) reserves 5
Mothly
1972 - May
June
July
Aug.
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec.
Weekly
Sept. 6
- 75
- 3
- 26
_11- I .
- 34
- 1
- 20
- 9
- 570
- 7
p
-266p
Represents change in System's portfolio from end-of-period to end-of-period; includes redemptions in regular bill auctions.
Represents change in daily average level from preceding period.
Includes matched sale-purchase transactions as well as RP's.
Sum of changes in vault cash, currency in circulation, Treasury operations, F.R. float, gold and foreign accounts, and other FR accounts
Reserves to support private nonbank deposits. Target change for October and November reflects the mid-point of the target range adopted at the
October 17, 1972 FOMC meeting. Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with the mid-points of target
ranges that were adopted during the month.
'
., .... I ........ I II
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
NOVEMBER 17, 1972
Table 4
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK RESERVES
Millions of Dollars
U S. Govt. Security Other Security Member Bank Reserve Positions
Period ealer Positions Dealer PositionsMember Bnk Reserve Positon
Bills Coupon Issues Corporate Municipal Excess Borrowings Net Free Basic Reperve Deficit
*STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
NOVEMBER 17, 1972
Table 5
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per Cent
Short-term _Lon-term
Per Treasur bills 90-119 day 90- da New Issue Municipal ( 
G
st FNMA Auction
Period Federal Fu Commercal CD's (10-r. Cnstant
_90-day -year Paper Prme-NY Aaa Utility* Bond Buyer Maturity) 
Yields
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
and 8 the weekly data is
of the statement week.
yield in weekly or
*New series--Corporate New Issues Aaa serips discontinued.
~--~----- -"- ' ' " "
Appendix Table I CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES November 17,1972
Reserves Money Stock Measures Bank Credit Measures Other
Available to Adjusted Total Time Thrift U.S.
Support Pvt. Credit Loans and Total Other than Institution Nondeposit Gov't.
Period Total Nonborrowed Deposits 1 M2 M3 Proxy Investments Time CD's Deposits CD's Funds Demand
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14)
An:nually (Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth) (Dollar Change in Billions)
p - Preliminary
n.a.- Not available.
Appendix Table II
RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
(Seasonally adjusted, Billions of dollars)
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
November 17, 1972
iec. 1968
bec. 1969
ee. 1970
NO' t ill,1 :
1971--Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
JTn e
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
May
Julne
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct. p
ov. I p
Non-
Total borrowed
(1) (7)
I I
r--I C--= --- -z'---- a - .~-----r-
Available to
Support Pvt.
M 1
Pvt. Dep.
M
3
I... ... ...
Adjusted
Credit
Proxy
Total
Loans and
... .. .. ..
Total
Time
Time Thrift
Other than Institution
CD's Deposits
I LI ____ J .____ J ______ £ ________ -t...- &
Non- U.S.
Deposit Gov't
Funds Demand
(14) (15)
October 1, 1970. Adjusted credit proxy includes mainly total member banks deposits subject to reserve requirements, bank-related commercial 
paper, and Euro-dollar
borrowings of U.S. banks. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks. Monthly data are daily averages except for nonbank commercial 
paper figures which
are for last day of month. Weekly data are not available for M3, total loans and investments and thrift institution deposits.
p - Preliminary.
Money Stock Measures Bank Credit Measures
