Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
October 13, 1972
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) October 13, 1972
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) The narrowly-defined money supply grew at a 6 per cent annual
rate in September, little more than in August and well below the 11 per cent
annual rate projected in the Blue Book at the time of the last Committee
meeting. It turned out that half of the $2 billion bulge in M1 that
developed over the two statement weeks ending September 6--which included
the long Labor Day weekend--was immediately reversed, and the level of M1
remained reduced throughout the month. Because of the marked shortfall in
M1, growth of M2 in September was also below expectations, although less so
than M1 due to a slightly stronger than anticipated growth in time deposits.
(2) For much of the inter-meeting period RPD growth also appeared
to be running below the 9-1/2 to 13-1/2 per cent September-October target
range. Most recently, however, unexpectedly large excess reserves have
raised the indicated RPD growth rate for the two months to 10-1/2 per cent
(with about two percentage points representing larger excess reserves than
assumed at the time of the Committee meeting).
(3) In view of the Committee's desire to attain a lower rate of
growth in M1 and other aggregates than had been projected, and with credit
market conditions calming, the Federal funds rate was allowed to edge up a
little over the inter-meeting period. On a weekly average basis, the range
of movement was from 4.93 per cent in the week of the last meeting to a high
of 5.15 per cent. This latter rate was on the high side of the Desk's aim,
and in the most recent statement week the funds rate averaged 5.09 per cent.
(4) Most other short-term interest rates have also risen somewhat
since the last meeting of the Committee. The 3-month bill rate has been most
recently quoted at 4.85 per cent, up about 20 basis points since
the last meeting. The prevailing bank prime rate moved up to 5-3/4 per cent,
and two banks with a floating prime rate went to 5-7/8 per cent today.
Most long-term rates, on the other hand, have shown little change since the
last Committee meeting, except that municipal bond yields have declined
fairly substantially. Stability in bond markets in part reflected recent
rumors of an imminent peace settlement in Vietnam and possibly also hopes
for favorable Congressional action on an expenditure ceiling. In these
circumstances, the Treasury elected to meet its October cash needs by
auctioning a $2 billion two-year note. The average rate in the auction
was 5.86 per cent, but following allotment the price of the issue dropped
by about the estimated value of the tax and loan account credit and the
market yield rose to 5.95 per cent.
(5) The table on the following page shows seasonally adjusted
annual rates of change in monetary aggregates over recent periods.
Most Recent
two
Calendar Past Past 6 Past 3 Past
Years Year Months Months Month
Dec '71 Sept '72 Sept '72 Sept '72 Sept '72
over over over over over
Dec '69 Sept '71 Mar. '72 June '72 Aug. '72
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term market paper
(Actual $ change in
billions)
for which data are available.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on total
loans and investment of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift insti-
tutions--which are either end-of-month or last Wednesday of month figures.
Prospective developments
(6) The approach taken in this blue book differs in some respects
from previous practice--the principal difference being to puc more stress on
targets and less on projections. The table on the following page shows possible
longer-run targets for key monetary aggregates which the Committee may wish to
consider in setting its financial objectives. The longer-run relationships
among monetary aggregates and interest rates are discussed in paragraphs (7) to
(9). Suggested shorter-run operating targets that are thought to be generally
consistent with the longer-run objectives are presented in paragraphs (10) to
(7) The longer-run targets under alternative A are indexed by an
M1 annual growth rate of 7 per cent in each of the fourth and first quarters.
We would expect that there may be only a modest further rise in short-term
interest rates in the fourth quarter under this alternative. In the first
quarter, with the rate of increase in nominal GNP projected to continue strong
and with large contra-seasonal Treasury cash borrowing anticipated, short-term
rates seem likely to rise more rapidly. The timing of interest rate movements
cannot, of course, be predicted with any certainty. It is always possible,
for example, that sizable foreign central bank transactions may affect the bill
market. Also, interest rates could rise substantially late this year as the
market anticipated heavy Treasury first quarter credit demands. On balance, one
might anticipate a 3-month Treasury bill rate rising to a 5-1/2--5-3/4 per cent
area by the end of the first quarter.
(8) Under alternatives B and C (indexed by 6 per cent and 5 per
cent annual rates of growth in M1, respectively) the staff would expect upward
Alternative Longer-Run Targets
for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A
Alt. B
Alt. A
Alt. C
Alt. B
Alt. A
Alt. C
- 1.0
M 2
Alt. B
of Growth
Alt. C
Alt. A
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C.
Alt. B
Alt. C
of Growth
-- I I I III
pressure on short-term interest rates to emerge sooner and to carry rates to
higher levels than under alternative A. It is likely that Treasury bill rates
by some time in early 1973 would move above ceiling rates on consumer-type
time deposits (for which the highest rate is 5-3/4 per cent on 2-year and over
maturities), thus raising the odds on a substantial slowing in time deposit
inflows to banks by late in the first quarter. As a result, M2 growth,
particularly under alternative C, is targeted to slow more than M1 growth.
Net inflows to nonbank savings institutions, whose ceiling rates on time
certificates are 1/4 percentage point higher than banks, would also come
under pressure, though not importantly perhaps until the second quarter.
(9) In long-term markets, credit demand pressures from private
sectors are expected to remain moderate into the winter. However, given its
large cash needs, the Treasury seems likely to tap all possible sources,
including the bond market, to satisfy its financing requirements. In general,
though, long-term markets are most vulnerable to upward rate pressures from
the supply of funds side. The institutional supply of funds would likely be
constrained under alternative C, and to a smaller degree under B. And as
interest rates began to rise, there might be some temporary investor withdrawal
from long-term commitments of funds.
(10) Suggested short-run operating targets for the two month
October-November period are shown below for the various alternatives
described above:
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
(11) The suggested operating targets indicate ranges for the
two month October-November period for the average growth rates of reserves,
for average growth rates for money supply as variously measured, and for
money market conditions as represented by the Federal funds rate. The mid-
points of the RPD ranges are thought to be consistent with the mid-points
of M1 and M2 growth rates for each of the alternatives. All of the Federal
funds rate ranges encompass current money market conditions, with the range
being wide enough to make it reasonably probable that aggregate objectives
under the various alternatives would be attained. Under alternative A, the
Federal funds rate range centers on recently prevailing conditions, and the
staff would expect that realization of the targeted growth rates in the aggre-
gates would produce little movement in the average funds rate. Under
alternative B, the funds rate range is skewed above prevailing rate levels,
indicating our expectations that restraining monetary growth to the rates
targeted would induce a rise in the funds rate. Under alternative C, the
range is skewed even more in an upward direction.
(12) While the Committee could direct the Account Manager to utilize
the operating targets shown above in any one of several ways, it may wish to
consider the following approach which is similar to the procedure followed by
the Committee in recent meetings. Under the proposed approach if RPD appears
to be moving toward the high end of the indicated range, for example, the Desk
would become somewhat more grudging in supplying nonborrowed reserves and
still more grudging if RPD seemed to be exceeding the range--but not to the
extent of forcing the funds rate above whatever upper limit the Committee might
specify. But in judging whether to take reserve action that tightens (or
eases) the money market, the Desk would be guided also by developments in the
monetary aggregates. For instance, if the monetary aggregates appear to be
remaining within the Committee's targeted range, the Manager would not have to
take any reserve action that tightens or eases the money market, even though
RPD is running high or low in its range. (Under such circumstances, it would
be presumed that unanticipated changes in the multiplier relationship between
reserves and monetary aggregates had occurred.) If, on the other hand,
monetary aggregates should move outside the Committee's targeted range, the
Desk would modify reserve-supplying operations in the appropriate direction,
subject to the federal funds rate constraint. The funds rate ranges shown
in paragraph (10)can, of course, be modified by the Committee on policy
grounds, depending upon how much emphasis it wants to place on limiting
possible variations in interest rates, the degree to which it wishes to stress
growth rates for the aggregates, and the extent to which it wants to take
account of special circumstances of the moment such as "even keel".
(13) In the interval between now and the next meeting, the
around prevailing levels. The Treasury may again add about $200 million per
week to its weekly bill auctions beginning in November. In addition, it
appears now that the Treasury, because of a tight cash position, will have
to lower its cash balance at the Fed in the first half of November, forcing
the System to undertake offsetting operations. Given the improved technical
position of the market, however, we would not expect sizable upward rate
pressures in the near-term--for example, the 3-month bill rate is not likely
to move much above 5 per cent--unless the funds rate were to move up
appreciably. Similarly, near-term pressures in long-term markets would
likely be quite modest, given the moderation of private credit demands, if
prevailing money market conditions are maintained.
(14) The recent Treasury cash offering and the forthcoming
financing to be announced on October 25 would, however, augment the
sensitivity of long- and short-term credit markets to a persistent firming
of money market conditions. In addition to refinancing a small amount of
securities maturing in mid-November, the forthcoming Treasury operation
may also raise new cash, perhaps about $2 billion.
Proposed directives
(15) Presented below are three alternative formulations for the
operational paragraph of the directive, which might be taken to correspond
to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in the preceding
Alternative A
"To implement this policy, while taking [DEL: special] account of
the effects of possible bank regulatory changes, TREASURY FINANCING
OPERATIONS, AND developments in credit markets, [DEL: and international
developments,] the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money
market conditions that will support SOMEWHAT more moderate growth
in monetary aggregates over the months ahead THAN RECORDED IN THE
THIRD QUARTER."
Alternative B
"To implement this policy, while taking [DEL: special] account of
the effects of possible bank regulatory changes, TREASURY FINANCING
OPERATIONS, AND developments in credit markets, [DEL: and international
developments,] the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money
market conditions that will support more moderate growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead THAN RECORDED IN THE THIRD QUARTER."
Alternative C
"To implement this policy, while taking [DEL: special] account of
the effects of possible bank regulatory changes, TREASURY FINANCING
OPERATIONS, AND developments in credit markets, [DEL: and international
developments,] the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money
market conditions that will support [DEL: more] moderate growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead."
(16) In all three alternatives, it is proposed to retain the
references to possible bank regulatory changes and credit market developments;
to add a reference to Treasury financing, particularly because of the November
refinancing to be announced in late October; and to delete the reference to
international developments, in view of the recent strength of the dollar.
Also, it is proposed to delete the word "special" in the phrase "while
taking special account. . . ." because of the recently improved technical
condition of credit markets.
(17) In alternatives A and B, which call, respectively, for
"somewhat more" and "more" moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the
months ahead, it is proposed to add the phrase "than recorded in the third
quarter." This addition is proposed in the interest of clarity, since the
long-run monetary growth rates specified under these alternatives, while
below the third-quarter rates, are equal to or above those recorded in
August and September.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL FR)
RESERVES AVAILABLE
PRIVATE NONBANK
TO SUPPORT
DEPOSITS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
-33
J
JJ S D M J S D
I I
A S 0 N
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL(FR)
October 13, 1972
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Annual Rates of Change
1971--3rd Qtr.
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Sept.-Oct.
Weekly:
1972--June 7
Seasonally Adjusted
Target and Actual
Associated and
Not Seasonally Adjusted
Target and Actual
Associated and
Aergt Reere gsurs assrv
AXeeate Reserves Kequir
Seasonallv Adtusted
Total Nonborrowed
:: :::::: :::::: :: 10.8
...ii : i .i.i.i .: ..i: 7 .1
i;i:f:i ;:;i!i :::::i !i i 10.0
NWTE: Data shown in parentheses are current projections.
(M) (4)
......... :...... : : :: ::: :: ::
(20.5)
(10.0)
Time U.S. Cov't.
Private and and
d ~ ...
(7)
(1.0)
(5.5)
(12.0)
(16.5)
Table 1
Bank Reserves
Reserves Vn... for pri e! No an --.- ed RKeerB es
... ....... ... -. :: 9 :I_ - . _ _
R t
:::::::::::;
::
:::::::::
::: :::::::::::;:::::;:
:: ;:::::::::^::::::::::
:::::::::::::;?::;;::
:::::::::::::::::::::::::
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::..........::: ::: ::
.... :::.......... :::
...........::::: ::
................ :::::
...............: ::::
Annual Growth Rates consistent
with alternative C 1/
Table 2
Monetary Aggregates
(Actual and current projections, seasonally adjusted)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
October 13, 1972
Narrow Broad Adjusted U.S. Total Time deposits Nondeposit
Money Money Credit Govt. Time and other Negotiable Sources of
Period Supply (M,) Supply (M2 ) Proxy Deposits Savings than CD's CD's Funds
Aug. 2
Oct. & p
11 pe
(1) ' (2)
Monthly Pattern in Billions
(243.0) (505.4)
(6.5) ( 8.5)
Weekly Pattern in Billions
(3)
of Dollars
Change--Quarter
9.7
of Dollars
(4) ' k ) ( )
and Month
pe - Partially estimated.
st are rounded to nearest half per cent.
-. -I
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
OCTOBER 13, 1972
Table 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations 1/ Daily Average Reserve Effect 2/ A in reserve categories ATarget
BTils Coupon Agency RP's Open Market A Member Other 4/ req. res. against available res. / available/
& Accept. Issues Issues Net/ Total Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7+(8)-(9 reserves -
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
September 19, 1972 FOMC meeting. Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with the mid-points of target
ranges that were adopted during the month.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
OCTOBER 13, 1972
Table 4
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK RESERVES
Millions of Dollars
U.S. Govt. Security Other Security
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Member Bank Reserve Positions
Period Bills Coupon Issues Corporate Municipal Excess Borrowings Net Free Basis Reserve Dficit
-anda Rnna -Rerve9 at PR RP*PT 1 Nr Vnrk (I Other
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
p 
438
-- -- i--..4 b ,...flJ--l. di ---it l il1 fi- d b
Notes:
* STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
Government Securicy dealer trading positiuns are on a UcomlimtlLIClIeli Ualaj. iau Lnl pOuoii-ola, WILln cW!L LUUI ItUUC a uy UllJ.J jIII. IIe y .pULL.Iaoc
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings available for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions
are debt issues still in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basis reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserve
less net Federal funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues In syndicate which
are Friday figures.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
OCTOBER 13, 1972
Table 5
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per Cent
Short-term Long-term
Perod Federal unds Treasury Bills 90-19 day New Issue Municipal (1 .
G o
stant FNMA Auction
90-day 1-year Commercial Aaa Utility, Bond Buyer YieldsPaper Maturity)
() (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
otes: weeKLy data ror columns L tO ' are scatement week averages or oaiy oata. For coLumnas anra / the weeKLy date is the mid-point or
following the end of the statement week.
FNMA auction yield is the implicit yield
mortgages.
the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 6 is a one-day quote for the Thursday
Column 8 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceding the end of the statement week. The
in weekly or bi-weekly auction for short-term forward commitments for Government underwriteen
*New Series--Corporate New Issue Aaa Series discontinued
