Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
December 14, 1973
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 14, 1973
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) During November, growth of M1 was more rapid than anticipated,
rising at an annual rate of nearly 11 per cent, but 11 has changed little
on balance in recent weeks. For the two-month target period as a whole,
the annual growth rate appears to be running at around 6-1/2 per cent,
close to the upper limit of the Committee's range of tolerance, as the
table shows. With recent expansion of time deposits other than large CD's
slowing a little more than expected, growth in M2 appears to be only a
little above the mid-point of its two-month range of tolerance. The
flattening of M1 in early December lends some credence to the view that the
November upsurge reflected essentially temporary influences, including a
rise in foreign commercial and central bank deposits and increased pre-
cautionary holdings by the public stemming from the energy crisis and the
associated stock market decline.
Table 1
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
in November-December Target Period
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates Range of
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance
RPD's -1 -- -3
M 6-1/2--8-1/2
Memo:
Fed funds rate
(per cent per annum) 9--10-1/2
Latest
Estimates
Avg. for Statement
Week Ending
(2) RPD's appear to have contracted during the November-December
target period at about a 5.0 per cent annual rate. This shortfall was
greater than allowed for by the Committee's range of tolerance. As shown
in Table 2, most of the shortfall in RPD's was attributable to a weaker than
expected performance of large CD's (subject over most of the period to a
reserve requirement of 11 per cent). Relatively more reserves than
anticipated were absorbed by private demand deposits.
Table 2
Comparison of Projected Changes in RPD's by Use
November-December 1973
(In millions of dollars)
Projection as of
November 20, 1973 Current
FOMC Meeting Projection
Change by Category of Use: z
Time deposits other than
(3) Early in the inter-meeting
growth of M1 appeared to be above, and M2
of the ranges specified by the Committee.
would ordinarily have become somewhat more
supplying operations, expecting the weekly
period incoming data indicated that
about equal to, the upper limits
In such circumstances, the Desk
restrictive in its reserve-
average federal funds
rate to rise toward the 10-1/2 per cent upper limit of its range of
tolerance. Because of the uncertainties in the economic outlook stemming
from the mid-East oil embargo and the sensitive state of financial market
psychology, however, the Committee directed the Account Manager to continue
aiming for a weekly average Federal funds rate around 10-1/4 per cent.
In the first two statement weeks of December the funds rate actually
averaged 10.17 and 10.04 per cent respectively, with the rate dropping
sharply on the last day of both weeks. Member bank borrowing at the
Federal Reserve amounted to $1.5 billion in the first week of December,
with excess reserves rising to $375 million, but in the following week
excess reserves were negative, by $244 million, and borrowing dropped back
to $1.3 billion.
(4) Since the last Committee meeting, most short- and long-term
market interest rates have fluctuated in response to changing expectations
with regard to monetary policy and the impact of the energy crisis on the
economy. On balance since the last Committee meeting, most short-term
rates have declined somewhat. For the most part, the decline in these
rates occurred following announcement of the reduction in marginal
reserve requirements on December 7. The declines ranged generally from
bill rate was bid at 7.53 per cent. A few large banks have raised their
prime lending rate to 10 per cent, but the higher rate has shown no
tendency to spread through the banking system.
(5) The table on the next page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various recent
time periods; figures in parentheses are preliminary revised growth rates
based on new benchmarks and seasonal factor review. Appendix Table III
compares money supply growth rates computed on a quarterly-average basis
with those computed on a last-month-of-quarter basis, and includes both
old and revised figures. Appendix Table IV compares old and revised money
supply growth rates over various other time intervals. All revised figures
are preliminary.
Total reserves
Nonborrowed reserves
Reserves available to
support private non-
bank deposits
Concepts of Money
M1 (currency plus
demand deposits) 1/
M2 (M1 plus time deposits
at commercial banks
other-than large
CD's)
M3 (M2 plus deposits at
thrift institu-
tions)
Bank Credit
Total member banks
deposits (bank credit
proxy adj.)
Loans and investments
of commercial banks 2/
Short-term market paper
(Monthly avg. change in
billions)
Large CD's
Nonbank commercial paper 3
sold to affiliates
October 1973.
and branches.
figures, except for data on
total loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift
institutions--which are derived from either end-of-month or last Wednesday-of-
month figures. Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables
are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series
when reserve requirements are changed.
Past 3
Calendar
Years
Dec. '72
over
Dec. '69
.9
( .9)
0.1
Past
12
Months
Nov. '73
over
Nov. '72
Past
6
Months
Nov. '73
over
May '73
Past
3
Months
Nov. '73
over
Aug. '73
Past
Month
Nov. '73
over
Oct. '73
i - ~-"-3~-
Prospective developments
(6) Of the three alternatives summarized below for Committee
consideration, alternative B includes a growth rate for M1 over the
first half of 1974 that is consistent with the extension to mid-year of
the 5 per cent growth path adopted by the Committee at its previous meeting.
This growth path starts from the revised September 1973 base (which is about
$2-1/2 billion above the old series, as was indicated in the previous bluebook).
In alternative B, M1 is targeted to increase at a 4-1/2 per cent annual rate
from December '73-to June '74. This growth rate is lower than 5 per cent to
compensate for the overshoot in M1 growth in the fourth quarter. As shown in
the chart on the next page, the estimated level of the money stock in December
is about $1 billion above the path level for that month. Alternatives A and C
involve more and less rapid growth in the aggregates, respectively. (Detailed
figures for the alternatives are shown on page 6a; all figures for the aggregates
are based on revised data, though revisions are still in a preliminary
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Targets (1st & 2nd qtrs.
combined
Associated ranges for
December-January
MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATH
RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- 280
- -,,-
REVISED Ml
(PRELIMINARY)
J A
1973
S O N 0 J F M A M J
1974
A M
Alternative Longer-Run Targets for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Rates of Growth
Months:
Dec.
Jan.
Dec.
Jan.
Adjugted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt A PD
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. C
(7) With regard to money market conditions, the staff would
expect some decline in the Federal funds rate between now and mid-January
if the Committee chooses to provide the reserves consistent with alternative B.
A funds rate range of 9--10-1/4 per cent is shown for that alternative. If
the rate were to drop toward the lower end of the range over the next few
weeks, the staff would not anticipate that any significant further reductions
would be needed in the first few months of 1974 to be consistent with the
targeted growth rates for money.
(8) The decline in the funds rate expected under alternative B
(and the greater decline expected under alternative A) essentially reflects
the substantial downward revision in the staff's projection of growth in
nominal GNP and the associated weakening in the demand for money and credit.
At the time of the last meeting the staff was projecting about a 9 and
of 1974 respectively; currently, the projected rates of growth are about
(9) If the Committee wishes to maintain money market conditions
close to those currently prevailing, the staff would expect growth in the
aggregates to slow to alternative C dimensions. With the Federal funds
rate unchanged, it is likely that market interest rates--particularly
short-term rates--would adjust upward from current levels in the process
of re-establishing a more normal relationship to the funds rate. Current
levels of market rates are low relative to the funds rate--in part,
apparently, because market participants are anticipating an economic
slowdown and the money market easing that has accompanied slowdowns
in the past.
(10) Market interest rates, however, do not appear to have fully
discounted future declines in the funds rate. Thus, an actual drop in the
funds rate, such as would be likely to occur under alternative B, might
trigger sizable further declines in short-term interest rates and also
some decline in long rates. Expectational forces probably would carry market
rates down in the short run by more than is sustainable over the longer run,
however, assuming the funds rate in the early months of next year remained
in the 9 per cent plus range. On balance, over the next few weeks the
funds rate drops to 9-1/2 per cent or somewhat below. This assumes no
substantial central bank sales of Treasury securities as a result of reflows
of dollars from abroad.
(11) The greater decline in the funds rate under alternative A,
as compared with B, would intensify market expectations of declining
interest rates. If the funds rate were to drop rapidly and to fall below
a little lower, at least temporarily. Market expectations of a decline in
the discount rate would become much more prevalent.
(12) Among the assumptions we have made in working out the
various monetary and interest rate relationships are: (1) moderate growth
in large negotiable CD's, in some part reflecting the lower cost of those
funds resulting from the recent reduction in marginal reserve requirements;
(2) continued fairly strong short-term credit demands by business (at
least in the early part of next year when inventory accumulation is expected
to be strong), but only moderate business loan growth at banks unless the
prime loan rate drops relative to the commercial paper rate; (3) no Treasury
cash borrowing until March (unless foreign central banks find it necessary
to redeem sizable amounts of Treasury specials) and sharply diminished
Federal agency borrowing; and (4) moderate growth in consumer-type time
deposits at banks (under alternative C) and more rapid growth as market
interest rates decline (under alternatives B and A) as banks reduce time
deposit offering rates only with a lag.
Proposed directive language
(13) Presented below are three alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in
the preceding section. As will be noted, alternatives A and C refer to
growth rates in the aggregates "so far this year." For the period
through November, these are as follows in terms of the revised series:
M 1, 6.0 per cent; M2, 8.8 per cent; and the bank credit proxy, 11.1 per
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of inter-
national and domestic financial market developments, the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions con-
sistent with [DEL: moderate] growth in monetary aggregates over the
months ahead AT ABOUT THE RATES PREVAILING SO FAR THIS YEAR.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of inter-
national and domestic financial market developments, the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions con-
sistent with SOMEWHAT SLOWER growth in monetary aggregates over
the months ahead THAN HAS OCCURRED SO FAR THIS YEAR.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of inter-
national and domestic financial market developments, the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions con-
sistent with [DEL: moderate] SLOWER growth in monetary aggregates over
the months ahead THAN HAS OCCURRED SO FAR THS YEAR.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
12/14/73
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY
E
BILLIONS OF DOLI
TOTAL RESERVES
Vi - I -
'" eak in series, Actual Level of Total Reserves After Changes in Reserve Requirements ltective November 9, 1972, July 19, 1973,
and October 4, 1973
TABLE 1 STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
---------------------
BANK RESERVES DECEMBER 14, 1973
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
I AGGREGATE RESERVES I REQUIRED RESERVES
RESFRVES AVAILARLE FOR I--.---- -------------- -------- .--------------------------------------
PRIVATE NONBANK DEPOSITS II SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
1(---------------------------------- ------ ft----- ------------ "wo-ft.
--......---------------------- I TOTAL MONBORROWED I PRIVATE OTHER CDOS AND GOVOT ANO
PERIOf I SEAS ADJ I NON SEAS ADJ II RESERVES RESERVES I DEMAND TIME DEP NON OEP INTERBANK
---------- - ------------------------------------------------- -- ---- -------------- -- --------
I fl) 1 (2) I (3) (4) (St f ) (7) (8
I II
MONTHLY LEVELS-SMILLIONSI I I
---- ------------- I II
OUARTERLYS I
I 9
I 9 if 9
WEEKLY LEVFLS-SMTLLIONS I II
---------- ----- I 9 I
W w -................---m -----.w-----..w---- ------ m-m-----------------.. ---------------m-- m m m m m ..m m m.. m-...... m. m m
NOTEt DATA SmOWN IN PaRENTHESES ARE CURRENT PROJECTIONS. ANNUAL RATES OF GROWTH HAVE BEEN
TABLE 2
MONETARY AGGREGATES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
DECEMBER 14, 1973
I MONEY SUPPLY I ADJUSTED II U.S. I TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS I NONDEPOSIT
I NARROW I BROAD I CREDIT II AOVT. I I OTHER I I SOURCES OF
PERIOD f (Mil (M2) I PROXY II DEPOSITS I TOTAL I THAN CO S I CD S I FUNDS
-~~-~- ~ -------~--- -- - -o. . . . .ft --- - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - -m- - - - - -
MONWTLY LEVELS-SMILLIONSI
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
QUARTERLY
--------- I
MONTHLY I
I
NOV.-MEC. I
I
WEEKLY LEVELS-SBILLTONS I
--------- ------------- 1
OCT. 3
DEC. 5 P
12 RE
( 6.6)
SSI
557.1 I
562.5 I
(56*.4) I
( 8,8)
II
IFI
( 0.9) I
II
II
( 0.5) II
II
( *4.8
.74.S6. I !
5. !
(5) I
( 5.7) I
J I 1
(7) I
--------------- ~~-- -- ft ----------------------- tf-----------0------------------
NOTE, DATA SHOWN IN PARENTHSEES ARE CURRENT PROJECTIONS. P - PRELIMINARY
PE - PARTIALLY ESTIMATED
( 7.2)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
DECEMBER 14, 1973
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open srket. Da tot 1/ aily Average Reserve Effect 2/ . In resetve categries , T
Bills Coupon Agency RP's Open Market a Member Other 4/ req. res. against available res. 5/ Iavailable
& Accept. Isapes Issues Net 3/ Total Operetions Bank Borrowing Factors U.s.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) 5/ reaseyes 5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
tonthly
.. . .- __ _ r ,= - .. . . .. . .. . .. .. .. .
Represents change in Systems parttoiio trom ena-or- perio to
Represents change in daily average level from preceding period.
Ihcludes matched sale-purchase transactions as well as RP's.
ena-or-perlao; includes reoeTnptions in regutar ULit au.i.ons.
Sumn f changes ih vault cash, currency Lt circultion, Treasury operations, F.1. float, gold and foreign accounts, and other F.R. accounts.
Reserves to support private honbanfk deposits. Target change for November and December reflects the target adopted at the November 20, 1973 FOMC
fieetihg. target change for previous moftha reflects the bluebook patterhs that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month.
* Thr lcl)r effect of special certificate (i.e., borrowing by Treasury from F.R.).
SSTRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
DECEMBER 14, 1973
TABLE 4
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
Millions of dollars
D sei ( eoaler Po amions Member Bonk Reserves Positions
Dealer p*9ilonio ____ __ ____________________..__________
Period " Coporae Municipal I Kcesa** Borrowing at FRB**' Basic Reserve eficic
Bils Coup on ssues uondi Bondp Reserves To 1tal Se na l
a 8 New Y Vork' Sfthera
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
Bto: Cowvernmien security dealer rading daiYstin aie oo a comni ien' basis. Trading positiois, which eiclude Treaeury bills financed by repurciaee agreeu&i
maturing in 16 days or Ioe, are indicators of dealer holdiiys available for ale over the near-erm. Other security dealer positions are debt isaues
still in syndicate, excluding crad4ng positions. the basic reserve deficit is excess reserves les borrowing at Federal Reserve less net Federal funds
purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are Friday figurea.
* STRICTLY COIpENTIA
** Beginning with January 1973, monthly averages for exSqas reserves an birrqwtuiu are weighted averages of cateiment week figqea.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
DECEMBER 14, 1973
TABLE 5
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per Cent
SS.hort rm . ., .. Long-Term . ...
Treasury Bil!s 90-119 bay CD's New Issue-NYC .. aaUtilit .. 1 U.S. Government FNA
Commercial New Recently Municipal (10-yr Constant Auction
Period Federal Funds 90-Iay l-year. Pappr 60-89 Day , 90-119 Day , Issue Offered Bond Buyer Maturity) Yie.ld
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 1 (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
