Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
July 13, 1973
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Around the end of June incoming deposit data began to
indicate that RPD and the narrowly defined money supply were growing at
annual rates in excess of the upper limits of the Committee's June-July
ranges of tolerance. At the same time the rate of expansio in M 2 appeared
to be close to its upper limit. M2 moved ahead less rapidly than M1
because growth in other time and savings deposits fell somewhat short of
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD
in June-July Target Period
Ranges of
Tolerance
Latest
Estimates
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates
(Growth at SAAR in per cent)
Federal funds rate
(Per cent per annum)
As adopted and subsequently
amended
Statement
week avg.
July 11, 1973
(2) With monetary aggregates generally at or above the top of
the target ranges, the Account Manager moved to a more restrictive reserve
posture. This change was expected to raise the average Federal funds rate
from the 8-1/2 per cent level that had been prevailing to the 9-1/4 per cent
ceiling adopted by the Committee at its June meeting. At the same time,
however, seasonal movements in technical factors were absorbing a large
volume of reserves and commercial banks were seeking to adjust their reserve
positions in light of the Friday, June 29 statement date and the Wednesday,
July 4 holiday. Member bank borrowing at the Federal Reserve ballooned to
$4 billion and $2.9 billion on July 2 and 3, respectively, and the effective
rate on Federal funds rose to 10 and 13 per cent on these days. Money
market psychology was also being affected in this period by the June 29
actions of the Federal Reserve raising the discount rate and reserve
requirements on demand deposits. For the July 4 statement week as a
whole, member bank borrowing averaged $2.4 billion and the Federal funds
rate 10.21 per cent.
(3) Following the increased tightness of the July 4 holiday
week, borrowings dropped sharply and the Federal funds rate fell back.
On Friday, July 6, with growth in the monetary aggregates showing no
tendency to recede, Committee members agreed to raise the ceiling on the
Federal funds rate to 9-3/4 per cent. Under this additional leeway, the
Desk pursued a tighter reserve management policy in the expectation that
Federal funds would trade around 9-1/2 per cent. In the statement week
ending July 11, the funds rate actually averaged 9.52 per cent. When
evidence subsequently became available that the overshoot in M1 was
widening, the Desk adjusted reserve strategy again, expecting the funds
rate to average close to the new 9-3/4 per cent ceiling.
(4) Early in the inter-meeting period, before the System policy
actions of late June, short-term interest rates had begun to rise partly
in anticipation of some further policy tightening. Bank CD rates showed
the most pronounced advance, reflecting bank efforts to recoup the large
CD run-offs that had developed over the quarterly tax date. When the
System's policy actions proved to be more aggressive than generally
anticipated, short-term rates jumped sharply. Over the full inter-meeting
period interest rates on private short-term instruments--including the
bank prime rate--have risen generally 75--100 basis points. Treasury
bill rates reached a peak early in July, with the 3-month issue at about
the time of the last meeting. Most recently, however, the 3-month Treasury
bill rate was quoted 7.78 per cent.
(5) Long-term interest rates also had been moving up prior to the
late-June policy actions and rose considerably further in early July. Over
the inter-meeting period as a whole, the yield advance amounted to about
bi-weekly FNMA auction of commitments to buy FHA and VA mortgages jumped
newly committed funds in primary mortgage markets have risen as much as
reflect both cut-backs in new commitment activity by mortgage lenders con-
cerned about further reductions in savings inflows over the months ahead
and the pass-through of higher interest costs resulting from recent
increases in rates paid for savings.
(6) The table on the next page shows (in percentage annual rates
of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various time periods.
Dec. '72 June '73 June '73 June '73 June '73
over over over over over
Dec. '69 June '72 Dec. '72 Mar. '73 May '73
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term market paper
(Monthly avg. change in
billions)
Prospective developments
(7) Three alternative policy strategies are summarized below
for Committee consideration. Alternative B incorporates a 3-3/4 per
cent annual rate of growth for M1 over the second half of 1973. This
is the growth rate that would be required to return to the 5-1/4 per
cent longer-run target path for M1, reaffirmed at the last meeting,
taking account of the overshoot in June and the second quarter (see
accompanying chart). Alternative A represents a somewhat easier policy,
and alternative C a somewhat tighter one. (More detailed figures are
shown in the table on the following page).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Targets (3rd and 4th Qtrs.
combined)
Credit proxy
Associated ranges for
July-August
Federal funds rate range
(inter-meeting period)
MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATH
RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- 270
.' .
.-
M1 LEVEL FOR MARCH
EXPECTED AT 3/19 FOMC--.
I I I I
S 0 N
i I I I I I I .
D J F M A M J J A S 0 N 0
for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Adjusted
Alt. A
Rates of Growth
arters: 1973
nths:
July
Aug.
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
iths:
July
Aug.
Rates of Growth
Alt. A
July
Aug.
Sept.
Alt. B
Alt. C
Credit
Alt. B
Proxy... .
Alt. C
-" ,'4tl I
(8) In the weeks immediately ahead, the staff expects that
there would be little further change in the Federal funds rate if the
Committee adopts the aggregate targets specified in alternative B. The
funds rate range shown for this alternative centers on the recently
prevailing 9-3/4 per cent level. Under alternative A, we would expect
the funds rate to decline from current levels as more reserves are
provided to encourage monetary growth, and under alternative C we would
expect it to rise.
(9) Under all three alternatives growth in the monetary
aggregates would be slower in the second half of 1973 than in the first
half. Money demand is expected to moderate because of a slowing in the
rate of growth of nominal GNP and because of the cumulative impact of
recent sharp interest rate increases. While the timing of such demand
adjustments is always uncertain, our best judgment is that a significant
slowing will begin in August. For July-August combined, a 3-3/4--5-3/4
per cent annual rate of growth for M1 is indicated under alternative B.
(10) Under prevailing money market conditions, short-term
rates are likely to rise somewhat further between now and the next
meeting. The 3-month bill may rise into the 8--8-1/2 per cent area.
However, the 3-month bill is in short market supply currently, and
upward adjustment of the rate may be moderated particularly if the
Treasury emphasizes long-term offerings and/or pays off a considerable
portion of the maturing issues in its forthcoming mid-August refinancing.
About $4-1/2 billion of publicly held securities mature at that time.
The Treasury will announce terms for the refunding on July 25. It is
still too early to say much about the characteristics of the offering.
(11) Growth in time deposits other than large CD's is expected
to slow considerably in the second half of the year. Many banks raised
offering rates promptly following the increase in ceiling rates, but the
spread of market rates over deposit rates remains considerably wider than
in the first half of the year. With regard to the long-term certificate
without ceiling, there have been a number of instances of attractive and
innovative offerings. It is too soon, however, to evaluate the extent to
which such offerings will catch on at banks and with the public. For the
time being we have assumed that long-term certificates will make only a
modest net contribution to growth in consumer-type time deposits. Under
alternative B, a growth rate of around 6 per cent is expected for time
deposits other than large CD's in the second half of the year. And the
growth rate for M2 would be around 4-3/4 per cent.
(12) The slowing in growth of demand and consumer-type time
deposits will limit bank credit availability. Banks are expected to
attempt to compensate at least in part through sales of large CD's.
However, the high cost of these funds and expected abatement of loan
demand as the economic expansion slows and bank lending terms stiffen are
likely to retard growth in CD's below the second-quarter pace. Under
alternative B, the bank credit proxy in the second half is expected to
increase at a 7-1/2 per cent annual rate, considerably slower than in
the first half.
(13) Long-term rates are likely to be moving upward in
response to the recent upsurge in short rates, and would probably come
under additional pressure to the degree that short rates rise further.
The summer calendar of corporate bond issues remains seasonally light,
however, and the Treasury is likely to borrow a less than seasonal amount
over the balance of the year, offset only in part by further agency offerings.
In general, demand pressures on capital markets seem unlikely to be strong
unless there is a sizable shift in corporate borrowing from banks to the
bond market. However, the supply of investment funds is likely to be
falling off--for example, for municipals, as banks come under increasing
pressure and for mortgages, in reflection of smaller savings flows to
depositary institutions. Of course, it market participants should come
to believe in a strong Phase IV control program or the probability of
vigorous fiscal action, the outlook for interest rates would be modified
Proposed directive
(14) Presented below are three alternative formulations for the
operational paragraph of the directive, which might be taken to correspond
to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in the preceding
section. For all three alternatives it is proposed to add a reference to
Treasury financing because of the regular August refinancing to be announced
late this month.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of international
and domestic financial market developments AND THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY
FINANCING, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market
conditions consistent with somewhat slower growth in monetary aggregates
over the months immediately ahead than [DEL: appears indicated for] OCCURRED ON
AVERAGE IN the first half of the year.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of international
and domestic financial market developments AND THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY
FINANCING, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market
conditions consistent with [DEL: somewhat] slower growth in monetary aggregates
over the months immediately ahead than [DEL: appears indicated for] OCCURRED ON
AVERAGE IN the first half of the year.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of international
and domestic financial market developments AND THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY
FINANCING, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market
conditions consistent with [DEL: somewhat] SIGNIFICANTLY slower growth in mone-
tary aggregates over the months immediately ahead than [DEL: appears indicated
for] OCCURRED ON AVERAGE IN the first half of the year.
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
WEEKLY AVERAGES
TABLE 1 STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
---------------------
BANK RESERVES JULY 13, 1973
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
S PRIVATE NONPANK DFPOSITS II SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
I--------------------------------------------------------------------------
I----------------------------II TOTAL NONGORROWED I PRIVATE OTHER CD'S AND GOV'T AND
oER1o) I SEAS ADJ I NON SEAS ADJ II RESPRVES RESERVES I DEMAND TIME DFP NON DEP INTERBANK
-- - - - - - -- - - - - - -- - - - - - - -- -- - - - -- - - - - - - -- - - - - - -- - - - - - - -- - - - - - -- - - - - ------'"---"" " "
I t( ) (2) (31 (4) 1 (5) (6) f7) (8)
ANNUAL PATES OF CHANGE It
---------------------- I I
I. I. II
FE KIY LEVFLS-SMTLLTONS I I II I
---------*------------- 9 I i I
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
-- - - ---- ------"'-
MONETARY AGGREGATES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED)
I ONEY SU PLY 1 DJUSTED II U.S. I TIME aNO SAVINGS nEPOSITS I NONCDPOSIT
I NaQO0w I RROA9 I CREOIT I GOVT. I I OTER II SOURCES OF
PFaTOO 1 (MI) I (M21 I PROXY 1I DEPOSITS I TOTAL I THAN CD S I C S I FUNDS
-- - - -- -- - -- - - - -- - - -- - - - -- - - - -- - - -- - - - -- - - - -- - --- ---------- " ' - - -- -- -- -- -- -- --
MONTMLY LEVFLS-$PTLI TON<I
------------------------
MAY I
JUNF
JULY
PFrtFNT ANNUAL r.IOWT4
-------------------
OUARTFRL Y I
ll------ 9T107?--4TH QT7 . I
I
MONTHM(Y
MaP.
APR.
JIINF
JULY
I
JIINF- )II Y
WFFWLY LFVFLS-$RTLLTON< I
-----------------------
f
MaY ? I
I I
(37.01 II
II
I ,
II
t .
I I
#5) I
( 9.5)
( 9.51
(61 I
(7) I
( 6.3)
..----------------------------------------......... .... .- *..._** .-.***.mmmmmmmmememmmmeme-m-mmemmemmmemmeommemmeml
(hTEr 0oTAa ;owN IN PARrNTHESES ARE CUODFNT PROJErTIONS. P - PRELIMINARY
PE - PARTIALLY ESTIMATED
AMNUAL ATFS OF rwANGE OTMFR THAN THOSF FOR TWM PAST ARE R6UNDED TO THE NEAREST HALF PERCENT.
TABLE 2
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
JULY 13,1973
Table 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations T/ Daily Average Reserve Effect 2/ A in reserve categories ATarget
Period
Bills Coupon Agency RP's, Open Market 8 Member Other l/ req. res. against available ree. 5/ available
3Accet. Total -
& Accept. Issues Issues Net - Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.q.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) reserves I/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
Represens cnange In yL tc s porLLuijO LLUo I c ul--pCrOu o0 cnu-o[-peL ouR u I re ucm ulo u 0u1-
Represents change in daily average level from preceding period.
Includes matched sale-purchase transactions as well as RP's.
Sum bf changes in vault cash, currency in circulation, Treasury operations, F.R. float, gold and foreign accounts, and other
Reserves to support private nonbank deposits. Target. change for June and July reflects the target adopted at the June 19,
eetifng. Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that vere
during the month.
r FR accounts.
1973 FOM
adopted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
JULY 13, 1973
Table 4
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
Millions of Dollars
U. S. Govt. Security Other Security Member Bank Reserves Positions
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions
Period Bills Coupon Issues Corporate Municipals Excess * Borrowings at TRB ** Basic Reserve Deficit
Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8.New York 38 Other
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
lot's: Government Security dealer trading positions are on a commitment basis. Trading positions, which exclude Treasury bills financed by repurchase agree-
ments tturing in 16 days or more, are Indicators of dealer holdings available for sale over the near-terti. Other security dealer positions are debt
issues still iL syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserve less net Fed-
*ral funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statenent weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are Friday
figures.
'pegthnifng with Tantary 1973, monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages 
of statedent week figures.
*STtICTLY CONIIbENtE A
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
JULY 13,1973
Table 5
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per Cent
Short-te rm_ L___ong-term___
Treasury bills 90-119 day CD's New issue-NYC Aaa Utility unipl U.S. Government FNMA
Period Federal funds 90-day -year Coercial 0-89 day 90-119 day New Recently (10-yr. Constant Auction
SPaper __Issue Offered B Bumaturity) Yields
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
)73 -- Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
S_ L I - 1 IA --- I .
tea: Weekly data for columns 1 to 4 are statement week averages of daily data. Columns 5 and 6 are one-day Wednesday quotes. For columns 7, 8 and 10 the
weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day quote for the Thursday following the end of the
statement week. Colamn 11 gives FNM auction data for the Monday preceding the end of the statement week. The FNMA auction yield is the yield in
the bi-veekly auction for short-term forward commitments for Government underwritten mortgages.
