Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
November 16, 1973
November 16, 1973
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) After two months of net decline, the narrowly defined
money stock grew at about a 4-1/2 per cent annual rate in October, and
there appears to have been a further acceleration in early November.
For October and November combined, M1 appears to be growing at an annual
rate of slightly above 6 per cent, which, as the table shows, is in excess
of the range of tolerance adopted at the last Committee meeting. M2 is
also exceeding its October-November range of tolerance by a sizable
amount, as time and savings deposits other than large CD's have been
increasing more rapidly than expected. However, until the most recent
statement week, large CD's outstanding, continued to decline; as a result,
the adjusted credit proxy is likely to show no net growth for the
October-November period. The related cut-back in bank need for reserves
has contributed to a contraction in RPD's, which are running far below
the Committee's target range.
Table 1
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
in October-November Target Period
Reserves and Monetary Aggregates Range of
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance
RPD's 2--5
Memo:
Fed funds rate
(per cent per annum)
Latest
Estimates
Average for
Statment week
(2) The marked further attrition in large CD's reflected both
the high marginal reserve costs of CD's relative to other sources of bank
funds and the shift of business borrowing from banks to the commercial
paper market. The interest cost of commercial paper had declined sub-
stantially relative to the prime rate after the last Committee meeting,
but most recently commercial paper rates have begun to rise. Reduced
market rates in October help to explain the faster than anticipated growth
in other time and savings deposits at banks, as well as the improved
flow of savings funds into savings and loan associations. As usual, it
is difficult to isolate factors that account for short-run variations in
the demand for M1. However, the large liquidation of dollar holdings
by foreign central banks may have been a special factor accounting for
temporary increases in the cash balances of those receiving dollars, and
financial market uncertainties related to the energy crisis may also
have led to some temporary rise in demand for M1.
(3) Early in the inter-meeting period short-term interest
rates recorded further general declines, as market participants con-
tinued to anticipate additional System action to correct the sluggish
late summer performance of the monetary aggregates. Later on, however,
as the monetary aggregates showed some strength and the Federal funds
rate remained generally stable, market judgments about the likely course
of interest rates changed, and Treasury bill rates began to rise toward
levels consistent with the prevailing funds rate. Initially, the
adjustment process was relatively gradual, but reactions in foreign
exchange markets to the Mid-East oil supply situation entailed large-scale
shifts in funds and triggered sizable foreign central bank liquidation of
U.S. Government securities, including special issues. To protect its cash
position against further liquidation of special issues at a time when
overdrafts on the System were no longer available, the Treasury announced
an unanticipated bill strip offering, even before its mid-November refunding
had been settled. Responding to these unexpected developments, rates in
short-term markets rose sharply--particularly in the Treasury bill area,
where the yield on the 3-month issue moved to about 8-5/8 per cent by
November 13.
(4) In view of the sudden unsettlement of the Government
securities market at a time when the Treasury refunding was still in
process of distribution, the Desk moved cautiously in its reserve
absorption operations. With market factors tending to supply reserves,
the average Federal funds rate actually edged a little lower for a time.
More recently, however, with new issues in the refunding fairly well
distributed and general pressures in the credit market tending to sub-
side, the Desk has been able to permit the funds market to tighten, and
the Federal funds rate has moved up to 10 per cent or slightly above.
At the same time, the 3-month bill rate has fluctuated sharply, dropping
abruptly to 7.53 per cent on Thursday and closing at around 7.60 per cent
on Friday.
(5) Since the recent behavior of the 3-month issue has reflected
technical market conditions, the basic state of the bill market may be
better measured by the 6-month rate, most recently quoted at around 8.20
per cent, or 90 basis points above its level at the time of the last
Committee meeting. In long-term markets, municipal and Treasury bond
yields, have risen 20-25 basis points over the period, but yields on
new high-grade corporate issues have shown little net change and mortgage
market rates have declined.
(6) The table on the next page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various
recent time periods. Appendix Table III compares money supply growth
rates computed on a quarterly-average basis with those computed on a
last-month-of-quarter basis.
Years Months Honths Months Month
Dec. '72 Oct. '73 Oct. '73 Oct. '73 Oct. '73
over over over over over
Dec. '69 Oct.'72 Apr. '73 July '73 Sept. '23
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term market .paper
(Monthly ave. change in
billions)
Prospective developments
(7) The alternatives for Committee consideration summarized
below (and detailed on p. 6a) include annual rates of growth for M1
over the fourth quarter of 1973 and the first quarter of 1974 combined
of 6 per cent (alt. A), 5 per cent (alt. B), and 4 per cent (alt. C),
Alt. A
Targets (4th & 1st qtrs.
combined)
Credit proxy
Associated ranges for
November-December 1973
Federal funds rate range
(inter-meeting period)
Alt. B
Alt. C
(8) A 5 per cent growth path for M1 from September is
illustrated by the dashed lines on the chart on the following page. The
bottom line of the chart shows M1 before the forthcoming annual revision
(expected to be ready by mid-December). The top line of the chart shows
a rough estimate for M1 as it will be after revision. We do not have
new seasonal factors yet, but the benchmark adjustment appears to add
MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATH
RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
-1280
REVISED Ml
(PRELIMINARY)
CURRENTLY PUBLISHED M1
I I I I I
J A S 0 N D J F M AJ F M A
. J I I I,
J F M A M J
Alternative Longer-Run Targets for Key Monetary Aggregates
IL M 2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Mofths:
NOv.
Dec.
Rates of Growth
Adjusted Credit. Proxy
1it. A Alt. B Alt. C
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
- ~---
RPD
Alt. A Alt. B
Dov.
Dec.
Rates of Growth
Alt. C
about $3--$3-1/2 billion to the level of M1 in September, and smaller
amounts in earlier months, due mainly to larger than estimated growth in
nonmember bank deposits. The rate of growth for the year ending
September in the revised figures will be around 6-1/2--7 per cent, as
compared with 5.3 per cent for the unrevised, currently published
figures. All of the tables are, of course, based on the unrevised
figures since the new data will not be available on a firm enough basis
to guide operations between now and the next meeting.
(9) Under alternative B, M1 is indicated to expand in November-
December at a 4-1/2-6-1/2 per cent annual rate, given a Federal funds
rate range centered around 10 per cent. RPD growth in this period is
expected to be negative, however, because reserves required to be held
against bank CD's are expected to drop further despite a projected pick-up
in CD issuance later this year.
(10) The demand for M1 (as well as for short-term interest
earning assets) in the near-term is likely to be sustained by financial
and economic uncertainties generated by the energy crisis. In addition
to these precautionary demands for cash, expansion in nominal GNP is
projected to be sizable in the fourth quarter and is likely to require
expanding transactions demands for money. However, the impacts of the
energy crisis on transactions demands for cash are by no means clear.
If the crisis lowers the rate of growth in nominal GNP, transactions
demands would likely be dampened somewhat for any given Federal funds
rate. On the other hand, if nominal GNP expands about as projected
(even though real GNP growth may be adversely affected), these demands
for money may not be significantly altered. These income and output
effects are most likely to be felt after the turn of the year, however.
(11) While any significant income effects of an energy shortage
are likely to come later rather than sooner, market interest rates could
be influenced by anticipations of a slowing in income growth and a
reduction over the short-run in credit demands. Thus, between now and the
next meeting of the Committee, short-term rates could drop back toward the
late October lows or even further for expectational reasons, and the
spread between the funds rate and short-term rates could again widen.
The recent decline in Treasury bill rates may already have discounted a
considerable amount of potential weakness in credit demand, but as indicated
earlier, bill rates, and particularly the 3-month bill, have been extremely
volatile in recent days.
(12) Apart from expectational effects related to the energy
crisis, upward pressure on short-term rates might be anticipated over the
next few weeks as business credit demands at banks and in the open market
combined continue fairly strong and as the Treasury comes to market to
borrow new cash in early December, presumably through tax bills. Our
estimates suggest a cash need of about $4 billion.
(13) Under alternative A the Federal funds rate is likely to
decline toward 8-3/4 per cent by the next Committee meeting as reserves
are provided to support a movement toward the higher longer-run growth
path for the aggregates indicated under that alternative. And under
alternative C the funds rate is likely to rise toward 11-1/2 per cent
in the process of moving toward its lower aggregate growth path. Under
current circumstances, the market is sensitive to small changes in the
funds rate, and would be even more sensitive to sustained increases or
decreases. Thus, an appreciable decline in market rates is likely under
alternative A and a large rise under alternative C.
(14) Under alternative C, disintermediation would clearly
once again become a pressing problem, particularly around the year-end
reinvestment period. Under alternative B, however, net inflows of consumer-
type time deposits to banks and to thrift institutions may be at a moderate
pace over the next few months. Growth of such deposits at banks is likely
to slow from the relatively rapid pace of recent months, when banks
were able to offer a varied and attractive menu of ceiling-free certificates.
Banks and thrift institutions could, however, have an unfavorable experience
around the year-end reinvestment period even under alternative B if credit
demands are strong enough to generate rising short-term market interest
rates around that time.
(15) With regard to bank credit, we have assumed that the
recent rise in the commercial paper rate will lead to a renewal of
business loan growth at banks at a moderate pace in the last few weeks
of the year and thus to some renewed demand for CD funds. In addition,
we have assumed a modest net addition to banks' bill holdings, largely
as a result of participation in the forthcoming Treasury financing.
But we expect most of the bills to be acquired by nonbank investors,
after initial tax and loan underwriting by banks. In part reflecting
these developments, the bank credit proxy is expected to rise modestly in
December, following a period of virtual stagnation in October and November
taken together.
(16) In long-term markets, a relatively large volume of new
corporate and state and local government bond issues are expected to be
offered between now and the mid-December holiday lull. As a result, bond
yields may come under some upward pressure under alternative B, upward
rate pressure would be considerably greater under alternative C. The
energy crisis could augment upward rate pressures by increasing inflationary
expectations and/or by stimulating anticipations of additional real
capital investment.
Proposed directive
(17) Presented below are three alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in
the preceding section. In all three alternatives, it is proposed to
delete the reference to Treasury financing because the quarterly refund-
ing announced on October 24 has been completed. Alternatives A and C
refer to growth in the monetary aggregates that "has occurred over the
past 6 months"; the annual rates of growth from April through October
for M1, M2, and the bank credit proxy are, respectively, 4.8, 7.9, and
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury financing and of] international and domestic
financial market developments, the Committee seeks to achieve
bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with [DEL: moderate]
FASTER growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead THAN
HAS OCCURRED OVER THE PAST 6 MONTHS.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury financing and of] international and domestic
financial market developments, the Committee seeks to achieve
bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with moderate
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury financing and of] international and domestic
financial market developments, the Committee seeks to achieve
bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with
[DEL: moderate] SLOWER growth in monetary aggregates over the months
ahead THAN HAS OCCURRED OVER THE PAST 6 MONTHS.
TABLE 1 STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
---------------------
BANK RESERVES NOVEMBER 16, 1973
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
---------------------------------------- --- -- --- - - -- - -- -- -- -- - -- -- - -- -- -- - -- - -- - ---- -
11 AGGREGATF RESFRVES I REQUIRED RESERVES
S RESFRVF, AVAILABLE FOR ( -----------------------------------------------------
PRIVATE NONRANK DEPOSITS II SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
SII------- ----------------------------------------------
I----------------------------I TOTAL NONRORROWED 1 PRIVATE OTHER CnOS AND GOV'T AND
PERIOD I SEAS AD. I NON SEAS AOJ II RFSFRVES RESERVES I DEMAND TIME DEP NON OEP INTERBANK
S (1) I (7) (3) (4) ( ) (6) (7) (8)
I I
MONTHIY LFVr S-SMILLTONSI I
------------------------F I I
oUAITERLY:i I
------
I I I I
OCT.-NOV. I -4.2) (I 2.2) ( 6.9) F ( -13.%) ( 18.0)
I I II
WEEKLY LFVELS-$MILLTON II
--------------------- I I
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOTEt DATA SHOWN IN PARPNTHESES ARE CURRENT PROJECTIONS. ANNUAL RATES OF GROWTH HAVE BEEN
AOJUSTFf FOR CHANGES IN RESERVE REQUTIFMENTS EFFECTIVE JULY 19. AND OCT .* 1973.
AT THE FOMC MEETING OF OCTOBER 16* 1973 THF COMMITTEE AGREED ON A RPD RANGE OF 2 TO 5
PER CENT.
TABLE 2
MONETARY AGGREGATES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
NOVEMBER 16, 1973
--------------------- w-----------w-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I MONEY SUPPLY I ADJUSTED II U.S. I TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS I NONOEPOSIT
I NARPOW I BROAD I CREDIT II GOVT. i I OTHER I I SOURCES OF
PEIOb I (MI) I (M21 I PROXY 1I DEPOSITS I TOTAL I THAN CO S I CO S I FUNDS
---.------ ----------------------------- ---------m ---e --------m -----em ---m-wom -m " ------------- ---------- w ------- m ----
MONTHLY LEVELS-RILLIONS
-----------*****---I
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
--------------------- I
QUARTERLY
--------- I
MONTHIY I
------- I
VFEKLY LEVFL-SRILLTONS I
------ -------------- I
( 7.7) I
(3)
II
( 1.0)
II
17.0 H
5.4 II
1.9
(-3.0) 1
(-0.5) I
II
II
I I
I ";
(7) I
( 6.7)
------------------------------------------- --- --- -----------------------
( (
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
NOVEMBER 16, 1973
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operationsl/ Daily Average Reserve Effect2/ A in reserve categories A Target
Bills Coupon Agency RP'q Open Market & Member Other4/ req. res. against available res.5/ available
& Accept Issues Issues Net3/ Total Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9)5/ reserves5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
Nov 860
p 94p 62p
meeting. Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month.
* Includes effect of special certificate (i.e., borrowing by Treasury from F.R.).
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
NOVEMBER 16, 1973
TABLE 4
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
Millions of dollars
U.S Govt. Security
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions[ Member Bank Reserves Positions
Corporate Municipal Excess** Borrowing at FRB** Basic Reserve Deficit..
Bills - Coupon Issues oBonds I Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38. Others
(1) (7) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
maturing in 16 days Or more, are indicators of dealer holdings available for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions are debt issues
still in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserve less net Federal funds
purchases Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are Friday figures.
* STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL ** Beginning with January 1973, monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement
week figures
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
NOVEMBER 16, 1973
TABLE 5
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per Cent
Apr.
May
Tunep
Tuly
Aug
Sept.
Oct
Nov
Federal Funds
Treasury Bills
,i -
CD's New Issue-NYC
Tnna-Term
S h t -Te- -
Aaa Utility
New
Issue
Weekly data for columns 1 to 4 are statement week averages of daily data. Columns 5 and 6 are one-day
weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day
Recently
Offered
Municipal
Bond Buver
U.S. Government FNMA
(10-yr. Constant Auction
Maturitvy Yields
Wednesday quotes. For columns 7, 8 and 10 the
quote for Thursday following the end of the
statement week. Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceding the end of the statement week. The FNMA auction yield is the average
yield in the bi-weekly suction for short-term forward commitments for Government underwritten mortgages.
i - ~r _ _'T TI~_
---- -- ~L~ ~i L-------- ---1 I ' i ' -- J.L----------I-
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Appendix Table I November 16, 1973
RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
Reserves Money Stock Meaures Bank. redit. Measuren Other
Available to Adjusted Total 2 Time Thrift U.S.
Support Pvt. M M M Credit Loans and Total Other than Institution! Iondeposit Gov't
(Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth) (Dollas Change in Billions)
May. +8.8 +9.4 +3.9 +4.0 +8.3 +10.1 +15.6 +15.2 +18.2 +13.0 +13.4 +1.5 +0.2 +0.7
lune +6.4 +8.0 +9.0 +6.4 +9.2 +11.1 +6.6 +6.5 +12.9 +11.4 +14.5 +6.7 -- -1.3
Nov. +11.4 +9.8 +20.8 +5.2 +1.9 +9.8 +10.5 +21.4 +14.2 +10.4 +13.2 +1.2 -- +0.6
Appendix Table II
RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
CONFIDENCIAL (FR)
November 16, 1973
Per iod
A rlfALLY;
Dec. 1969
Dec. 1970
Dec. 1971
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
My
Ju ly
Sept.
Oct. p
WEEKI,Y:
1973--JT ly
nva, 7,
p - Preliminary
Available to
Non- Support Pvt.
MONEY STOYK )EA ITalS
BANK CREDIT MEASURES
Adjusted
Credit
Proxy
I""I __ I -MONEY ST rK MASURESY
TotaL oorrowe Uep ons i l. rvD. ue. o , I
I 1OTHER_
Time Thrift
Other than Institution
. . . . -
.. . i . .
Non- U.S.
Deposits Gov't
Di.j d-K.
NOTIE: Reserve requirements on Eurodollar borrowings are included beginning October 16, 1969, and requirements on bank-related commercial paper are included beginning
October 1, 197C. Adjusted credit proxy includes mainly total member bank deposits subject to reserve requirements, bank-related commercial paper, and Eurodollar
borrowings of U.S. banks. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks. Monthly data are daily averages except for nonbank commercial paper figures which
are for last day of month. Weekly data are not available for M, total loans and investments and thrift institution deposits.
Total
Loans and Total
Investments Time
(9) (10)
I s uepos1ts -- u _runa a nu
(12)
: ..............
.................:...... :......... ::
n -IIII
APPENDIX TABLE III
Growth Rate in Money Supply
(Per cent change at an annual rate)
M Q
M Q
M = Annual rates of growth calculated from average
levels in the final months of the quarters.
S= Annual rates <alculated from average levels in
all three months of the quarters.
M Q
I _ 1
