Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
August 17, 1973
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) August 17, 1973
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 growth was at about a 6 per cent annual rate in July and,
with recent data pointing to a slowdown in August, it appears that for the
July-August target period M 1 expansion will fall somewhat short of the range
of tolerance set by the Committee. Growth in M2 , on the other hand, appears
to be running above the upper end of its target range. The unexpected strength
in M2 reflects a strong consumer response in early August to the higher rates
offered by banks on consumer-type deposits following liberalization of
Regulation Q ceilings.
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates
(Growth at SAAR in per cent)
M 1
Federal funds rate
(Per cent per annum)
As adopted and subsequently
amended
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD
in June-July Target Period
Ranges of
Tolerance
Latest
Estimates
Statement
week avg.
(2) Growth in RPD over July-August also is expected to be above
the upper limit of the Committee's range of tolerance, as greater than
expected growth in CD's and nondeposit sources added to required reserves.
In addition, the implementation of the hike in required reserves in the
week ended July 25 absorbed more reserves than we had allowed for because
of a misestimation in the deposit mix.
(3) In the two statement weeks following the last FOMC meeting,
incoming data suggested that July-August growth rates in all monetary
aggregates might approach and possibly exceed the upper end of their
respective target ranges. Accordingly, the Desk assumed a more restric-
tive posture in the provision of reserves, and the Federal funds rate
averages for both of these weeks slightly exceeded the 10-1/2 per cent
upper limit of the constraint set by the Committee at its July meeting.
Against this background a majority of Committee members agreed on
August 3 to raise the ceiling for the Federal funds rate to 11 per cent
in order to provide room for maneuver if further restraint on reserve
provision should prove necessary.
(4) Short-term interest rates rose sharply further during most
of the period since the July FOMC meeting in response to high rates on
Federal funds and changed expectations as to the possible severity of
monetary restraint. Rates on large certificates of deposits and banker's
acceptances have paced this general advance, as banks sought funds aggres-
sively in response to continued strong credit demands. Advances in Treasury
bill rates lagged somewhat behind other short-term rate increases over most of
July but then began catching up in early August, partly in response to the
Treasury's auction of $2.0 billion of September 1973 tax bills and a sizable
offering of short- and intermediate-term securities by the Federal Home Loan
(5) Given sharp upward market rate adjustments, the increase in
the discount rate to 7-1/2 per cent on August 13 had little impact on short-
term rates. Market participants generally interpreted the increase as
representing an adjustment to a higher market rate structure rather than a
signal of a further tightening in policy. Indeed, a general credit market
rally began to develop around mid-August and short rates, particularly
Treasury bill rates, declined from recent intermeeting highs. Most recently
the 3-month Treasury bill was trading at around 8.70 per cent bid.
(6) Long-term market interest rates increased substantially after
the July Committee meeting, but late in the period there was a strong bond
market rally. With the combined new issue calendar for corporate and municipal
securities continuing on the light side, the further rise in long-term yields
appeared to reflect mainly a reaction to the sharp rise in short-term rates.
The strong rally in recent days appears to have been based on an attitudinal
shift stemming from good international news and the thought that the monetary
aggregates may be now under control. Moreover, rumors of heavy buying of
Treasury coupon issues arising out of Middle East oil transactions further
bulled the market, given the larger dealer short positions.
(7) The Treasury encountered great difficulty in its mid-August
refunding operation, which involved the auctioning of $4.5 billion in new
issues to redeem $4.7 billion publicly held issues maturing August 15,
addition to the auction of September tax anticipation bills, the Treasury sold
at auction $2 billion of a reopened, 7-3/4 per cent, 4-year note, and $500
million of a 7-1/2 per cent, 20-year bond. Bidding for both coupon issues
was quite weak, and it was necessary for government accounts to support the
market by buying outstanding securities and by acquiring about one-half of
the bond issue in the auction. Subsequently, however, the market for both
of these coupon issues has improved markedly, and the bond and note are now
about 5 and 2 points respectively above their auction prices.
(8) Mortgage rates also increased further during the inter-
meeting period, with an 8.71 per cent rate set in the latest FNMA mortgage
auction--up 33 basis points since mid-July and 67 basis points since mid-
June. In addition to moving in general sympathy with other long-term rates,
the continued rise in mortgage rates reflects an apparently sharp curtailment
in the extension of commitments by thrift institutions--a cutback generated
by net outflows of deposit funds in the latter part of July and early August.
To meet these deposit outflows and cover the continuing takedowns of out-
standing loan commitments, savings and loan associations have been borrowing
heavily from their Federal Home Loan Banks in recent weeks, and the FHLB
System in turn has raised a large volume of funds in the market for payment
later this month. Under the circumstances, both savings and loan and FHLB
System liquidity has declined, and mutual savings banks are reported to have
been liquidating securities and drawing on outstanding lines of credit at
commercial banks.
(9) The table on the next page shows (in percentage annual rates
of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various recent time periods.
A new Appendix table III shows quarterly growth rates for money supply
calculated in two ways--by comparing average levels for all three months
of the quarter and by comparing levels in the final months of the quarter.
Past
Calendar
Past
12
Past
6
Past
3
Months
Past
Month
Dec. '72 July '73 July '73 July '73 July '73
over over over over over
Dec. '69 July '72 Jan. '73 April '73 June '73
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term market paper
(Monthly ave. change in
billions)
I/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
2/ Based on month-ead figures. Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data an total
loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institu-
tions--which are either end-of-nonth or last-Wednesday-of-month figures.
Prospective developments
(10) Three alternative policy strategies are summarized below
for Committee consideration. More detailed figures, including estimates
into the future for M3 as well as the narrower money supply concepts, are
shown in the table on the following page.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Targets (3rd & 4th qtrs.
combined)
Associated ranges for
August-September 1973
(inter-meeting period)
(11) The three alternatives include the same M1 growth rates for
the second half of 1973 as in the previous Blue Book. Alternative B repre-
sents a continuation of the longer-run growth path for M1 reaffirmed at the
last Committee meeting and depicted in the chart following p. 7-a. The longer-term
growth rates for the other key monetary variables associated with each M1
- 7-a -
Alternative Longer-Run Targets
for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Rates of Growth
Months:
Aug.
Sept.
_ Adjusted gredit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Total Reserves ,
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Pl.
Alt. A Alt. 8B
Alt. C
Rates of Growth
ohths:
Aug.
Sept.
- -- --
MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATH
RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- 270
^- -
- 260
MI LEVEL FOR MARCH
EXPECTED AT 3/19 FOMC--,..--,
I I I I I I I I I _ . I
S O N J F M A N J J A S 0 N D
I I I I I I I I I I III
growth rate have been changed to reflect the behavior of time deposits
following the early July changes in Regulation Q ceiling rates. In addition,
the funds rate ranges associated with the three alternatives have also been
raised somewhat, reflecting in part the upward revisions in projected nominal
(12) The recent sharp rise in short-term interest rates will be
limiting money demand in the months ahead. As a result, even though growth
in nominal GNP is expected to remain substantial, M1 may expand at a rela-
tively slow pace between now and year-end, given prevailing money market
conditions. For alternative B, a 9-1/2--11-1/2 per cent Federal funds rate
range is shown. This range is symmetrical around current money market con-
ditions. Staff judgment and model forecasts suggest that the odds are better
than even that some decline in the funds rate will develop if the alternative
B targets for the aggregates are pursued, given the degree of restraint
already built into the system.
(13) In the August-September period M1 growth under alternative B
is indicated to be in a 2--4 per cent annual rate range. A particularly low
growth rate is shown for August, reflecting in part drawdowns in cash balances
for investment in higher yielding time deposits, especially the newly avail-
able, widely advertised long-term savings certificates. However, such a one-
time stock adjustment is likely to be short-lived in its effects on cash
balances mainly held for transactions purposes or for normal financial market
(14) Under alternative B, over the next two months, M2 expansion
in a 7-3/4--9-3/4 per cent annual rate range is indicated. The faster in-
crease in M2 relative to M1 results mainly from the initial sizable movement
into consumer-type time and savings deposits at banks in the wake of the
regulatory changes. The initial inflow probably reflected not only some
movement out of demand deposits but, more importantly, shifts of funds from
nonbank thrift institutions. We have assumed a gradual phasing out of
transfers from thrift institutions to banks, though we do not expect it to
subside as promptly as transfers out of demand deposits because of the
maturity distribution of thrift institution deposits and a certain inertia
in shifting deposits from one institution to another. On balance, a con-
siderably more moderate rise in consumer type time deposits is expected in
September than in August, and a further tapering appears in prospect for the
fourth quarter.
(15) Growth of M3 in the August-September period--at around
in M2, since the shift in funds from thrift institutions to banks raise the
M2 figures relative to M3 . By the fourth quarter, we would expect most of
this divergence to disappear, and growth rates of consumer-type time and
savings deposits at banks and thrift institutions are both projected at
around 7 per cent.
(16) Looking to all three money concepts, by the fourth quarter M1
is indicated to be expanding at a 3-1/2 per cent annual rate under alternative B,
while M2 and M3 growth is expected to be around 5-1/2 and 6 per cent,
respectively. For M2 and M3, these would be lowest quarterly growth rates
since early 1970.
(17) The aggregates are specified to show less growth under
alternative C and more under alternative A. Under alternative C, the
funds rate is expected to rise into the upper part of a 10 to 12-1/2
per cent range between now and mid-September. The wider range specified
under this alternative reflects what we presume to be an icreasing diffi-
culty in forcing the public to further economize on cash holdings at a
time when interest rates have already increased to historically high levels.
Under alternative A, we would expect the funds rate to drop between now and the
next meeting, though perhaps not to the bottom of the indicated range.
(18) Other key assumptions in the monetary relationships pre-
sented are: (a) continued strength in business loan demand on banks;
(b) some reduction in demand for consumer and mortgage credit; (c) con-
tinued active demand by banks for large CD funds, though perhaps less
aggressive demand than in the past four months taken as a whole;
(d) greater bank reluctance to participate in the securities market, par-
ticularly under alternative C, in view of the wide spread of their bor-
rowing costs over their return on portfolio. On balance, bank credit--as
measured by the proxy--is expected to rise by around a 15--16 per cent
annual rate in the August-September period, buoyed in part by a projected
rise in U.S. Treasury deposits at commercial banks. Growth is likely to be
considerably less rapid in the fourth quarter as credit demands fade some-
what, inflows of consumer-type time deposits abate, and Treasury deposits
at banks decline.
(19) Most short-term rates appear to have adjusted to a 10-1/2
per cent funds rate. The 3-month Treasury bill rate was low relative to the
funds rate during the inter-meeting period, and the recent market rally has
carried it even lower. Some upward movement in the bill rate from recent
levels can be expected if money market conditions remain taut, in sympathy
with continued strong demands in the short-term area by banks, business, and
Federal agencies. In addition, the bill market could be particularly affected
if foreign central banks sell bills in the market or liquidate Treasury specials
in financing a return flow of funds to the U.S.
(20) Given the still wide spread of short- over long- rates, it
would appear that the recent market rally may have carried long rates lower
than is sustainable. However, market participants are now especially sensitive
to clues regarding System policy, and long-term rates could decline further if
the market comes to believe that the aggregates are under control and monetary
restraint has peaked. With the market as sensitive as it is, a significant
move in the funds rate in either a tightening or easing direction is likely
to be accompanied by prompt and rather sizable sympathetic adjustments in other
interest rates.
Proposed directive
(21) Presented below are three alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to correspond
to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in the preceding
section. For all three alternatives it is proposed to delete the reference
to international developments in light of the recent strong recovery of
the dollar. Retention of the reference to domestic financial developments
is proposed only for alternative C, the one alternative that contemplates
a significant tightening of the money market. As will be noted, all three
alternatives refer to growth rates in the aggregates "thus far this year."
For the period through July, these are as follows: M1, 6 per cent; M2,
Alternative A
To implement this policy, [DEL: while taking account of internationl
and domesticate financial market developments and the forthcoming Treasury
financing,] the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money mar-
ket conditions consistent with SOMEWHAT slower growth in monetary
aggregates over the months immediately ahead than HAS occurred on
average [DEL: in the first half of the] THUS FAR THIS year.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, [DEL: while taking account of international
and domesticate financial market developments and the forthcoming
Treasury financing,] the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve
and money market conditions consistent with slower growth in
monetary aggregates over the months immediately ahead than HAS
occurred on average [DEL: in the first half of the] THUS FAR THIS year.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: international]
and domestic financial market developments [DEL: and the forthcoming
Treasury financing,] the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and
money market conditions consistent with SIGNIFICANTLY slower growth
in monetary aggregates over the months immediately ahead than HAS
occurred on average [DEL: in the first half of the] THUS FAR THIS year.
TABLE 1 STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
BANK RESERVES AUGUST 17, 1973
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
-- -- --- -- - - ----- -------- ------ ------- - ----- ------ m------ ------------------------
II AGGREGATE RESERVES I REQUIREn NESERVES
RESERVES AVAILABLE FOR I------------------- --------------------------------------
I PRIVATE NONBANK OEPOSITS II SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
I If-------------------- ------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------- TOTAL NONPORROWED I PRIVATE OTHER CD'S AND GOVIT AND
PERIOD I SEAS AO.I I NUN SEAS ADJ II RESENVES RFSERVES I OEMAND TIME DEP NON DEP INTERANK
------------------- -------- --------------------------- m--- -------- m----------
(I 1) I (2) (3) (4) 1 (5) (6) (7) (a)
I I I
MONTHLY LFVELS-$MILLIONSI I
---------- --- ------I II I
ANNUAL RATES OF CHANGE I I
---------- ------ II I
QUARTERLY: I II
------- III
I 1 It I
JULY-AUG. ( 14.1) I( 11.6) I 11.41 I 3.6) ( 9.0) ( 101.5)
I 1I I1
WEEKLY LEVELS-SMILLIONb I I I
----- ------- --------- - ----------------------------------- 0-- ----------------------------------------------------------------
NOTE: bATA SHOWN IN PAREtlT4FiSES ARI CUHRENT PROJELTIONS. ANNUAL RATtS OF bROWTH HAVE AFFN
PER CENT.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
AUGUST 17, 1973MONETARY AGGREGATES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED)
I MONEY SUPPLY I ADJUSTED II U.S. I TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS 1 NONDEPOSIT
I NARROW I RROAD I CREDIT It GOVT, I I OTHFH I I SOURCES OF
PERIOD I (M) I (M2) I PROXY II DEPOSITS I TOTAl I THAN CD S I CD S I FUNDS
MONTHLY LEVELS-SBILLIONSI
*****---------- ---- -m-1
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
-- ~-~----i-- i----- I
OUARTERLY
--------- I
JUNE
JULY I
AUG.
WEEKLY LEVELS-SBILLIONS I
I
JULY 4
I
AUG. 1 P I
(1) I
( 4.0)
( 0.9)
( 3.4) 1
( 7.4)
(3) iI
It
II
I I
(444.7) II
II
II
I I
I I
II
(13.6) II
(18.6) II
II
(14.1) II
II
I I
II
438.3 II
436.7 II
437.0 II
437.7 It
(4) I
?3.1 I
16.0
(16.2) I
(17.3)
I
(6) I
(11.2) 1
--rl--- -------- -- ----------- ---------------- --- -m----------------
NOTEI DATA SHOWN IN PARENTHESES ARE CURRENT PROJECTIONS. P - PRELIMINARY
PE - PARTIALLY tSTIMATE6
TAHLE 2
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
AUGUST 17, 1973
Table 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations 1/ Daily Average Reserve Effect 2/ A in reserve categories A Target
Period Bills Coupon Agency RP's3/ Total Open Market A Member Other 4 req. resa against available res. 5/ available
& Accept. Issues Issues Net - O perations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) reserves 5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
i/ Represents change in System's portfolio from end-of-period to end-of-period; includes redemptions in regular bill auctions.
2/ Represents change in daily average level from preceding period.
2/ Includes matched sale-purchase transactions as well as RP's,
/ Sum of changes in vault cash, currency in circulation, Treasury operations, F.R. float, gold and foreign accounts, and other FR accounts.
I/ Reserves to support private nonbank deposits. Target change for July and August reflects the target adopted at the July 17, 1973 FOMC
meeting. Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consisteht with target ranges that were adopted
during the month.
*Includes special certificate (i.e., borrowing by Treasury from FR).
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
AUGUST 17, 1973
Table 4
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
Millions of Dollars
U. S. Govt. Security Other Security Member Bank Reserves Positions
Period Dealer Positions Dealer Positions__ber Bank Re s
Bills Coupon Issues Corporate Municipals Excess** Borrowing at FRB** Basic Reserve Deficit
Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Other
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
**Beginning with January 1973, monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
*STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
AUGUST 17, 1973
Table 5
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per cent
Short-term _ Long-term
Treasury bills 90-119 day CD's New issue-NYC Aaa Utility U.S. Government FNMA
Period Federal funds 90-day -year ommercal Recently Municpaer (10-yr. Constant Auction
Paper Issue offered d B maturity) Yields
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
tay
June
Weekly data for columns 1 to 4 are statement week averages of daily data. Columns 5 and 6 are one-day Wednesday quotes. For columns 7, 8 and 10 the
weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day quote for the Thursday following the end of the
statement week. Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceding the end of the statement week. The FNMA auction yield is the yield in the
bi-weekly auction for short-term forward commitments for Government underwritten mortgages.
I , _ 1 r _ I II I ~L _ . L------ -
Appendix Table I
RESEVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
August 17, 1973
I monav Stock Measure" I flant redlt Measures
Available to Ad td Total Til m Thrift U .S.I I I P IFI It I Idt.atodSupport Pvt. Credit I Loans and TotlI Other than nstituon I Nondapott Gov't.
let Half 1971
Ind Wall 1971
lst Ralf 1973
Int Otr. 1973
?n. Otr. 1017
I }-an 5 - i 6-- '7-1- -:;~^ i n^ -t-an-i (A \ --9)1 'T'n "
(Per Cent Annual Rates of Groth) (Dollar Change in Billions)
+12.1
+2.0
+10.7
+3.4
+20.8
+7.7
+16.6
+17.6
+10.4
+5.7
- I
+10.1
+8.4
+11.0
+11.5
+9.8
+12.1
+9.2
+7.2
.8.3
+16.4
+19.7
+13.1
+12.1
+11.1
+11.5
+10.6
+12.8
+15.5
+15.7
+9.5
+13.9
+16.4
+1.64
+9.8
+6.6
+19.0
+3.8
+15.4
+14.5
+9.8
+16.6
+20.0
+12.1
+13.7
+12.1
+8.0
+15.9
+16.1
+10.8
+12.3
+11.6
+9.5
+8.7
+19.2
+15.4
+13.2
+19.6
+14.0
+14.2
+13.3
+19.7
+14.3
+16.2
+13.2
+13.6
+9.1
+9.1
+11.7
+6.4
+9.3
+0.4
+0.3
+0.2+0.4
+0,3
+0.2
p - Treltminary.
+10.8
+10,3
+10.3
+10.2
+10.4
+15.1
+12.6
+10.4
+5.5
--.- i; ---- I-- ------ C. ~---'-P-_l----i-~-~T~ i'~'-l-l-L*--- ~~--~ ~--
- ' --- C --- -
- -'-L-- '
-. _.r-
Appendix Table II
RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
August 17, 1973
MONEY STOCK MEASURES BANK CREDIT MAlSURES OTHER
Avellbla to Adjusted TotalI Time Thrift Non- U.S.
Period Total borrod Depait lrota l Pvt. p 3 Pco l v ata Tia Ca'n De a tta D's epe, and
(4) (5) (6)
ODe. 1969
Dec. 1970
Dee. 1971
Apr.
Nay
June
July
AuB.
sept.
Oct.
1car.
Dec.
Apr.
Way
June
Jhly p
JI:::llllHI............!!
............i~
(10) (11)
p - Preliminary
NOTr. IResrve reqniremento on Euro-dollar borrowings are included beginning October 16, 1969, and requirements on bank-related commnnercial paper are eluded beginning
October 1, 1970. Adjusted credit proxy include mainly total member bank deposite subject to reserve requirements, bank-related comnsrcial paper, and Euro-dollar
borrowings of F.S. hanks. eekly data ere daily averages for statement weeks. Fonthly data are daily averages except for non-bank coaeretal paper figurea which
are for last day of month. Weekly date are not Available for M , total lBans and invetmnts and thrift institution deposlts.
iiiiiiii iiiii 343.6
::::::::::::::: ;
iiiiiiiiiii iiiiii 346.2
............... ;
Aul. 1 p
8 p
' ---- c ~ --- '
I - ;, -- 1:"""""""" ----- U
APPENDIX TABLE III
Growth Rate in Money Supply
(Per cent change at an annual rate)
M Q
M Q
M Q
M = Annual rates of growth calculated
levels in the final months of the
from average
quarters.
Q = Annual rates calculated from average levels in
all three months of the quarters.
