Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
March 16, 1973(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) March 16, 1973
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 now appears to be growing at an annual rate within the
Committee's February-March range of tolerance, as shown in the table.
Growth of M2 is near the high end of its February-March target range.
RPD is growing above the upper limit of its range, chiefly because heavy
loan demands have led banks to expand large CD's much more rapidly than
anticipated. The combination of very rapid acceleration in CD growth and
the maintenance of Treasury tax and loan balances at unexpectedly high
levels (as a result of foreign central bank purchases of special Treasury
certificates) has ballooned growth in the credit proxy to an estimated
February-March annual rate of 18 per cent, far in excess of what was
indicated at the last Committee meeting.
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD
in February-March Peiod
(SAAR in Percentage Points)
Ranges of Current
Tolerance Estimates
March 14)
(2) Early in the inter-meeting period, incoming data suggested
that RPD and M2 were both running above their February-March ranges of
tolerance; by the end of February, M1 also seemed to be moving to the
upper limit of its range. In these circumstances, since the Federal funds
rate had already been averaging around the 6-3/4 per cent maximum contem-
plated at the mid-February meeting, the Committee members concurred in
the Manager's recommendation of March 1 that the upper limit be raised to
in case of need. This permitted the Manager to restrain somewhat further
the provision of nonborrowed reserves. At the same time the pressure of
loan demand on commercial banks caused spirited bidding for funds. Des-
pite resistance by the Desk, the funds rate tended to persist above 7 per
cent, and in the most recent statement week averaged 7.13 per cent. Over
the full inter-meeting period, the funds rate has risen about 55 basis
points, on top of the roughly 150 basis points rise that occurred during
the preceding three months.
(3) Rate increases on short-term market instruments have
generally matched or exceeded the rise in the Federal funds rate since the
last meeting, although the spread of the funds rate over the 3-month bill
rate remains relatively wide. Rates on large CD's with maturities just
under 90 days have advanced as much as 100 basis points during the inter-
meeting period; Treasury bill rates are up 75-100 basis points--with the
interest rates on commercial paper--the issuance of which has been reduced
by borrower shifts to the alternative use of bank credit--have risen
half per cent to 5-1/2 per cent, effective February 26, and a rise in
the bank prime rate from 6 to 6-1/4 per cent occurred at about the same
time. Market rate increases in recent days have been fueled partly by
expectations that a further discount rate hike is impending.
(4) In markets for longer maturity securities, upward
pressures on yields have been relatively less intense than in short
markets, with advances ranging generally from 10 to 30 basis points.
Special factors have tended to limit the extent of the rise on corpor-
ate, U. S. Treasury, and Federal agency securities; in the case of
corporates, the calendar of new utility and industrial bond offerings
has been unusually light, while in the case of Treasury coupon and
Federal agency issues a foreign central bank--shifting out of bills--
has been a persistent large buyer. Municipal bond yields, on the other
hand, have been under increasing pressure from sizable current offer-
ings and a large forward calendar as well as from a falling off in bank
portfolio acquisitions.
(5) The table on the following page shows (in percentage
annual rate of change) selected monetary and financial flows over
various time periods. The slowing of growth in M1 and M2 over the first
two months of 1973 has helped offset the surge in December 1972. Over
the 3 months ending in February, M1 has grown at a 6.3 per cent annual
rate and M2 at an 8.2 per cent rate. Growth rates over the past 6 months
are slightly higher, and over the past 12 months are higher still.
Years Months Months Months Months
Dec. '72 Feb. '73 Feb. '72 Feb. '73 Feb. '73
over over over over over
Dec. '69 Feb. '72 Aug. '72 Nov. '72 Jan. '73
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term market paper
(Actual $ change in
billions)
Prospective developments
(6) Presented below in summary form (with figures for
aggregates representing seasonally adjusted annual rates of change)
are March-April ranges for monetary aggregates and money market con-
longer-run targets are indexed by growth rates for M 1 of 7, 5-1/2,
and 4 per cent over the next two quarters for alternatives A B, and
C, respectively. These policy options tie in with the economic
analysis of longer-run alternatives to be presented for FOMC considera-
tion at the forthcoming meeting. For purposes of the Blue Book dis-
cussion, Regulation Q ceilings are assumed to remain unchanged.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Longer-run targets
(represented by growth
rates for 2nd and 3rd
quarters of 1973)
Associated ranges for
March-April 1973
(7) Given the cumulative impact of monetary restraint, the
staff believes that growth in the monetary aggregates at the rates shown for
alternative B would involve little further change in money market conditions.
Growth in M 1 for the March-April period is indicated at 5-1/2--7-1/2
per cent in this alternative, ranging a little above the longer-run
target. This is due primarily to the assumed effect of larger-than-
usual income tax refunds this year, which will also bolster time and savings
deposits. RPD growth in the March-April period consistent with these
aggregates is projected to be relatively large, however, partly because it
reflects a further sharp increase in large CD's, and also because of the
effects of lagged reserve accounting.
(8) Assuming adoption of the somewhat larger growth rates for
the aggregates as a longer-run target under alternative A, money market
conditions would be likely to ease down through the range shown for that
option over the next few weeks. On the other hand, an effort to secure a
slowing in rates of growth in the monetary aggregates of the dimensions
shown under alternative C would be likely to entail a further rise in the
Federal funds rate from current levels. The pattern for this alternative
shown in the detailed table on p. 6a assumes that the funds rate would
rise to near the upper end of the 7--8-1/4 per cent range before the next
Committee meeting. If the Committee wished to undertake a more gradual
tightening--for example, constraining the rise in the funds rate to
around 8 per cent over a two-month period--the staff would still expect a
significant slowing in growth of the aggregates over time. The slowing,
however, would probably be somewhat delayed with M 1 expected to expand
at a 5 per cent annual rate in the second quarter and 4 per cent in the
- 6-a -
Alternative Longer-Run Targets
for Key Monetary Aggregates
M 1
Alt. A Alt. B
Quarters: 1973
Months:
Mar.
Apr.
Alt. C
M2
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. C
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Months:
Mar.
Apr.
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A
RPD
Alt. B
(9) Even assuming little change in the Federal funds rate
from current levels, the 3-month bill rate is likely to continue to
rise over the next few weeks, perhaps moving up in a 6-1/4--6-1/2 per
cent range. In addition to the continued pull on the bill rate from
a funds rate of around 7 per cent, the Desk is likely to be a sizable
seller of bills during the first half of April because of an expected
substantial decline in the Treasury balance at the Fed prior to mid-
April tax collections. The Treasury balance at the Fed has recently
risen to an exceptionally large $4 billion as the bulk of the recent
outflows of funds to abroad was reinvested by official institutions in
Treasury specials. If a sizable reflow of these funds should develop,
upward interest rate pressures in the Treasury bill market would be
particularly strong, assuming that foreign central banks dispose of
Treasury issues as demand for dollars increases, and the bill rate
could well rise above the indicated range.
(10) Short-term rates outside the Treasury bill area appear
to have already adjusted more fully than short-term bills to prevailing
money market conditions, but nevertheless some of these rates could rise
somewhat further. Rates on negotiable CD's maturing in over 90 days
offered by large banks are apparently at or near ceilings. With these
banks crowding CD borrowing even more into the short-term area, short-
term CD rates are likely to rise. As costs of bank funds rise, there
will be further pressure on bank lending rates and policies. With
pressure continuing on the short-term rate structure, long-term rates
are likely to increase further as investors become more reluctant to make
long-term commitments at current rates and as borrowers begin to seek to
nail down funds in the bond market.
(11) A tightening of the money market from currently prevailing
conditions would lead to rather substantial further upward adjustments in
short- and long-term interest rates. For instance, if the funds rate
were in a 7-1/2--8 per cent range, we would expect increases of about
term CD's which are at ceiling rates), and sizable accompanying rises in
long-term rates.
(12) Upward pressures on short- and long-term interest rates
partly reflect the necessity for banks and other savings institutions to
adjust to a significant slowing in the rate of inflow of consumer-type
time and savings deposits. Such a slowing would be expected under alter-
native B, and would be even more marked under alternative C; however, this
does not allow for any change in Regulation Q ceilings on consumer-type
time and savings deposits. Banks and other institutions would have to
adjust to smaller inflows by adopting more stringent commitment policies,
reducing liquidity, and reducing their participation in bond markets. In
addition, large banks would remain aggressive issuers of CD's, and savings
and loan associations would begin borrowing actively from Federal Home
Loan Banks.
Proposed directives
(13) Presented below are three alternative formulations
for the operational paragraph of the directive, which might be taken
to correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discuss-
ed in the preceding section. The reference to credit markets is pro-
posed for elimination only in alternative A, the only alternative
that contemplates a significant easing of the money market. In view
of uncertainties as to how the current international exchange crisis
will be unwound, a reference to international developments is suggested
for all three alternatives.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of
[DEL: possible domestic credit market and]international develop-
ments, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and
money market conditions that will support [DEL: somewhat-slower]
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead [DEL: than
occurred on] AT ABOUT THE average RATES OF in the past 12
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of
possible domestic credit market and international develop-
ments, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money
market conditions that will support somewhat slower growth
in monetary aggregates over the months ahead than occurred
on average in the past 6 months.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of
possible domestic credit market and international developments,
the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market
conditions that will support [DEL: somewhat] SUBSTANTIALLY slower
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead than
occurred on average in the past 6 months.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
MARCH 16, 1973
I -
PERIOD
------ *----------*--------
MONTHLY LEVELS-SMILLIONSI
------------------------
ANNUAL RATES OF CHANGE
---------------- I
MONTHLYI
- -* I
WEEKLY LEVELS-SILLIONS
-*-----.----------*--
MAR. 7
S I
"-"----------------- -------------------- ***-*****-*-*---******----------------------------------
"ttrHVES AVATLAPLE FOR PHWVAITL UNMPNK DEPOSITS IIAGGREGATE RESERVES I REQUIRED RESERVFS
------------------------------------------------------ ... II-------------------------------------------------
St45ONALLY ADJUSTD I '07 SEASONAtLY ADJUSTtn II SEASONALLY ADJUSTFD
-------------------------- I---------------I--------------t--------------- - ----
ACTUAL I ACTUAL II NON- I TIME AND GOV T.
AND I ANM II TOTAL BORROWED I PRIVATE NON- AND
PROJCTOED PROJCTED I REStRVfS RESERVES I DERANO DEPOSITS INTFIRRN
- (1 I ?1 II 3- (1--- IS) -1 (--7---
(1) 1(P7 If 13) 14) 1 I5) I6) (7)
( 11.0)
( 5.0)
( 6.5) ( -2.5)
( -5.01
( 2*313
I -4.5
I 36.0)
?.47'
2.4*6
-- - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - -- - - - - - - -- - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - --------------------------------
NOTE: OATA SeIoN 11 PUktNTMESLS AHE CURF.*T PHOJfCTIONS.
1/ AT ThI FOMC MEE
-// . Eq CLNT.
-- - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - ------"------------------
TALE 1
RANK rFFERVES
TABLE 2 STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
*---*-----*--------
MONETARY AGGREGATES MARCH 16, 1973
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED)
I MUNEY SUPPLY I ADJUSTFI II U.S. I T11E AND SAVINGS DLPOSTTS I NONDEPOSIT
I NARROW I HROAD I CkEtIT II bOVT. I I OTHER I I SOURCES OF
PEkIOD I (I1) I 1(21 I PROXY II DEPOSITS I TOTAL I THAN CD S I CD S I FUNDS
MONTHLY LEVELS-HILLO I I II I I I I
--------------- I I II I
I 
I
II I ) I I
PERCENT ANNUAL 6bOWTH I II I I
-------------------- I I I I I
QU TEHLY I II
*-*****-* I I I (I
II I I I
WEEKLY LEVELS-$PILLIONS I I I II
-.... --- I 1 I I I I I
It I I I
---------------------- ----"-------- - - - - - - -- -- - - - -- - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
NOTIJ DATA SHU-N IN PARENTFSES ARE CURHENT PROJFCTIONS. P - PRELLINARY
PE - PARTIALLY ESTIMATED
ANNkUAl NAl (IF CANl F O'HFl TP a T THOSE FOR THE PAST ARE ROUNDED TO THE NEAREST HALF PFRCENT.
----------------------------------------- -------- --- -------------- - ------ - -----
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MARCH 16, 1973
Table 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations 1_/ Daily Average Reserve Cffect 2/ in reserve categories A Target
Bills Coupon Agency RP'
s
3 Total Open Market A Member Other 4/ req. res. against available res.5/ available
& Accept. Issues .Issues Net - Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) reserves5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
Mar. -45
Apr.
/ Reserves to support private nonbank deposits. Target change for February and March reflects the mid-point of the target range adopted at the
February 13, 1973 FOMC meeting. Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with the mid-points of
target ranges that were adopted during the moeth.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
March 16.1973
Table 4
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK RESERVES
Millions of Dollars
TT.S. Govt. Security Other Security
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Mb Bank Reserve PPeriod Is Coupon Issues Corporate Municipal Excess oi rowings Net Free Basic Reserve DeficTt
Bonds _ onds Reserves at FRB Reserves 8 New York 38 Other
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
*1,683
*2,191
*1,976
*1,969
* 190
* 11
* -73
p
1,491p
Government Security dealer trading positions are on a commitment basis. Trading positions, which exclude Treasury bills financed by repurchase
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings available for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions
are debt issues still in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserve
less net Federal funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which
are Friday figures.
------ --- -
* STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL ** Includes $132 million of Washington Metropolitan Transit Authority bonds.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MARCH 16, 1973
Table 5
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per Cent
dreaur biars
90-day I 1-year
Pa er
S -t r ,
Aa lit lity
New Recently
Tassa Offerd,
Municipal
Bond Buyer
" L ong-tm
U S. Cov't.
FNMA Auction
Yields
weekly date is the mid-point of 
l
he .alcndir week over which data are Oversaged, Calumn 9 is a one-day quote for the lnursday following tie end of
the statement week. Column 11 gives FNMA auction date for the Monday preceding the ond of the statement week. The FNMA nact ion yield as the yield
in the bi-weekly auction for short-term forward cnmmitments for Government underwritten mortgages.
Period Federal Funds
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov.
eec
n1 t I 1 I f I T
