Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
August 16, 1974
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) August 16, 1974
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 increased at about a 1 per cent annual rate in July, but
preliminary data for early August suggest a pick-up in growth, For the two
months together, M1 growth is expected to average around 3 per cent, in the
lower part of the Committee's range of tolerance. 1/ Growth in M2 has been
closer to the mid-point of its range of tolerance, as time deposits other
than money market CD's have been rising about as projected. RPD is now ex-
pected to expand at a rate in the lower part of its tolerance range,
reflecting a shortfall relative to projection of CD growth in addition
to the weakness of M1.
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
in July-Aug. Target Period
Latest Estimates
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates Range of Old Revised
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance series series
M1  2-6 2.8 3.2
M2 4½-7½ 5.7 6.2
RPD's 8½ -11¾ 9.4 9.4
Memo:
Federal funds rate 11-13 Avg. for statement
(per cent per annum) week ending
July 17 13.04
July 31 12.29
Aug. 14 12.02
(2) Savings flows to nonbank thrift institutions in July were
quite weak. On a seasonally adjusted basis.mutual savings banks experienced
a net deposit outflow, while deposit growth at S&L's was small. Data so
far available for August suggest a continuance of the relatively weak
performance at non-bank thrift institutions, no doubt reflecting the
bunching of security offerings attractive to small investors. These
other alternatives have included variable rate securities issued by bank
holding companies and other corporations designed to appeal to individuals,
and new high coupon Treasury issues offered in the mid-August refunding.
(3) The Federal funds market has eased appreciably since the
last FOMC meeting. In the past two weeks, funds have been trading at rates
within a 12 to 12¼ per cent range, about 100 basis points below the average
established during the week of the July FOMC meeting and about 150 basis
points under the peak level reached in the first week of July. There has
apparently been some lessening in banks' reluctance to borrow at the Federal
Reserve since the late June - early July period of peak money market tensions.
Member bank borrowing (exclusive of emergency borrowing) has been about $200
million higher on average in the past four statement weeks as compared with
the previous four. From mid-July to mid-August total borrowing averaged
$3.3 billion, of which $1.5 billion represented emergency borrowing (almost
all of which was at Franklin National).
(4) Private short-term interest rates have moved down concurrently
with the Federal funds rate, though by smaller amounts. Key rates, such as
those on 90-day commercial paper and bank CD's are now about ¼ to ½ of a
percentage point below their levels at the time of the July meeting. Yields
on new corporate and municipal bonds have also edged lower over this period.
New issues have been distributed more readily, partly because the sizes of some
issues have been scaled down and the maturities shortened.
(5) In contrast to private rates, yields on Treasury and Federal
agency securities have risen significantly during the intermeeting period.
Yields on Treasury coupon issues have risen about 20 to 30 basis points
and bill rates--which had been depressed relative to the general level of
market rates--have advanced about one percentage point. A series of
Treasury financing operations which added significantly to the floating
supply of issues, together with anticipation of further bill financing,
were mainly responsible for the upward pressure on rates. Market
disappointment over the failure of Arab countries to invest their oil
revenues in Treasury special issues has also added to the upward pressure.
(6) The three new coupon issues offered in the Treasury's mid-
August refunding have been well received. In view of their high coupon
rates, the issues were particularly attractive to individual investors.
As a result, half of the amount auctioned was awarded to noncompetitive
bidders, a record participation for this type of bidding. All three
new issues are currently trading at modest premiums above their average
auction prices. Dealers have not pressed their awards on the market
and still hold nearly three-fourths of the $1,050 million they were
originally awarded.
(7) The table on page 5 shOws (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various
recent time periods. Appendix table III compares money supply growth rates
computed on a quarterly-average basis with those computed on a last-month-
of-quarter basis. Projected figures on the two bases are shown in
Average Past Past Past
of Past Three Twelve Six Three Past
Calendar Years Months Months Months Month
Concepts of Money (Revised series)
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
commercial banks 2/ 12.8 11.9 13,6 10.5 13.1
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Nonbank commercial paper .2 .6 -. 2 .3 .1
Prospective developments
(8) Three alternative sets of specifications are summarized
below for Committee consideration (with more detailed figures shown in
the table on p.6a).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Targets (3rd & 4th qtrs,
combined)
M1  6¼ 5¼ 4¼
M2  7½ 6½ 5¼
Credit proxy 7½ 6½ 6
Associated ranges for
August-September
M1 5½-7½ 4¾-6¾ 4¼-6¼
M2  6¼-8¼ 5¼-7¼ 5-7
RPD 8¾-10¾ 7¾-9¾ 6¾-8¾
Federal funds rate range 9¾-11¾ 10¾-12¾ 11¾-13¾
(inter-meeting period)
(9) Alternative B continues the 5¼ per cent annual growth rate
for M1 over the second half of 1974 adopted by the Committee at its last
meeting. Because of the downward revision in the level of the
money stock as a result of benchmarking to the April call report,
this 5¼ per cent rate of growth would lead to a level of M1 by the
end of this year that is $1.4 billion lower than that implicit in
the growth path adopted at the last meeting. Alternative A encompasses
a more rapid 6¼ per cent rate of growth for M1 over the July-December
period, while Alternative C comprises specifications that might
Alternative Longer-Run Targets for Key Monetary
M1 M2
July
Aug.
Sept.
Alt. A
Alt. B
Alt. C
Aug.
Sept.
July
Aug.
Sept.
Aug.
Sept.
Adjusted Credit
Alt. A Alt. B
Proxy
Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B
Rates of Growth
Alt. A
Alt. C
Total Reserves
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A
Alt. A
Alt. B
RPD
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. C
be considered if the Committee wishes to aim for a lower rate of growth
than previously desired for the monetary aggregates over the second half
of the year. (The three alternatives are depicted in the chart on the
following page).
(10) Under alternative B, and given the recent slowing in
money growth, the staff expects that the Federal funds rate may decline
a little further between now and the next meeting--centering around
to more than a quite modest downward adjustment in other market rates.
Demand pressures on credit markets are expected to be fairly well
sustained in the weeks ahead, as a sizable volume of corporate, municipal,
and Federal agency offerings come to market. The Treasury will probably
borrow another $2 billion or so of cash in early September, possibly
through tax bills, over and above ongoing additions to the weekly bill
auctions. While this flow of new securities would work to limit down-
ward rate adjustments, a sizable expectational decline in rates could
take place if a further downdrift in the funds rate were accompanied by
continued slow growth in the monetary aggregates and adverse business news.
(11) Alternative A contemplates a significant further decline
in the funds rate over the next few weeks, which would undoubtedly spur
a sharp drop of interest rates generally. Alternative C, on the other
hand, envisions a return of the Federal funds rate to the 13 per cent
area, and this would be accompanied by a re-emergence of market tensions
and generally rising interest rates. Dealers in U.S. Government securities
would, under the circumstances, attempt to liquidate positions enlarged
in the wake of recent Treasury financings.
MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATH
RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- -- *c - 285
- - - -
ORIGINAL SERIES. S
ROWTH A=6'/% GROWTH JUNE TO DEC.
O JUNE '74 5.3% B=514% GROWTH JUNE TO DEC.
C=41/% GROWTH JUNE TO DEC.
REVISED SERIES
O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D
1973 1974
(12) Under the Federal funds rates contemplated in any of the
alternatives, the unusually low growth rate of M1 in July would not be
expected to persist in the months ahead, assuming the staff projections
of nominal GNP growth are correct. Taking account of the strengthening
indicated by fragmentary early-August data, M1 would be expected to grow
in a 4¾-6¾ per cent range in the August-September period under alternative B.
(13) Expansion in time deposits other than money market CD's
at banks is expected to slow a little further over the months ahead under
alternative B. While the Federal funds rate and other short-term rates
may decline somewhat, the increased availability of instruments attractive
to small savers (such as variable-rate debentures, money market mutual funds,
and Treasury and Federal agency issues) is likely to lead to continued
substitution of such instruments for Regulation Q-constrained time and
savings accounts. Growth in savings accounts at nonbank thrift institutions
is expected to remain quite weak under alternative B, thus continuing sub-
stantial constraint on the supply of private mortgage funds. Growth in
consumer-type time and savings at both banks and nonbank thrift institutions
would be even more constrained under alternative C, whereas growth in
such savings would begin to recover under alternative A.
(14) Business loan growth at banks is likely to be less strong
over the next few months than it was during the first seven months of
the year, partly in reflection of a projected low rate of inventory
accumulation and partly as a result of tight bank lending policies. Growth
in money market CD's also is expected to be at a more moderate pace in the
months ahead. In these circumstances, bank credit growth is also expected
to slow over the latter half of the year.
(15) Demands for bank credit could be enlarged, however, should
investors become more selective and should liquidity pressure become more
pervasive. Under such circumstances, many borrowers, particularly those
of less-than-prime quality, would be forced to fall back on bank lines.
While borrowers' ability to float debt in the open market has improved
since early July, yield spreads reflecting risk differentials generally
remain wider than normal. Thus, markets and investor attitudes continue
to be quite sensitive to shocks to confidence that might be generated
by such factors as failures, or near-failures, of financial institutions
or business firms.
Proposed directive
(16) Presented below ate three alternative formulations
for the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed
in the preceding section. In all three alternatives, it is proposed
to delete the reference to Treasury financing because the quarterly
refunding announced on July 31 has been completed.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of {DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury refunding and of] developments in domestic
and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions [DEL: that would
moderate] CONSISTENT WITH SOMEWHAT FASTER growth in monetary
aggregates [DEL: over the months ahead] THAN HAS PREVAILED OVER RECENT
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury refunding and of] developments in domestic
and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions [DEL: that would]
CONSISTENT WITH moderate growth in monetary aggregates over
the months ahead.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury refunding and of] developments in domestic
and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions [DEL: that would
moderate] CONSISTENT WITH RELATIVELY SLOW growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead.
(17) In the event the Committee wishes to couch the
operational paragraph of the directive in terms of money market
conditions, the specifications of alternative B might be associated
with language indicating that "...the Committee seeks to maintain money
market conditions in the neighborhood of the restrictive conditions
recently prevailing, provided that the monetary aggregates appear to
be growing at rates within the specified ranges of tolerance."
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
NARROW MONEY SUPPLY M1 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
BROADER MONEY SUPPLY M2
I I I I
M J ,3
1974
A S
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
8/16/74
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- 550
TOTAL RESERVES
*Break in series, Actual Level of Total Reserves After Changes in Reserve PRequirements
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
BANK RESERVES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
AUGUST 16, 1974
II AGGREGATE RESERVES I REQUIRED RESERVES
RESERVES AVAILABLE FOR --------- ---------------------------------
PRIVATE NONPANK DEPOSITS 1I SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
II1----------- ---------- --
---------------------- TOTAL NONBORROWED I PRIVATE OTHER CD'S AND GOV'T AND
PERIOD SEAS AOJ I NON SEAS ADJ I RESERVES RESERVES I DEMAND TTME DEP NON DEP INTERBANK
I (1) (2) 11 13) (4) (5) (6) (7) (81
MONTHLY LEVELS-SMILLIONSI
-------------- I
ANNUAL RATES OF CHANGE
MONTHLY I
1974--MAY
JUN.
JUL.
AUG.
WEEKLY LEVELS-SMILLIONS
AUG. 7
14 I
( -1.6)
S 6.7)
( 8,9581
( 5,7591
( 1,840)
-- - - - - - - - - - - - -- - ---------------- - ---------- - - ------ - - -- - ----------- - ---- - -------- --- --- ------
TABLE 1
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
AUGUST 16, 1974MONETARY AGGREGATES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTSED)
I MNEY SUPPLY I ADJUSTED I1 U.S. I TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS ( NONDEPOSIT
I NARR3W ( BROAD I CREDIT Ft GOVT. I I OTHER I I SOURCES OF
PERIDO I (Ml) I IM21 I PROXY 11 DEPOSITS I TOTAL I THAN CD S I CD S I FUNDS
I
MONTHLY LEVELS-SBILLTONSI
DFRCCNT ANNUAL GROWTH
OUARTERLY I
lo74--IST OTR.
2N6 OTR.
MONTHLY
- ----- I
JUN.
JUL.
AUG.
WEEKLY LEVFLS-S*BLLTINS
--- - -----------------
JUL. 3
10
AUG. 7 P
14 PEC
(8I(1 I 12) f31 (4) (5 161
(2R2.3) (603.31 (489.6) I 5.01 (406.6 f(321.1)
I I )) I I
I I II I F
I I if I
I I II F F
F f I F I
I I II I
( 2.8 I ( 5.71 I ( .1 I 9.9) f 8.5)
I I II I I
I II f I
F I II I
I I II F I
S81.2
83.3
85.4
-I--~~~~~~~~~~~~I~ ~- -- W~-I-- I- ------ -- --------- ----- ---- ---- - ------ --------- - ---
TABLE 2
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
August 16,1974
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations 1/ Daily Average Reserve Effect 2/ A in reserve categories ATarget
Bills Coupon Agency RP's Open Market zN Member Other 4/ req. res. against available res. 5/ available
& Accept. Issues Issues Net 3/ TOTAL Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) reserves 5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
I/ Represents change in System's portfolio from end-of-period to end-of-period; includes redemptions in regular bill auctions.
21 Represents change in daily average level for preceding period.
3/ Includes matched sale-purchase transactions as well as RP's.
4/ Sum of changes in vault cash, currency in circulation, Treasury operations, F.R. float, gold and foreign accounts, and other F.R. accounts.
5/ Reserves to support private nohbank deposits. Target change for July and Aug. reflects the target adopted at the July 16, 1974 FOMC meeting.
Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
AUGUST 16, 1974
TABLE 4
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND, BANK POSITIONS
Millions of dollars
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Feb.
Mar,
Apr.
May
June
U.S. Govt. Security
Dealer Positions
Bills Coupon Issues
* 457
* 284
* -214
* -178
* 772
Dealer Positions
Corporate
B A
Member Bank Reserve Positions
Excess** Borrowing at FRB** Basic Reserve Deficit
3a nt.hers
l_ . on s L s o s 11 Reserve0 J 4 .. 9 -hers
(4)
- 6,106
- 4,940
- 5,355
- 6,090
- 8,186
- 9,793
- 9,555
- 9,361
- 9,347
- 8,966
- 9,758
- 8,957
- 9.93
3
p
- 9,853p
Government security dealer trading positions are on a commitment basis. Trading positions, which exclude Treasury bills financed by repurchase agree-
mehts maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings available for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions are debt
issues still in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserve less net Federal
funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are Friday figures.
* STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
** Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
I
I
- ------ --
m..r^ O IT .. 7----I.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
AUGUST 16, 1974
TABLE 5
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per cent
Short-Term _ ____________ Long-Term_____. ___
Treasury Blls 90-119 Day CD's New Issue-NYC Aaa Utility U.S. Government FNMA
period Commercial New Recently Municipal (10-yr. Constant Auction
Federal Funds 90-Day 1-Year paper 160-89 Day 90-119 Day Issue Offered Bond Buyer . Matur ity) Yilds
1973 -- High
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Api .
May
June
Daily -Aug. 8
15
Weekly data for columns 1 to 4 are statement week averages of daily data. Columns 5 and 6 are one-day Wednesday quotes. For columns 7, 8 and 10 the
weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day quote for Thursday following the end 
of the
statement week. Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monay preceding the end of the statement week. The FNMA auction yield is the average yield
in hi-weekly auction for short-term forward commitments for Government underwritten mortgages.
August 16, 1974
August 16, 1974
APPENDIX TABLE II
RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
RESERVES . MONEY STOCK MEASURES _S tS6 _ IhIT . OTHER _
Available Total Time Thrift
to Support M1 Adj. Loans & Other Insti- Non- U.S.
Non- Pvt. Pvt. Credit Invest- Total Than tution Dep. Gov't
Period Totall borrowed Deposits Total De. M2 M3 Pro ment Time Depo's und Demand
ANNUALLY:
Dec. 1970
Dec. 1971
Dec. 1972
XONTHL:
1
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
July p
WEEKLY:
1974--April 3
May I
8
June 5
12
Aug. 
7
C4) I C5)
Revised
(6)
Set
(7)
tesi a s
(8) 1 (9)
(10) (11)
Revised Series
commercial paper are included beginning October 1, 1970. Adjusted credit proxy includes mainly total member bank deposits
subject to reserve requirements, bank-related commercial paper and Eurodollar borrowings of U.S. banks. Weekly data are
daily averages for statement weeks. Monthly data are daily averages except for nonbank commercial paper figures which are for
last day of month. Weekly data are not available for M3, total loans and investments and thrift institution deposits.
p - Preliminary.
