Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
July 12, 1974
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) July 12, 1974
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Following an increase in M1 at a 7.3 per cent annual rate
in June, growth in July now appears likely to be at a rate a little
over 5 per cent. M1 growth for the June-July target period thus is
estimated at about 6¼ per cent, well within the range of tolerance
set by the Committee at its last meeting. M2 growth is also expected
to decelerate between June and July, with the June growth rate at 9½ per
cent and the July projection at about 7 per cent. The 2-month growth
rate is expected to be about 8¼ per cent, a little below the top of the
range of tolerance. RPD growth, on the other hand, is projected at
about a 15 per cent rate for the 2-month target period, above the top
of its range of tolerance, as CD growth was stronger than expected.
Growth of Monetary
in June-July
Aggregates and RPD's
Target Period
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates
(Growth at SAAR in per cent
Range of
Tolerance
Latest
Estimates
RPD's 10-13
Memo:
Federal funds rate
(per cent per annum)
Avg. for statement
week ending
(2) Growth in the bank credit proxy over June and July is
expected to average close to 10 per cent, a less rapid expansion than in
other recent months. Business loan expansion, while weak in early June,
spurted from mid-June to early July, particularly at large banks. An
important share of this borrowing reflects a shift of financing demands
to banks that would ordinarily have been met in the commercial paper market
or by the issuance of corporate securities. Some firms that lack the
highest credit rating have been prevented from tapping the commercial
paper market because of investor unwillingness to buy their paper. In the
market for corporate and municipal securities a number of issues--especially
by public utilities--were canceled due to rapidly rising interest rates
and reluctance on the part of underwriters to make bids in the atmosphere
of rate uncertainty. In this environment, there has been some market
discussion of possible capital controls, which may have also contributed
to recent borrowing at banks.
(3) In June deposit growth at nonbank thrift institutions
(including interest credited) strengthened to a seasonally adjusted
annual rate of 7½ per cent from the depressed April-May level. This
improvement is probably temporary; partial data for early July indicate
large outflows at both New York savings banks and large California S&L's
following the mid-year interest crediting.
(4) Most short- and long-term interest rates have risen
sharply since the last meeting of the Committee. In the short-term
area commercial paper, CD's, and bankers' acceptances increased by
around 1 percentage point to levels ranging from 12¾-12¾ per cent in
the 3-month area. Bank prime rates generally have been increased to
short-term rates. In contrast, short-term Treasury bill rates have
declined somewhat on balance, for three main reasons: the prime quality
characteristic of bills, active demands from foreign and small investors,
and recent large seasonal debt repayment by the Treasury. Corporate
and municipal bond yields have increased by about 90 basis points since
mid-June; even larger increases in these rates were forestalled by
cancelations and withdrawals of new issues. Treasury bond rates were
subject to much less upward pressure. As rates have adjusted upwards,
the ability of a number of borrowers with less than the highest quality
credit ratings to obtain funds in accustomed financial markets has been
impaired--including some industrial and real estate commercial paper
issuers, utilities, and bank holding companies. In addition, a few
regional commercial banks are experiencing problems in rolling over CD's,
especially in the national market, and some banks are reported to be
having difficulty placing their acceptances. Thus, yield spreads
representing risk differentials have widened markedly.
(5) During the first statement week following the June Committee
meeting the Federal funds rate edged up slightly to 11.97 per cent.
Thereafter, the funds rate jumped to record highs, averaging 13.55 per
cent in the week of July 3 and 13.34 per cent in the week of July 10. The
rise in the funds rate was influenced by churning around the mid-year
statement date and the July 4 holiday, uncertainties in both domestic and
international financial markets, the increasingly sensitive state of
CD and commercial paper markets, and perhaps a desire on the part of
lenders to obtain a risk premium on some of their placements. In this
environment, banks became more cautious in managing their money
positions, and some city banks--despite the high cost of Federal funds--
apparently wanted to stay out of the discount window in order to
establish a clean record in the case of future borrowing needs should
liquidity pressures grow still more intense. The reluctance of banks to
borrow at the window became evident in the week ending July 10, when member
bank borrowing, other than emergency borrowing, declined to a level of
$1.3 billion despite the record Federal funds rate. Excess reserves in
early July also were somewhat higher than they have been recently,
although this was in large part influenced by statement date window-
(6) At the time of the telephone conference of the FOMC on
July 5, chances seemed good that the funds rate would recede with a
continuation of normal reserve-supplying operations. On the basis of
the discussion at that meeting, the Desk continued to resist the high
Federal funds rate without injecting an unusually large amount of reserves.
Subsequently, however, the funds rate remained well above 13 per cent,
and a majority of the members concurred in the Chairman's recommendation
of July 10 that System operations be undertaken promptly with a view
to reducing the average funds rate to 13 per cent, on the understanding
that the rate would be permitted to decline to the neighborhood of 12
per cent should money market factors work in that direction. Despite
large reserve-supplying operations, the funds rate remained about, 13½ per
cent on Thursday and Friday, but if reserve projections turn out to be
right it should decline somewhat after the weekend.
(7) The table on the next page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various recent
time periods. Appendix table III compares money supply growth rates
computed on a quarterly-average basis with those computed on a last-month-
of-quarter basis. Projected figures on the two bases are shown in
Average Past Past Past
of Past Three Twelve Six three Past
Calendar Years Months Months Months Month
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Nonbank commercial paper .2 .5 .3 -.2 -.1
Prospective developments
(8) Specifications for alternative suggested policy stances
are summarized below for Committee consideration (with more detailed
figures shown in the table on p. 7a).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Targets (3rd & 4th qtrs.
combined)
Associated ranges for
M2  6½-8½ 5½-7½ 
4¾-6¾
RPD 10½-12½ 9¾-ll¾ 9-11
Federal funds rate range
(9) Of the alternatives presented, alternative B represents
continuation of the longer-run target path for M1 adopted at the last
Committee meeting. In that alternative, the annual growth rate for the
second half of 1974 is 5½ per cent. This is slightly above the 5¼ per
cent rate adopted at the last meeting simply because the June level for
M1 turned out to be slightly lower than estimated at that time; the level
set for December is unchanged from the previous meeting.
(10) The specifications of alternative B would contemplate a
Federal funds rate in an 11-13 per cent range between now and the next
Committee meeting, and M1 growth for July-August in a 4-6 per cent annual
MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATH
RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
-- 1 - 285
. ... .***/
.... ....- *--*....***
_________________________ I
D J F M A M J
1974
J A S 0 N D
Alternative Longer-Run Targets for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1
Alt. A Alt. B
July
Aug.
Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Rates of Growth
Adjusted Credit
Alt, A Alt. B
Months .
July
Aug.
Pro y
Alt. C
Total Reserves
Alt, A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. C
Alt. C
rate range. The funds rate centers on 12 per cent, which would represent
an easing from the money market conditions prevailing over the past two
weeks. Such a funds rate would probably lead to some relaxation in
pressures on short- and long-term markets, partly because investors and
borrowers would come to believe that monetary policy was a little less
restrictive than had appeared to be the case in the most recent weeks.
Any drop in market rates is likely to be modest in size and short-lived,
however, given the inflationary environment, continued strong credit
demands, and the forthcoming Treasury, Federal Financing Bank, and Agency
financings (both to raise cash and to refund maturing issues). Large
demands for U.S. securities by foreign official accounts, of course, could
modify this rate outlook appreciably in particular market sectors.
(11) On July 31, the Treasury will announce the terms on which
it will refund $4.4 billion of publicly held securities maturing in mid-
August. A modest amount of new cash may also be raised in early August,
and looking ahead to September, the Treasury will probably have to raise
about $3 billion of additional new cash. Private credit demands are also
expected to be substantial in both short- and long-term markets. With
markets increasingly cautious--and yield spreads between low and high
quality issues widening further--a sizable part of the market demand
may be diverted to banks as less than prime grade borrowers are forced
to fall back on credit lines. Thus, pressures on banks are likely to
remain intense.
(12) The ability of banks to finance additional loan demands
is expected to be relatively limited, though. With growth in demand
deposits and consumer-type time deposits constrained, banks will be
under pressure to issue new CD's. However, except for the prime names,
market receptivity to CD's is in some question. In general, the recent
concern with liquidity exposure, on the part of both banks and investors,
will probably reduce the pace at which new CD's will be offered. As a
result, bank credit growth under alternative B is projected at around an
in the first half of the year. This rate of expansion would probably mean
that banks will have to cut back sharply on acquisitions of securities,
particularly municipal and Federal agency issues. Thus, interest rates
in intermediate and longer-term markets would likely come under renewed
upward pressure as time goes on. The bank prime loan rate would probably
also rise somewhat further.
(13) Under alternative B pressures on thrift institutions would
be expected to be somewhat greater than during the second quarter. Growth
in deposits at mutuals and savings and loan associations is expected to
drop slightly to about a 3½ per cent annual rate, making no allowance for
Citicorp and similar issues--the timing, terms, and volume of which are
still unknown. Rough estimates based on the terms originally announced
suggested that about half the funds for the $850 million Citicorp issue
would come out of thrift institutions, about a quarter out of banks, and
a quarter from other market instruments. For a one-month period, this
would represent a reduction in deposits at thrift institutions by 1½ per
cent at an annual rate and in consumer-type time deposits at banks by
¾ per cent at an annual rate.
(13) Alternatives A and C specify faster and slower rates of
growth in monetary aggregates, respectively, than alternative B.
Alternative C contemplates little change from the Federal funds rate
that has come to prevail in recent weeks, and this would be expected to
lead to a slowing in the growth rate of M1 to around 4 per cent over the
second half of this year. The market is currently in process of adjusting
to a funds rate in the 13 per cent area, although the process of
adjustment does not appear to be complete. Under this alternative,
interest rates would likely rise further in the weeks immediately ahead,
and would rise by more than under alternative B over the longer run.
Between now and the next Committee meeting, the 3-month commercial paper
rate might move up to the 13 per cent area, the CD rate would adjust
upward, and upward pressures on the prime loan rate would be very strong
given these still higher market rates. Inflows to thrift institutions
would be further curtailed, and the mortgage market--apart from Govern-
ment support--would come under even greater constraint than at present.
(14) Under alternative A--which contemplates M1 growth at
a 7 per cent annual rate over the second half of the year--the Federal
funds rate would be expected to decline to around 11 per cent between
now and the next Committee meeting, probably stimulating a fairly marked
decline of interest rates over a broad maturity spectrum. Interest
rate declines would be intensified in the short run as market attitudes
with respect to monetary policy shift and as Government security dealers
begin to cover short positions. However, given the size of prospective
borrowing demands and the concern over inflation, rate declines would
not be likely to cumulate. For example, recently postponed municipal and
corporate offerings would probably be re-offered shortly under the circum-
stances, and this would tend to moderate downward rate pressures. The
position of banks and thrift institutions would ease under this alternative,
though remaining on the tight side as compared with historical experience,
since an 11 per cent Federal funds rate implies a structure of market
rates still quite attractive relative to present Regulation Q ceilings.
(15) The possibility of a credit crunch in financial markets
cannot be ignored, especially under alternative C. Such a development
could be triggered by a series of failures of financial or industrial
concerns, here or abroad. This could lead to sharply higher rates and a
drying up of credit flows in markets where there is perceived to be
heightened credit risk and to lower rates in safe markets, such as the
Treasury securities market. Many borrowers would not be able to obtain
credit, and some bank and other institutional lenders would not be able
to tap their usual sources of funds. Under the circumstances, remedial
action by the System would be expected, either through the market or
through the discount window. As a result, whatever specifications are
adopted by the Committee would very likely have to be superseded, at
least temporarily, by other operating criteria. It should be recognized
in any event that the various specifications presented are more uncertain
than usual since the situation in financial markets and the economy is
unprecedented in the postwar period.
Proposed directive language
(16) Presented below are three alternative formulations
for the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended
to correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed
in the preceding section. For all three alternatives, it is proposed
to include a reference to Treasury financing because the regular August
refunding will be announced on July 31.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of THE
FORTHCOMING TREASURY REFUNDING AND OF developments in domestic
and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to
[DEL: maintain about the prevailing restrictive] ACHIEVE BANK RESERVE
AND money market conditions [DEL: provided that] CONSISTENT WITH
GROWTH IN the monetary aggregates AT ABOUT THE RATES PREVAILING
OVER RECENT MONTHS [DEL: appear to be growing at rates within the
specified ranges of tolerance].
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of THE
FORTHCOMING TREASURY REFUNDING AND OF developments in domestic
and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to
[DEL: maintain the prevailing restrictive] ACHIEVE BANK RESERVE
AND money market conditions [DEL: provided that the] THAT WOULD
MODERATE GROWTH IN monetary aggregates OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD
[DEL: appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges of
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of THE
FORTHCOMING TREASURY REFUNDING AND OF developments in domestic
and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to
[DEL: maintain about the prevailing restrictive] ACHIEVE BANK RESERVE
AND money market conditions [DEL: provided that the] THAT WOULD SLOW
APPRECIABLY THE GROWTH IN monetary aggregates OVER THE MONTHS
AHEAD [DEL: appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges
of tolerance].
(17) In the event that the Committee again wishes to couch
the operational paragraph of the directive in terms of prevailing money
market conditions, the specifications of alternative C might be associated
with the language used in the directive adopted at the last meeting--
namely, that ". . .the Committee seeks to maintain about the prevailing
restrictive money market conditions, provided that the monetary aggregates
appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges of tolerance."
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
NARROW MONEY SUPPLY M1 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
BROADER MONEY SUPPLY M2
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
BANK RESERVES JULY 12, 1974
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
II AGGREGATE RESERVES I REOUIRED RESERVES
RFSERVES AVAILABLE FOR -----------------------------------------
S PRIVATE NONBANK DEPOSITS I SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
SII----------------------------------------
I--------------------- II TOTAL NONBORROWED I PRIVATE OTHER CD'S AND GOV'T AND
PERIOD SEAS ADJ I NON SEAS ADJ II RESERVES RESERVES I PFMAND TIME DEP NCN DEP INTERBANK
(1) I (21 II 13) (4) I 15) 161 (7) (8)
MONTHLY LFVELS-SMILLIONSI
- ------------- I
1974--APR. I
MAY
JUN.
JUL.
ANNUAL RATES OF CHANGE
---- ---------- ------ I
MONTHLY:
1974--APR.
MAY
JUN.
JUL.
WFEKLY LEVELS-SMILLInNS
I 22.0)
( 14.3)
I 7.7)
S 2.8)
( 5,6141
( 2,265)
( 10.1)
- ---- ,-,,----- - -- - --------- ------ - ----- L -- ----- I------~
NOTE: DATA SHOWN IN PARENTHESES ARE CURRENT PROJECTIONS. AT THE FOMC MEETING OF JUNE 16,1974
THE COMMITTEE AGREED ON A RPD RANGE OF 10.0 TP 13.5 PERCENT FOR THE JUNE-JULY PERIOD.
TABLE 1
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
JULY 12, 1974MONETARY AGGREGATES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED)
I MONEY SUPPLY I ADJUSTED II U.S. I TIME AN SAVINGS DEPOSITS I NONDEPOSIT
I NARROW ( BROAD I CREDIT II GOVT. I I OTHER I I SOURCES OF
I I(M1 I (M2) t PROXY II DEPOSITS I TOTAL I THAN CD S I CD S I FUNDS
(1) I (2) I
I I I
MONTHLY LEVELS-SBILLIONS
- --- I
PEPCENT ANNUAL GROWT I
------------- --- I 1
OUARTERLY
----- r I
MONTHLY
------ I I I
JUN.-JUL. I 6.7 ( 8.?)
WEEKLY LEVELS-SBILLINS
----------------------- I I I
I I
(485.61 ( 2.4) (404.8) (319.0) (85.9) (10.4)
II I I I I
II I I I 1
(I I I I I
( 6.5) I (14.4) ( 9.1)
II I I I I
( o.P I (15.4) I (10.3) 1
II I I I
II I I I
II I I I I
---------------------------------- ----- ----- - ---------- - --- ------------- -- - ----- - --- --------- ----------
----------------------------------- - -------- - --------- --- I--- - -- --- - -------- - ---------- --- ------------
------1------------------- -------------- ---- -- - --- --- - ------ - ----- --------------- ~------------------------
--- ------------------------------ ------------ ------ ---------------------- -----------------
TABLE 2
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
July 12, 1974
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
- - - Er a~ - t_ r _---
April
'Tay
July
Aug.
hills
A .-._
Open Market Operations 1/
AgencyCoupon RP's
rI-* 1 / TrVrTA
Daily Average Reserve Effect 2/
A Member
BD «1 k A..,-- i
Open Market Other 4/
F rt*- -
Z. in reserve categories.
req. res. againsq available res.5/J
d ~ ~ a .
, A ccept. , l gues I __ gues I si . U L1 pe - n s I I iJ , a B v -\ / a14.1 ireslgves
STarget
available
F.R. accounts.
L974 FOMC meeting.
uring the month.
Represents change in System's portfolio from end-of-period to end-of-period; includes redemptions in regular bill auctions.
Represents change in daily average level for preceding period.
Inclides matched sale-purchase transactions as well as RP's.
Sum of changes in vault cash, currency in circulation, Treasury operations, F.R. float, gold and foreign accounts, and other
Restrves to support private nonhank deposits. Target change for June and July reflects the target adopted at the June 18,
Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted d
- - L .I _L Irl r I1T
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
July 12, 1974
Table 4
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
Millions of dollars
U.S. Govt. Security
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Member ,Bank Reserve Positions
Corporate Municipal Excess** Borrowing at FRB** Basic. Reserve Deficit
Period Bills Coupon Issues Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Others
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings available for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer posi-
tions are debt issues still in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal
Reserve less net Federal funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in
syndicate which are Friday figures.
* STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
** Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
JULY 12, 1974
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per cent
__ Short-Term
July
Aug
Sept.
Oct.
Nov
Feb.
Mar
Apr
May
June
Daily - July 5
Federal Funds
Treasury Bills
CD's New lssue-NYC
*11'- - oeTr
Aaa Utilty
New Recently Municipal
Issue Offered Bond Buyer
U S. Government FNMA
(10-yr Constant Auction
Table 5
NOTrS Weekly data for columns I to 4 are statement week averages of daily data. Columns 5 and 6 are one-day Wednesday quotes. For columns 7, 8 and 10 the
weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day quote for Thursday following the end of the
statement week. Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceding the end of the statement week. The FNMA auction yield is the average yield
it hi-weekly auction for short-term forward commitments for Government underwritten mortgages.
~ "' II
June 12, 1974
