Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
June 14, 1974
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M 1 increased at about a 5 per cent annual rate in May but
there was an acceleration in early June, so that growth for the May-June
period now appears likely to fall just under the 7 per cent upper end of
the Committee's range of tolerance. M2 has displayed a generally similar
pattern of monthly change, rising at a 5½ per cent annual rate in May and
then at a considerably stronger pace so far in June, when there has been a
larger than expected rise in large time deposits other than money market
CD's. For May and June combined, M2 appears likely to grow at a rate
roughly equal to the 7½ per cent top of its range of tolerance. And RPD
growth is near the upper end of its range.
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
in April-May Target Period
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates Range of Latest
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance Estimates
M2  4½-7½ 7.6
June 14, 1974
(2) Growth in the bank credit proxy over May and June is
estimated at an average annual rate of 14 per cent, below the extra-
ordinary April pace but still strong. Banks greatly increased their
borrowings in the CD market in May in view of the continued generally
strong loan demands and in anticipation of large maturities in June. In
late May and early June, CD growth has slowed substantially, however.
Borrowing in the Euro-dollar and commercial paper markets was also
relatively strong until late May and then abated.
(3) Deposit growth at nonbank thrift institutions was at only
a 1½ per cent annual rate in May, and available data for early June
suggests that inflows have picked up only slightly. This conforms
generally to the experience of banks with respect to passbook savings
and small time deposits. Time and savings deposit accounts at banks
subject to Regulation Q ceilings have shown little, if any, growth in
recent months. Growth in bank time deposits has been in the form of
money market CD's and other time deposits over $100,000.
(4) Short- and long-term interest rates have fluctuated in
a relatively narrow range in recent weeks. At times during the inter-
meeting period, market sentiment appeared to be developing that
interest rates had reached peak levels and were about to decline.
Scattered declines in bank prime loan rates gave credence to this
view, and the stock market rallied. Market interest rates showed little
change, because the money market remained taut and the Account Management
sold a large block of bills timed so as to help dampen market
expectations of rate declines.
(5) With the potential for a resurgence in bullish sentiment
still present, however, Committee members concurred with Chairman Burns'
recommendation of June 10 that the upper limit of the funds rate range
be raised to 11¾ per cent, on the understanding that the Desk would use
this leeway if market interest rates came under downward pressure or
if the monetary aggregates began growing at rates that appeared to be
testing the upper limits of their tolerance ranges. In recent days,
given the latest estimates for the aggregates, the Desk has been aiming
at a Federal funds rate in the area of 11½-1l¾ per cent. The 3-month
bill rate was about 8.30 per cent at the close on Friday, up about 10
basis points from its level at the time of the last Committee meeting.
(6) The table on the next page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various
recent time periods. Appendix table III compares money supply growth
rates computed on a quarterly-average basis with those computed on a
last-month-of-quarter basis. Projected figures on the two bases are
shown in appendix table IV for the three alternatives presented in
the next section.
Average Past Past Past
of Past Three Twelve Six Three Past
Calendar Years Months Months Months Month
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Nonbank commercial paper .2 .6 .3 -.8 .8
the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(7) Alternatives for Committee consideration are summarized
below (with more detailed figures shown in the table on p.5a).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Targets (3rd & 4th qtrs.
combined)
Credit proxy 10½ 9¾ 8¾
Associated ranges for
June-July
RPD 13¼-15¼ 12½-14½ 11½-13½
Federal funds rate range 10-11½ 10¾-12¼ 11½-13
(inter-meeting period)
(8) At its last meeting the Committee adopted longer-run
targets for the second and third quarters combined that included a
of such a growth rate to year-end is illustrated by the dashed line
in the chart on the following page. Rates of growth consistent with
that extended path are shown in alternative C. These include a 4¾
per cent annual rate of growth in M1 between June and year-end, which
would compensate for the estimated 7 per cent annual rate of growth
for Ml in the second quarter and would lead to an average 5½ per
cent growth for the last three quarters of the year.
MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATH
RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
-- -285
Alternative Longer-Run Targets for Key Monetary Aggregates
June
July
Dec.
Quarters:
June
July
Alt. A
Alt. B
Alt. C
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt B Alt. C
M2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Rates of Growth
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A
Alt. A
M3
Alt. B
RPD
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. C
(9) The staff expects that attainment of the alternative C
aggregates would require a further rise in the Federal funds rate between
now and the next Committee meeting to a consistent trading range around
second half of the year is now slightly slower than at the time of the
last Committee meeting, but the growth rates for the third and fourth
quarters--annual rate of 8.8 and 10 per cent, respectively--still suggest
sizable increases in transactions demands for cash.
(10) A rise in the funds rate over the weeks ahead would be
associated with further increases in interest rates generally. The
increases could be quite marked as expectations that market interest
rates had peaked--already coming into question--turn into expectations
of further rise. If the funds rate rose to the 12 per cent area, the
the weeks ahead, the 3-month commercial paper rate would rise above its
earlier 11 per cent peak, and the prime loan rate would again be under
substantial upward pressure. However, increases in short-term market
rates, particularly in the Treasury bill area, could be tempered if
foreign official demand for U.S. Treasury securities were to strengthen.
Rising short rates would probably be communicated to longer-term markets
also, given sizable corporate and municipal security offerings in prospect.
The increase in bond yields, at least on the highest quality issues, would
be moderated, however, to the extent that evidence of monetary restraint
tends to make investors somewhat less pessimistic about the outlook for
(11) The rise in interest rates expected under alternative C
would further constrain inflows of consumer-type time and savings
deposits to banks and thrift institutions, given current Regulation Q
ceilings. As a result, growth in M 2 and M3 for the second half of
respectively. Banks would be forced to raise interest rates offered for
CD's and Euro-dollars. However, we would expect considerable moderation
in the amount of net new funds raised through these instruments; bank
loan growth would probably be cut back by tighter lending terms, and
banks would probably become increasingly wary of adding to CD holdings at
ever higher interest costs. Marginal financial and business firms might
find it difficult to refinance maturing debts as banks and other lenders
become more selective. Financial strains would increase generally, and
the odds on failure of some of the more vulnerable firms would rise.
(12) Alternative B encompasses a 5¾ per cent growth rate for M1--
and growth rates of 6¾ and 5½ per cent for M2 and M3 respectively--in
the second half of 1974. These aggregate growth rates appear to be con-
sistent with a Federal funds rate around 11½-11¾ per cent, close to the
center of the range for this alternative. Thus, upward interest rate
pressure under this alternative would be considerably less than under
alternative C. At this writing, interest rates generally appear to be
in process of adjusting to Federal funds trading at rates somewhat above
forthcoming Committee meeting; and little further, if any, upward rate
movement is likely to develop subsequently if the funds rate remains
around the center of alternative B range.
(13) Assuming the prevailing money market conditions, M1
growth in the June-July period is likely to be in a 6-8 per cent annual
rate range. On the basis of partial data for the early part of June,
we would expect June growth to be on the order of 8 per cent at an annual
rate. Given the over-all interest rate increase of the past few months,
and the end of the tax refund period, growth in M1 is expected to slow
in July and subsequent months of the third quarter. For the third
quarter as a whole, M growth is indicated to be 5¼ per cent at prevailing
money market conditions--though rising to 6¼ per cent in the fourth quarter
when nominal GNP growth is projected to expand somewhat more rapidly.
(14) The substantial injection of nonborrowed reserves that
seems necessary to attain the aggregates of alternative A would probably
lead to an easing of money market conditions. A downward movement in the
funds rate--and especially a drop to the 10¾ per cent mid-point of the
range shown for this alternative--would be accompanied by a sharp decline
in market interest rates as investors came to believe that monetary policy
had made a major turn. The decline would be especially large in short-
term markets. In the Treasury bill market, the 3-month bill rate could
drop to below 7 per cent in view of the limited market supply at the
moment and the sizable volume of maturing mid-June tax bills. Given
the basic strength of credit demands, however, the immediate decline in
interest rates would probably be followed by a gradual upward readjustment
if the Federal funds rate were to hold around 10¾ per cent.
Proposed directive language
(15) Presented below are three alternative formulations
for the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended
to correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives dis-
cussed in the preceding section. As will be noted, alternative A
refers to growth rates in the monetary aggregates prevailing over
recent months. Growth in M1 was at an annual rate of about 7 per
cent in the first quarter, and including an estimate of 8.2 per
cent for June, it is about 7 per cent for the second quarter as well.
The comparable rates for M2 are about 10 per cent for the first
quarter and about 8 per cent for the second quarter.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of
developments in domestic and international financial markets,
the Committee seeks to [DEL: maintain about the prevailing restrictive]
ACHIEVE BANK RESERVE AND money market conditions [DEL: provided that]
CONSISTENT WITH GROWTH IN the monetary aggregates AT ABOUT THE
RATES PREVAILING OVER RECENT MONTHS [DEL: appear to be growing at
rates within the specified ranges of tolerance].
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of
developments in domestic and international financial markets,
the Committee seeks to [DEL: maintain about the prevailing restrictive]
ACHIEVE BANK RESERVE AND money market conditions [DEL: provided that
the] THAT WOULD MODERATE GROWTH IN monetary aggregates OVER THE
MONTHS AHEAD [DEL: appear to be growing at rates within the specified
ranges of tolerance].
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of
developments in domestic and international financial markets,
the Committee seeks to [DEL: maintain about the prevailing restrictive]
ACIIEVE BANK RESERVE AND money market conditions [DEL: provided that
the] THAT WOULD SLOW APPRECIABLY THE GROWTH IN monetary aggregates
OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD [DEL: appear to be growing at rates within the
specified ranges of tolerance].
(16) In the event that the Committee again wishes to couch
the operational paragraph of the directive in terms of money market
conditions, the specifications of alternative B might be associated
with the language used in the directive adopted at the last meeting--
namely, that "...the Committee seeks to maintain about the prevailing
restrictive money market conditions, provided that the monetary aggre-
gates appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges of
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
RESERVES AVAILABLE TO SUPPORT
PRIVATE NONBANK DEPOSITS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
l40
M A M
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
RANK RESERVES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
JUNE 14, 1974
I AFGPFGATF RESERVES I REQUIRED RESERVES
RESERVES AVAILAPLE FOR ----------- ------------------------------------------
PRIVATE NONBANK DEPOSTTS I SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
I i-------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------- TOTAL NONBORROWED I PRIVATE OTHER CD'S AND GOV'T AND
PEROD I SEAS ADJ I NON SEAS ADJ I RESERVES RESERVES I DEMAND TIME DFP NON DEP INTERBANK
I fl) I (7?) 1 (3) (4) | (51 (6) (7) (8)
I
MONTHLY LEVFLS-SMILLTONSI
----- --------- I
ANNUAL RATFS
MONTHI
1974-
WEEKLY LEVELS-
--------------
MAY
JUN.
OF CHANGE
---- IERLY:
LY:
-MAR.
APR.
MAY
JUN.
-SMTLLTCNS
------- I-
I
JUN. 5 I
( -7.P)
( 8,794)
( 10.0)
( 9.0)
( 5379)
(' 1,915)
NOTF: DATA SHOWN IN PARENTHESES ARE CURRENT PROJECTIONS. AT THE FOMC MFFTING OF MAY 21, 1974
TuE COMMITTEE AGREED ON A RPO RANGE OF 13 TO 20 PERCENT FOR THE MAY-JUNE PERIOD.
TABLF 1
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
JUNE 14, 1974MONETARY AGGREGATES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED)
I MONEY SUPPLY I ADJUSTED I U.S. I TIMF AND SAVINGS DFPOSITS I NONDFPOSIT
I NARROW I BROAD I CREDTT II GOVT. I I THER I I SOURCES OF
PERIOD I (M1) I (M2) I PROXY II DEPOSITS I TOTAL I THAN CD S I CD S I FUNDS
MONTHLY LEVELS-SPTLLTONSI
------------------------ I
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
--------------------- I
MONTHLY I
----- - I
WFEKLY LEVELS-SPTLLIONS
----------------------- I
JUN. 5 P
12 PFI
I (7) I (8)(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
I I II I
I I II I
I I 11I
( 8.2) I 9.7) (10.5) (13.1)
( 6.7) ( 7.6) (13.8 (18.1)
I I II I
I I II I
I I II I
( 8.5)
-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -------------------'--- --- -- -- - - - - - -- - - - - - - -- - - - - --- - - - - - -
TABLE 2
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
JUNE 14, 1974
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations 1/ Daily Average Reserve Effect 2/ A in reserve categories A Tar1et
Rills Coupon Agency RP's Open Marker A Member Other 4/ req. rea. against available res. 5/ available
& Accept. Issues Issues Net 3/ Total Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) reserves 5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
I/ Represents change in System's portfolio from end-of-period to end-of-period; includes redemptions in regular bill auctions.
Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
JUNE 14, 1974
TABLE 4
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
Millions of dollars
U.S. Govt. Security
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Member Bank Reserve Positions
Corporate Municipal Excess** Borrowing at FRB** Basic Reserve Deficit
Period Bills Coupon Issues Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Others
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
* 305
* 94
* 333
*1,031
*1,110
*384
* 8
* 19
* 12
* 76
- 5,872
- 6,443
- 6,106
- 4,940
- 5,355
- 6,090
- 8,186
- 9,793
- 9,712
- 9,102
- 9,091
- 9,329
- 8,711
- 9,340p
-10,418p
Government security dealer trading positions are on a commitment basis. Trading positions, which exclude Treasury bills financed by repurchase
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings available for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer posi-
tions are debt issues still in syndicate,excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal
Reserve less net Federal funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in
syndicate which are Friday figures.
* STRICTLY OCNFIDENfIAL
** Monthly averages for rxcess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
TABLE 5
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per cent
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
JUNE 14, 1974
Short-Term Long-Term
Treasury Bills 90-119 Day CD's New Issue-NYC Aaa Utility U.S. Government FNMA
Commercial New Recently Municipal (10-yr. Constant Auction
Period ederal Funds 90-Day 1-Year paper 60-89 Day 90-119 Day Issue Offered Bond Buyer Maturity) Yields
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
Daily -- June 6
(2) (3)
Weekly data for columns 1 to 4 are statement week averages
of daily data. Columns '
(7) (8)
and 6 are one-day Wednesday
quotes. For columns 7, 8 and 10
for Thursday following the end of
The FNMA auction yield is the
the weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day quote
the statement week. Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceding the end of the statement week.
average yield in the hi-weekly auction for short-term forward commitments for Government underwritten mortgages.
I' ~ "'
