Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
January 17, 1975(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent Developments
(1) M1 increased at an annual rate of about 2 per cent in
December,and incoming data for early January suggest that its growth
over the December-January target period will fall substantially below the
lower end of the range of tolerance established by the FOMC at its
December meeting. M2 expanded at only a 2 per cent annual rate in
December, as inflows into bank time deposits other than money market CD's
also slowed markedly. While such time deposit inflows appear to be
improving in January, M2 expansion for the December-January target period
also is expected to be well below the lower end of its tolerance range.
The bank credit proxy expanded at a 7 per cent annual rate in December,
as banks issued CD's aggressively, partly for window-dressing purposes.
Since the turn of the year, banks have been much less active in the CD
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
in December-January Period
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates Range of
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance Latest Estimates
Memo:
Federal funds rate
(per cent per annum)
Avg. for statement
week ending
January 17, 1975
(2) Following the December FOMC meeting, the Account Manager
began aiming at a Federal funds rate of about 8¼ per cent. Despite
large increases in nonborrowed reserves, the Federal funds market showed
little tendency to ease, however, as member banks managed their reserve
positions conservatively over the holiday and year-end statement date
period. The relative abundance of reserves finally showed through in
the money market on the final day of the year, so that the average funds
rate for the statement week ending January 1 dropped to 7.35 per cent.
In the following statement week, the Desk reduced its Federal funds rate
target to about 7½ per cent, the lower limit of the Committee's tolerance
range, in response to evidence of weakness in the aggregates. On
January 9, with growth in the aggregates apparently well below the
lower limits set by the FOMC, the Committee concurred in the Chairman's
recommendation to reduce the lower limit of the funds rate range to
funds rate averaged 7.22 per cent, and the funds rate has drifted down
further in recent days.
(3) Interest rates on private short-term market instruments
have generally declined 1 to 2 percentage points since the December
meeting due to a combination of System policy actions and weaker private
credit demands. The 3-month Treasury bill rate declined around per-
centage point to about 6.30 per cent. On January 3, the discount rate
was reduced by ½ point to 7¼ per cent by six Federal Reserve Banks.
Because of the exceptionally heavy current and prospective corporate
bond calendar as well as the prospect of large Treasury financings,
yields in bond markets have not responded to the sharp decline in
short-term rates, although the large volume of new corporate issues
has been readily handled by the market.
(4) Deposit inflows strengthened significantly further at
nonbank thrift institutions in December. With mortgage demands remaining
weak, these funds were used mainly to repay debt and build portfolio
liquidity. Some institutions were also reported to have stepped up
their acquisition of mortgages from mortgage companies and to have
increased their purchases of GNMA guaranteed mortgage-backed securities.
Mortgage rates have declined somewhat further in recent weeks.
(5) The table on the following page shows (in percentage
annual rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over
various recent time periods. Appendix table IV compares money supply
growth rates computed on a quarterly-average basis with those computed
on a last-month-of-quarter basis. Projected figures on the two bases
are shown in appendix table V for the three alternatives presented in
the next section.
Average Past Past Past
of Three Twelve Six Three Past
Calendar Years Months Months Months Month
1971 Dec. '74 Dec. '74 Dec. '74 Dec.'74
-- over over over over
1973 Dec. '73 June '74 Sept.'74 Nov.'74
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Nonbank commercial paper -- .4 .6 .3 - .6
Prospective developments
(6) Three alternative sets of specifications are summarized below
for Committee consideration, with more detailed data shown in the table
on p.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges of tolerance
for Jan.-Feb.
Federal funds rate
(inter-meeting range)
Longer-
run growth rates 1/
June '74-June '75
Nov. '74-June '75
Dec. '74-June '75
June '74-June '75
Nov. '74-June '75
Dec. '74-June '75
staff GNP projection for first and second quarters
funds rate behavior as described in the paragraphs
(7) The format of the summary table has been modified to provide
additional perspective on longer-run growth rates of key monetary aggregates.
The bottom half of the table shows growth rates for M1 and M2 for periods
Alternative Longer-Run Growth
Alt. A
Alt. B
Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. C
Alt. A
Alt. B
Growth Rates
Nov.'74--June '75
Nov.'74--June '75
Alt. A
M3
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. A
Credit Proxy
Alt. B
Growth Rates
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
June
Alt. C
Alt. C
of time varying from 6 months to a year, with all periods ending in mid-1975.
These longer-run growth rates assume the staff GNP projection and further
assume that the funds rate reaches levels at about the mid-point of the
ranges shown over the next several weeks. For alternative A, however, it
should be noted that the lower interest rates are not assumed to persist
throughout the whole first half of the year, as will be explained below.
(8) Alternative A encompasses the 6 per cent longer-run annual
rate of growth for M1 (over the seven-month November '74-June '75 period)
that was preferred by the Committee at its last meeting, the achievement
of which would now require a 6¾ per cent growth rate over the first half
of this year. Under this alternative the funds rate would be expected to
decline to 6 per cent, or a shade below, between now and mid-February.
Growth in M1 by February would be expected to be considerably higher than
in recent months, partly in lagged reaction to earlier interest rate
declines, and partly because the behavior of money appears to have been
unusually weak recently relative to nominal GNP. Given the very low growth
that seems in store for January, however, the M1 growth rate would be
expected to be in a 4-6 per cent range for the two-month January-February
(9) Interest rate declines under alternative A may begin to be
reversed as spring progresses. The rate of growth in M1 by the second
quarter is expected to be relatively rapid as the impact of monetary
ease cumulates, and growth would tend to accelerate further in the third
quarter, given the substantial jump in the rate of increase in nominal
GNP forecast by the staff, partly because a greater fiscal stimulus is
now assumed, as explained in the green book. Assuming the Committee were to wish
to hold monetary growth to around a 6-7 per cent annual rate in
the second half of the year, this would appear to require an upward
adjustment of the funds rate, as well as other short-term market
interest rates, at a fairly early stage.
(10) The specifications of alternative B contemplate a smaller
decline in the Federal funds rate over the next few weeks than under
alternative A. The mid-point of the suggested range is around 6¾ per
cent. Money supply growth over the first half of 1975 would be
expected to be at about a 6 per cent annual rate, and would be at about
a 5½ per cent annual rate of growth over the Nov. '74--June '75 period.
Because alternative B puts in place a lesser degree of monetary stimula-
tion over the near-term, it would appear that any reversal of the interest
rate decline would be delayed more than under alternative A. In order to
prevent an acceleration of monetary growth in the second half of 1975, the
funds rate under this alternative would probably not need to rise until
perhaps early summer. However, market interest rates more generally could
begin rising in spring in anticipation of continued exceptionally large
Treasury cash needs in the second half of the year combined with a pick-up
of total private credit demands (assuming that an economic recovery in
the second half is still anticipated at that time).
(11) Alternative C assumes money market conditions as indexed
by a Federal funds rate centering around 7¼ per cent. M1 growth in
the January-February period under this alternative would be expected to
be in a 3-5 per cent annual rate range. A pick-up in M1 growth would
still be anticipated in February, but the rate of expansion would be
less than under the two other alternatives. Similarly, over the
longer-run, growth rates for money supply would be slower; for example,
over the first half of 1975 M1 growth might be at around a 5¼ per cent
annual rate.
(12) Given prevailing market expectations of a further easing
in monetary policy, a Federal funds rate of around 7¼ per cent is likely
to be accompanied by some back-up in market interest rates in the near-
term, particularly rates on Treasury securities and corporate bonds.
Over the next few weeks, the Treasury will likely be raising new cash by
adding $200-$300 million to the weekly bill auctions; in addition
$1 -$2 billion of new cash will probably be raised in connection with
the refunding of $3 billion of publicly-held debt that matures in
mid-February. Terms of this refunding will be announced on January 22
or 23. The Treasury will also be raising large amounts of new cash in
March and April. Given the prospective volume of Treasury issues to be
distributed through the market, dealers may be reluctant to add
significantly further to holdings unless they can foresee some drop in
their financing costs. On the other hand--aside from a very heavy
volume of corporate bond issues--credit demands in other sectors of the
market are likely to be quite modest in the weeks ahead. Demands may
be particularly light in private short-term markets so that interest rate
pressures, should they develop, are more likely to appear in longer-term
market sectors.
(13) The net inflow at banks of time and savings deposits
(other than money market CD's) is expected to continue at about the
pace of the fourth quarter of 1974 under alternative C. Greater
inflows of consumer-type time and savings deposits are assumed under
alternatives A and B in the months immediately ahead, but under
alternative A the rate of inflow is assumed to drop back somewhat in
the spring as interest rates begin to rise. Under all three alternatives,
the staff has assumed that savings inflows will be sustained in late
spring or early summer by initial payments of the proposed income tax
rebate--which would also tend temporarily to enlarge demand deposits.
Implied rates of growth for M2 under the three alternatives are shown in
the bottom panel of the summary table in paragraph (6).
(14) Similar assumptions to those for consumer-type time
deposits at banks were made for deposit flows at thrift institutions.
Given the apparently weak mortgage demand, downward pressures on mortgage
interest rates might be expected in the months ahead under all three
alternatives, with declines in mortgage rates the largest, of course,
under alternative A. Under the easing alternatives, conditions leading
to a reversal of such rate declines would tend to develop as time passes,
though perhaps not until after mid-year.
(15) Bank credit expansion will probably be generally moderate
over the months ahead under any of the alternatives. This is mainly
because business and consumer credit demands on banks are expected to be
quite sluggish, as businesses reduce inventories and consumers continue
to hold off on purchases of durable goods. In addition, given their need
to improve liquidity positions, uncertainties as to the quality of their
loan portfolio, and their weak capital positions, banks are unlikely to be
aggressive issuers of CD's over the months ahead. Money center banks
in particular may be cautious in adding to their security portfolios and
relaxing lending terms. Nevertheless, the banking system as a whole may
make sizable investments in short-term U.S. and state and local government
securities, utilizing available funds from consumer-type time and savings
deposits and demand deposits.
Proposed directive
(16) Presented below are three alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in
the preceding section. For all three alternatives, it is proposed to
include a reference to Treasury financing because the regular mid-February
financing will be announced shortly.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of
THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCING AND OF developments in
domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions
consistent with [DEL: somewhat] more rapid growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead than has occurred in
recent months.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of
THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCING AND OF developments in
domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions
consistent with somewhat more rapid growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead than has occurred in recent
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of
THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCING AND OF developments in
domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions
consistent with [DEL: somewhat more rapid] MODERATE growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead [DEL: than has occurred in recent
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL(FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
NARROW MONEY SUPPLY M1
BROADER MONEY SUPPLY M2
BILLIONSOF DOLLARS
,5% growth
I i I
0 N
D J F
1975
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL(FR)
1/17/75
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
520
- 480
BILLIONS OF
MARKET CONDITIONS AND INTEREST RATES
PER CEN
1
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
BANK RESERVES JANUARY 17, 1975
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
RESERVE:
PRIVATE
P-----------
PERIOD V SEAS ADJ
----- - ----- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ---------- ----------- ----------- ---AVAILABLE---------- -- --FOR---
S AVAILABLE FOR
NONBANK DFPOSITS
S-NON SEAS ADJI NON SEAS ADJ
I-----------------------------
ITOTAL NONBORROWED I
I RESERVFS RESERVES
REQUIRED RESERVES
SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
PRIVATE OTHER
DEMAND TIME DEI
CD'S AND GOV'T AND
P NON DEP INTERBANK
MONTHLY LEVELS-tMILLIONSI
- -- --------"-"--- -- --
ANNUAL RATES OF CHANGE I
------- -------- I
MONTHLY:
1974--OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
DEC.-JAN. I
WEEKLY LEVELS-$MILLIONS
- - - - - - - -- ------- V
(1) I (2) I
I 11I
(34,498) (35,526) II
V VI
( 10.9)
( 13.7)
( 9,003)
( 2518)
------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------ --------- ---- -----------
---- --------------------------'--- --------'------ ------- -------- ------- -------'-----
TABLE 1
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
MONETARY AGGREGATES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED)
JANUARY 17, 1975
I MONEY SUPPLY I ADJUSTED II U.S. I TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS I NONDEPOSIT
( NARROW f BROAD I CRFDIT I1 GOVT. I I OTHER I I SOURCES OF
PERIOD I (Ml) I (M2) I PROXY II DEPOSITS I TOTAL I THAN CD S I CD S I FUNDS
MONTHLY LEVELS-$BILLTONSI
------------------------ I
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
-------------------- I
WEEKLY LEVELS-SBILLIONS
- ------------------- I
( 0.0)
I 1.1)
( 6.5)
( 4.5)
(3) II
II
(497.4) II
II
II
II
-- II
4.9 II
7.3 lI
II
S8.0) I
II
(7.7) II
II
I
II
II
II
494.5 II
495.4 I
497.9 If
(5) I
( 7.7)
( 7.8)
------------ -------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------- - - -------------------- -------- --------
TABLE 2
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
JAlUARY 17, 1975
Open Market Operations 1/ Daily Average Reserve Effects 2/ 4 in reserve categories A Target
Bills Coupon Agency RP's Open Market A Member Other 4/ req. res. against available res. 5/ available
& Accept. Issues Issues Net 3/ Total Operations Bank Borrowing Factors UI.S.G. and interb (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) reserves 5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month.
Special certificate. (Direct Treasury borrowing from F.R.). ** Reflects special certificate purchase.
TABLE 4
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
Millions of dollars
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
JANUARY 17, 1975
U.S. Govt. Security
Period Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Member Bank Reserve Positions
Corporate Municipal Excess** I Borrowing at FRB** Basic Reserve Deficit
Bills Coupon Issues Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Others
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
(1)
3,796
*2,234
*2,487
*2,507
*2,845
- 9,793
- 9,920
- 9,555
- 9,224
- 8,250
- 8,689
- 9,715
- 8,976
- 9,889
- 9,016
* STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
** Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
Government security dealer trading positions are on a commitment basis. Trading positions, which exclude Treasury bills financed by repurchase agree-
ments maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings available for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions are debt
issues still in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserve less net Federal
funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are Friday figures.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
JANUARY 17, 1975
TABLE 5
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per cent
Short-Term _Long-Term
Period Treasury Bills 90-119 Day CD's New Issue-NYC Aaa Utility U.S. Government FNMA
Commercial New Recently Municipal (10-yr. Constant Auction
Federal Funds 90-Day 1-year Paper 60-89 Day 90-119 Day Issue Offered Bond Buyer Maturity) Yields
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Weekly data for columns 1 to 4 are statement week averages of daily data. Columns 5 and 6 are one-day Wednesday quotes. For columns 7, 8 and 10 the weekly
date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day quote for Thursday following the end of the statement week.
Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceding the end of the statement week. The FNMA auction yield is the average yield in bi-weekly auction
for short-term forward commitments for Government underwritten mortgages.
I---~-- --
I I I II
Appendix Table 1
RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES January 16, 1975
MONEY STOCK BANK CREDIT
RESERVES OTHERMEASURES MEASURES
Available Total T e Tr
Period to Adjusted Loans Time Thrift Non- U.S.
Total Non Support M1  M2  M3  Credit and Total Other Inst- Ds deposit Gov't.borrowed Private Proxy Invest- Time Than tution C Funds Demand
Deposits ments CD's Deposits
requirements on bank-related commercial paper are included
current month and end of previous month reported data.
FR 712-S
Appendix Table 2
RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
SEASONALLY ADJUSTED, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
January 16, 1975
BANK CREDITRESERVES MONEY STOCK MEASURES EASN RET OTHERMEASURES
Period Available Total Time Thrift
Non- to 1 Ad Loans Total Other Insti- N - U.S.Total borrowed Support M2  M3  Credit and Time Than tution CD's deposit Gov't.
Pvt Total Pvt. Proxy Invest- CD's Deposits Funds Demand
Deposits Dep. ments
I
Dec.
p - Preliminary.
Appendix Table III
Money Supply Growth Rates
M1 less Foreign
M1 less Official Deposits and
M1  Foreign Official Deposits due to Foreign
Deposits Commercial Banks
August -0.5 -- --
Appendix Table IV
Growth Rate in Money Supply
(Per cent change at an annual rate)
M1 M 2
M = Annual rates of growth calculated from average
final months of the quarters.
Q = Annual rates calculated from average levels in
of the quarters.
levels in the
all three months
Appendix Table V
Growth Rates in Money Supply for Alternatives
M Q
M2
M _
Alt. A
Alt. B
Alt. C
M - Annual rates of growth calculated from average
last months of the quarters.
Q = Annual rates calculated from average levels in
months of the quarters.
levels in
all three
