Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
October 17, 1975
By the staff
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC October 17, 1975
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 grew at about a 2 per cent annual rate in September, and
further weakness in recent data now suggest some net contraction for October.
As a result M1 is projected to decline slightly on average over the two-month
target period--falling substantially below the lower end of the Committee's
range of tolerance, as shown in the table. The weakness in M1 and a further
slowing of growth in consumer-type time deposits in September have reduced
the expected two-month growth rate for M2 to a 4.3 per cent annual rate, also
well below its range of tolerance.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
over September-October Period
Reserve and monetary aggregates Ranges of
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance
MI  5 to 8
M2  7 to 9k
RPD 1 to 4
Memo:
Federal funds rate
(per cent per annum) 53 to 7-
Latest Estimates
Avg. for statement
week ending
(2) Business loans at banks and commercial paper issued by
nonfinancial corporations both declined in September, as high corporate
liquidity reduced the need for external financing. Even so, the outstanding
volume of large negotiable bank CD's expanded appreciably for the first time
since January. This unexpected CD growth was concentrated among a few money
center banks and seems to have represented an effort to improve their liquidity
positions in preparation for possible adverse market reactions stemming from
the continuing financial problems of New York and recent publicity highlighting
loan losses at banks. As a result of the CD expansion, and of a larger than
projected rise in Government deposits, the bank credit proxy appears to be
expanding at about a 5 per cent annual rate in the September-October period.
(3) In the initial statement week after the September FOMC meeting,
the Desk sought reserve conditions consistent with a Federal funds rate
trading in a 6¼ -6½ per cent range. On October 2, incoming data suggested
that growth in the monetary aggregates was running below the Committee's
ranges of tolerance, and conditions in the municipal market were becoming
increasingly unsettled. Accordingly, the Chairman recommended and the
Committee concurred in a strategy calling for the Manager to lower the Federal
funds rate to 6-1/8 per cent immediately, and then to reduce it further over
the following few days to 6 per cent. The Committee also agreed to reduce
the lower limit of its funds rate constraint to 5¾ per cent, in order to
provide leeway for further reserve provision in the event that signs of
continuing weakness in the monetary aggregates were confirmed by additional
data. In the statement week ending October 8, the funds rate averaged
aggregates--the rate has averaged around 5.80 per cent. On October 15,
the Board of Governors announced a cut in reserve requirements on longer-
maturity time deposits--which had the effect of releasing about $350 million
of reserves to banks in the week beginning October 30.
(4) Short-term interest rates have declined significantly since
early October in response to the evidence of weaker growth in the monetary
aggregates, the decline in the Federal funds rate, and the cut in bank
reserve requirements. As a result, most short-term rates are now 40 to 70
basis points below the levels that prevailed at the time of the September
FOMC meeting. The 3-month Treasury bill has traded most recently at around
(5) Recent declines in short rates have contributed to a general
strengthening of markets for longer-term securities as well. Yield reductions
have been largest on Treasury notes and bonds--ranging to as much as 50 basis
points. In the municipal market, developments surrounding the New York
financial crisis have continued to dominate. The atmosphere has improved
somewhat in response to the general easing in market conditions. On
October 17, New York City managed to roll over its debt maturities, but
there is still no demand for such issues from the general public.
(6) Combined deposit growth at savings and loan associations
and mutual savings banks slowed to an annual rate of 11½ per cent during
September. At S&L's the slower deposit flows, taken in conjunction with
the large volume of new mortgage commitments made during August, reportedly
led to more cautious lending policies in September. This is suggested by
recent data which show no further increase in commitments for September and an
increase of 10-15 basis points in the average interest rate on conventional
mortgages over the past five weeks.
(7) The table on the following page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various time
Past Past
Calendar Twelve Six Three Past
Year -_Months Months Months Month
Sept.'75 Sept.'75 Sept.'75 Sept.'75
Sept.'74 Mar. '75 June '75 Aug, '75
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change in
billions)
loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institu-
tions--which are derived from either end-of-month or last Wednesday-of-month
figures. Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are
adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when
reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(8) Shown below for Committee consideration are alternative
longer-run growth ranges in the monetary aggregates. The one-year
span has been moved forward one quarter to cover the period from the
third quarter of 1975 to the third quarter of 1976. The FOMC's current
longer-run growth ranges for the period between the second quarters of
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Current
(9) Of the longer-run alternatives, B encompasses the same
growth range as adopted in June for Ml. Growth rates for M2 and M3 are
lower, however, because slower growth in time and savings deposits is
now anticipated, given recent experience and the expectation that
market interest rates will again be under upward pressure late this year
and early next year.
(10) Shorter-run alternatives for monetary aggregates and the
Federal funds rate are summarized below
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges of tolerance
for October-November
These alternatives can be viewed as first stages that are loosely related to
attainment of the corresponding longer-run growth paths. Appendix Table IV
shows quarterly average Federal funds rates that the staff currently believes
likely to evolve over the next four quarters in attaining longer-run monetary
objectives. In general, all the alternatives involve rising Federal funds
rates as the period progresses, given the continued expansion projected for GNP.
(11) The staff still believes that growth in M 1 will soon resume.
We are now projecting growth over the latter part of October and continuing
through winter, in view of the strong further expansion in nominal GNP, and
hence in transactions needs for money, forecast by the staff. Since the early
October level of M1 is so low, however, this growth would not be reflected in
the monthly averages until November. Given current money market conditions,
as under alternative B, the staff expects M1 to expand at more than a 10 per
cent annual rate in November. But since the level of M1 is expected to decline,
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
QII
QIII
QIII '75-QI '76
QI '76-QIII '76
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M4  M5 Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
on average, in October, the two month October-November growth rate would be
relatively low--in a 3-5 per cent annual rate range under alternative B.
(12) Alternative B involves a Federal funds rate range centered
around the recently prevailing 5¾ per cent rate. Yields in short- and
long-term markets (other than the mortgage market) have declined recently in
response to the easing of the money market, and little further decline is
likely in the period immediately ahead, assuming the funds rate remains around
commercial paper may be around 6-3/8 per cent. Bond yields could decline
somewhat further if there should be a breakthrough in resolving New York's
financing problem or if the volume of corporate bond offerings drops further.
However, the Treasury will announce its mid-November refunding on October 22.
While the refunding is a small one--involving only about $2.4 billion of
maturing publicly-held issues--the Treasury may offer mainly longer-term
issues in the financing and is expected to raise a modest amount of new cash
at the same time.
(13) Given at least maintenance of the recent lower level of market
rates, time deposit experience at banks and thrift institutions should improve
somewhat as compared with the recent past. However, over the longer-run, with
upward interest rate pressures still anticipated, the staff believes that
institutional savings flows will come under renewed pressure, and we have
assumed an increase in Regulation Q ceilings in the first quarter of next
(14) A slight easing of the money market, as is contemplated by
the mid-point of the 5-6 per cent Federal funds rate range shown for
alternative A, might be accompanied by some further declines in market
interest rates. These declines probably would not be particularly large
since many market participants may still expect rates to turn around later.
Such an expectation would be reinforced to the extent that incoming business
news continues to be good. A larger decline in the funds rate to around
the 5 per cent bottom of the alternative A range would of course trigger
more substantial interest rate declines as the market's assessment of future
monetary policy and possibly also the business outlook changes.
(15) The staff expects that interest rate declines under
alternative A would facilitate attainment of higher longer-run growth rates
for the monetary aggregates--typified by M1 growth over the next year in a
in interest rates are likely to be quite substantial, however, especially
when considered in conjunction with expansion over the longer-run of
transactions demands. Thus, the Federal funds rate under this alternative
probably would have to begin rising again late in the year to keep money
growth around the mid-point of the higher range.
(16) Alternative C involves a Federal funds rate range over the
next four weeks centered on 6 per cent. This would return the rate to where
it was at about the time of the previous Committee meeting. Such an immediate
rise in the funds rate appears most consistent with adoption by the Committee
of lower longer-run rates of growth in the monetary aggregates,
indexed by M1 expansion over the year ahead in a 4-6½
per cent range. Also such a rise in the funds rate would not be inconsistent
with the longer-run growth rates of alternative B. An immediate increase in
the funds rate would retard money growth over the near term, but would imply
somewhat less of a rise in the Federal funds rate over the next year than
shown for alternative B in appendix Table IV.
(17) A rebound in the funds rate to around 6 per cent would
exert significant general upward pressure on interest rates, since it would
be contrary to current market expectations. Yields on Treasury securities
would probably be particularly affected given the imminent quarterly Treasury
refunding and the continuing sizable volume of Federal deficit financing. In
these circumstances, savings inflows to depositary institutions could, of
course, be expected to deteriorate.
(18) Presented below are three alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to corre-
spond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in the
preceding section. No reference to the forthcoming Treasury financing
is proposed because the quarterly financing to be announced on October 22
is relatively small and because Treasury financings have been and for some
time will continue to be frequent.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with
[DEL: moderate] SUBSTANTIAL growth in monetary aggregates over the months
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent
with moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent
with [DEL: moderate] MODEST growth in monetary aggregates over the months
CONFIDENTIAL(FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
RESERVES AVAILABLE TO SUPPORT
PRIVATE NONBANK DEPOSITS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
SI I I I I I I I
I i i I
for Sept -Oct
A S 0
N D
RPD series has been adjusted to remove discontinuities associated with changes in reserve requirement ratios
CONNFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
NARROW MONEY SUPPLY Ml BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
I 280
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS AND INTEREST RATES
EY MARKET CONDIT
LY
AGES
FEDERAL FUI
FR DISCOUNT
RATE
IONS PER CENT
14
- 10
PERCENT INTEREST RATES Long-term
WEEKLY
FHA MORTGAGES
- 3 - FNMA MONDAY AUCTION
NEW ISSUE
GOVT BONDS
10 YEAR AVERAGES
MUNICIPAL
BOND BUYER
THURSDAYS
- 7
PER CENT
CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
TABLE 1 CLASS II-FOMC
BANK RESERVES OC,. 17, 1075
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
RESERVES AVAILABLE AGGREGATE RESERVES REQUIRED RESERVESRESERVES AVAILABLE
FOR PRIVATE SEASONALLY ADJUSTEDFOR PRIVATE
Period
NONBANK DEPOSITS Total Nonborrowed Total Private Other Time CD's and Gov't. and
SA NSA Reserves Reserves Required Demand Deposits Nondeposits InterbankoA I N oA ___
MONTHLY LEVELS-SMILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
WEEKLY LEVELS-$MILLIONS
OCT. 1
( -4.8)
f -2.1)
( 0.4)
S 1.0)
( 8,743)
f 3.0)
( 4,140)
( 1,932)
Table 2 CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
CLASS ]I-FOMC
MONEY SUPPLY Adlusted U.S TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS Nondeposit
Period Narrow Broad Credit Govt Other Sources of
(Ml) (M2) Proxy Deposits Total Than CD's CD's Funds
MONTHLY LEVELS-$BILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
SEPT.-OCT. ( -0.4) ( 4.3) ( 5.5) ( 12.2) ( 8.3) ( 30.0)
WEEKLY LEVELS-SBILLIONS
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II- FOMC
OCTOBER 17, 1975
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECT OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations 1/ Daily Average Reserve Effects 2/ A In Reserve Categories ATarget
Bills Coupon Agency RP's Open Market A Member Other 4/ Req. res. against available res.5/ available
Period & Accept. Issues Issues Net Total Operations Bank Borrowing Factors V.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8J-(9) reserves 51
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
Oct. 265
Nov.
Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month.
* Special certificate (Direct Treasury borrowing from F.R.) ** Reflects special certificate purchase.
P - Preliminary.
TABLE 4
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1/
($ millions, not seasonally adjusted)
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II--FOMC
OCTOBER 17, 1975
Treasury Coupons Federal Agencies Net Change
Period INet Purchases 3/ Net Purchases 4/ Outright RP
July
Aug.
Sept.
- 490
- 352
- 373
- 565
- 116
- 200
- -- -- 539
S - - - 584
-- -- -- -1,138
S - - - 159
S - - - - - 223
S - - - 765
S - - - 1,794
-- -- - -932
- 986
- 238
- 623
Change from end-of-per
Outright transactions
Outright transactions
iod to end-of-perLod.
in market and with foreign accounts, and redemptions (-) in bill auctions.
in market and with foreign accounts and short-term notes acquired in exchange for maturing bills. Excludes maturity shifts,
rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury borrowings from the System.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts only. Excludes redemptions and maturity shifts.
In addition to net purchases of securities, also reflects changes in System holdings of bankers' acceptances, direct Treasury borrowi gs from
the System, and redemptions (-) of Agency and Treasury coupon issues.
Includes changes in both RP's (+) and matched sale-purchase transactions (-).
' I
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
OCTOBER 17, 1975
TABLE 5
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
(millions of dollars)
U.S. Govt. Security
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Member Bank Reserve Positions
Corporate Municipal Excess** Borrowing at FRB** Basic Reserve Deficit
Bills Coupon Issues Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Others
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions issues
still in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserve less net Federal
funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are Friday figures.
** Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.* STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
OCTOBER 17, 1975
TABLE 6
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(Per Cent)
Short-Term ILong-Term
Treasury Bills 190-119 Day CD's New Issue-NYC Aaa Utility Municipal U.S. Government FNMA
Federal Commercial New Recently Bond (20-yr. Constant Auctions
Period Funds 90-day 1-year Paper 60-89 Day 90-119 Day Issue Offered Buyer Maturity) Yields
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
(2) (3)
p - Preliminary.
Weekly data for columns 1 to 4 are statement week averages of daily data. Columns 5 and 6 are one-day Wednesday quotes. For columns 7,8, and 10,
weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day quote for Thursday following the end of the
statement week. Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceeding the end of the statement week. The PNMA auction yield is the average
yield in bi-weekly auction for short-term forward commitments for Government underwritten mortgages.
-- ~-----
