Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
September 12, 1975
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC September 12, 1975
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 grew at a 4½ per cent annual rate in August, and data
suggest some pick up in September. For the August-September period, M1
is now projected to grow at an annual rate of 5.7 per cent, about the
mid-point of its range of tolerance. Growth of consumer-type time deposits
also slowed in August, and M2 is projected during the August-September period
at a 7 per cent annual rate, somewhat below the lower end of its target of
Growth in Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
over August-September Period 1/
Reserve and monetary aggregates
(Growth at SAAR in per cent)
Ranges of
Tolerance
Latest Estimates
Memo:
Federal funds rate
(per cent per annum) 5¾ to 7
Avg. for statement
week ending
(2) Business loans at banks remained about unchanged in August,
following a small July advance, but the volume of commercial and finance company
paper outstanding rose $600 million, as the wide differential between the bank
prime and commercial paper rates continued to make the paper market relatively
attractive. Banks allowed CD's to run off for the seventh straight month,
and the bank credit proxy declined.
(3) Following the August FOMC meeting, the Desk continued to
provide reserves consistent with the Federal funds rate remaining in a range
of 6-1/8 to 6-1/4 per cent. On the basis of data for the aggregates that
became available after Labor Day, the staff reduced its projection of M1
growth for August-September to the lower part of the Committee's range of
tolerance and its projection of M2 growth below the bottom of the range. In
view of the expectation of a substantial strengthening in demands for money
and credit over coming months, and the likelihood that a decline in the
Federal funds rate may have to be reversed shortly, the Committee concurred
on September 5 in the Chairman's recommendation to instruct the Desk to
continue aiming at a Federal funds rate in a 6-1/8 to 6-1/4 per cent area,
leaning toward the lower figure. In the most recent statement week, the
funds rate averaged 6.15 per cent.
(4) Treasury bill rates have changed little on balance since the
August meeting, even though the Treasury continued to add significantly to
the supply of bills. The 3-month bill was most recently trading around
(5) Over most of the intermeeting period, yields on Treasury coupon
issues edged lower, and corporate bond yields remained about unchanged, re-
flecting the stability of short-term rates, System purchases of coupon issues
in late August, and a lull in the volume of new offerings in both sectors.
Municipal yields rose to record levels during the intermeeting period as
the financial problems facing New York City continued to cast a pall.
However, on September 9, the New York State legislature adopted a financial
plan that would avoid a near-term default on the City's outstanding securities
and cover the City's cash needs through mid-December. In response, the market
atmosphere improved and prices of MAC issues strengthened. Following the
Treasury's September 10 announcement of its sizable cash requirements over the
remainder of 1975, however, yields in all bond markets adjusted upward.
Throughout the intermeeting period, mortgage rates advanced as demands for
mortgage funds expanded and lenders became more uncertain as to the cost and
availability of savings funds.
(6) The Treasury indicated that it would be raising about $44 to
$47 billion in the second half of 1975, which is about $3-$6 billion more than
previously announced. Allowing for the funds already raised since mid-year,
the remaining cash need to be covered between now and year-end appears to be
in the $23-$26 billion range. A substantial amount of this will be auctioned
between now and the next Committee meeting. The Treasury will raise $1 billion
of new cash in the monthly 2-year note auction on September 16, and will offer
$2 billion of 29-month notes on September 24. It is also likely that another
$5 billion will be auctioned in the note market near the time of the next
Committee meeting on October 21. Meanwhile, the Treasury will also be
adding to weekly and monthly bill auctions, though in the case of the weekly
auctions by somewhat lesser amounts than in recent months.
(7) The table on the following page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financing flows over various time
Calendar Twelve Six Three Past
Year Months Months Months Month
Aug. '74 Feb. '75 May 75 July '75
Concepts of Money (Revised Series)
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(8) Summarized below for Committee consideration are specifi-
cations for three alternative short-run policy courses. More detailed
figures--including longer-run growth rates--are presented in the
tables on pp. 6a and 6b.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges of tolerance
for Sept.-Oct.
(9) Following relatively slow growth in the July-August period,
in September and October M1 is expected to expand at rates more nearly
consistent with the underlying strength of transactions demands. Deposit
expansion in the previous months had been dampened as the public brought
deposit holdings into a more normal relationship with income and interest
rates, following the sharp bulge in late spring resulting from special
Treasury payments. This process now appears to have been completed.
Under alternative A --which assumes the same Federal funds rate range
for the forthcoming intermeeting period as that adopted at the last
meeting--M1 is expected to rise at an annual rate in the 6½-3½ per cent
area over this and the next month on average. M2 growth is also likely
to accelerate, mainly reflecting the more rapid expansion on demand deposits.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
QIII
QIV
QII '75-QIV '75
QIV '75-QII '76
QII '75-Q0I '76
MEMO
Committee Target Ranges
- 6b -
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Credit Proxy
Levels
1975 August
September
Octnber
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
1975 September
QII
QIV
QII '75-QIV '75
QIV '75-QII '76
However, growth in consumer-type time and savings deposits also is
expected to strengthen a little, at least temporarily, from its reduced
August rate.
(10) If Federal funds over the next few weeks were to continue
trading in the recent 6-1/8--6¾ per cent range, market interest rates
generally would be likely to show little further net change. Interest
rates on Treasury securities--particularly bills and short-intermediate
issues--have been adjusting upward recently in response to the cash need
and financing package announced by the Treasury on Wednesday. Some
further yield increases could occur, though, as the new securities are
auctioned, with about $8 billion of new cash to be raised through auctions
of coupon issues between now and around the time of the next meeting.
(11) Business borrowing in the corporate bond market over the
weeks ahead is likely to be at a slower rate than in the first half of
this year, though picking up from the reduced August pace and still
quite sizable by historical standards. The prospective volume of state
and local government issues remains relatively large. The municipal market
could be stabilized, for a time, by the assistance package for New York
City enacted by the New York State legislature. It is possible that the
period of calm may last into the fall, but there are still substantial
uncertainties in the market, typified by the slow reception initially
accorded the recent offering of generously priced short-term New York
State issues.
(12) Given the large amount of Treasury borrowing that is
being compressed into the next month or so, as well as the still sensitive
state of the municipal market, a significant rise in the Federal funds
rate--for example, toward the upper end of the 5-3/4--7 per cent range
of alternative A--would likely lead to substantial further yield advances.
Interest rate increases would be accentuated if strengthening credit
demands on banks from businesses and consumers were at the same time
reducing bank willingness to add to Treasury security holdings.
(13) While alternative A basically assumes little or no change
in the Federal funds rate between now and the next meeting, the staff
believes the funds rate would have to rise later in the fall if the
monetary aggregates are to remain on track with the Committee's longer-
run objectives. A funds rate in the 7-7 per cent area would be expected
by late fall, assuming a longer-run M1 objective characterized by 7 per
cent growth from QII '75 to QII '76 (the assumption of the Green Book
GNP projection), with further funds rate increases anticipated in the
first half of next year. Attainment of a longer-run 6 per cent annual
rate of growth in M1 would be likely to require more prompt and intensive
pressure on the funds market. In view of the further interest rate increases
expected given either of these two M1 growth rates,we have assumed, in
working out all of the alternatives in this bluebook, a small upward
adjustment in Regulation Q ceilings around year-end of ¼ to ½ percentage
point on time certificates. With this assumption, longer-run M2 growth
is projected toward the low end of the Committee's announced target
range under alternative A.
(14) Alternative C encompasses an immediate substantial tightening
of the money market and is characterized by a Federal funds rate range
With growth in nonborrowed reserves more constrained, member bank borrowing
under this alternative would be likely to rise to $400 million or more,
given the 6 per cent discount rate. Nonetheless, growth of M1 in
September-October would probably be reduced somewhat, to the 6-8 per cent
area. Interest rates generally would rise quite sharply during the next
month under this alternative, particularly given the very large Treasury
financing demands described in paragraph (6). A rise in the 3-month bill
rate to [8] per cent or a little above would not be unlikely, and the yield
on 2-year Treasury notes could exceed 9 per cent.
(15) Such rate levels would undoubtedly divert savings flows
away from banks and thrift institutions. The staff would expect the
annual rate of growth in consumer-type time deposits at banks and deposits
at thrift institutions to drop to around a 7-8 per cent rate in October.
Pressures on such flows would be intensified later in the fall and early
next year, when further increases in the Federal funds rate would be
(16) Under alternative C mortgage market conditions may be
expected to tighten rather promptly, with rates rising further over the
next few weeks and with lenders becoming less willing to make loan
commitments. Under alternative A, and to a certain extent under
alternative B (to be discussed below), strains on the mortgage
market would be more delayed and less severe. The assumed adjustment
in Regulation Q ceilings would temper the impact of upward market rate
adjustments on savings inflows to thrift institutions after year-end,
but the mortgage market would still be expected to come under additional
pressure next year.
(17) Alternative B contemplates a modest tightening of money
market conditions between now and the next Committee meeting, as
indicated by the 6-3/4 per cent mid-point of a 6-7 per cent Federal
funds rate range. As in the other alternatives, additional tightening
would appear to be necessary later this year and early next year. The
staff has assumed that the Federal funds rate under this alternative
particular funds rate pattern would be consistent with a one-year growth
rate for M1 between QII '75 and QII '76 of 6-3/4 per cent. Given the
downward revision of $1.2 billion in the average level of M1 in the
second quarter of 1975, such a growth rate would result in the same
average level of M1 in the second quarter of 1976 as was implied by the
Proposed directive
(18) Given below is a proposed operational paragraph if the
Committee wishes to continue formulating its instructions in terms of
desired growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead. No
alternatives are presented for this formulation, in the expectations that
the reference to desired growth will be taken to apply to the longer-term
targets and that the Committee will not be reconsidering its present 5 to
alternatives discussed in the preceding sections are consistent--until
the October meeting.
"Monetary aggregates" proposal
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with
moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
(19) Should the Committee desire to formulate the directive
in terms of bank reserve and money market conditions, the language needed
would depend on the specific conditions sought. These alternative
"money market" directives intended to correspond to the similarly lettered
policy alternatives are given below.
Alternative "money market" proposals
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to [DEL: achieve] MAINTAIN ABOUT THE PREVAILING bank reserve and money
market conditions OVER THE PERIOD IMMEDIATELY AHEAD, PROVIDED
THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES APPEAR TO BE GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES
CURRENTLY EXPECTED [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead].
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to achieve SOMEWHAT FIRMER bank reserve and money market conditions
OVER THE PERIOD IMMEDIATELY AHEAD, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES
DO NOT APPEAR TO BE GROWING AT RATES BELOW THOSE CURRENTLY EXPECTED
[DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to achieve FIRMER bank reserve and money market conditions OVER THE
PERIOD IMMEDIATELY AHEAD, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES DO NOT
APPEAR TO BE GROWING AT RATES BELOW THOSE CURRENTLY EXPECTED
[DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the
months ahead].
RESERVES AVAILABLE TO SUPPORT
PRIVATE NONBANK DEPOSITS
- 33
t I I 1 I
S 0J J A
M J S i M J S D i.M J S D M J S D
RPD series has been adjusted to remove discontinuities associated with changes in reserve requirement ratios
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
9/12/75
MONETARY AGGREGATES
NARROW MONEY SUPPLY M1 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
I ~ ~ ~ ~ I iL iiLLLI L
BROADER MONEY SUPPLY M2
- 280
- 280
L1ae
J J A
1975
S 0
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY
L V I L I L I
CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
TABLE 1 CLASS II-FOMC
SEPT. 12, 1975
BANK RESERVES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
RESERVES AVAILABLE AGGREGATE RESERVES REQUIRED RESERVES
RESERVES AVAILABLE
o FOR PRIVATE _ _SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
Period
NONBANK DEPOSITS Total Nonborrowed Total Private Other Time CD's and Gov't. and
MONTHLY LEVELS-tMILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
WEEKLY LEVELS-SMILLIONS
SEPT. 3
( -1.4)
( -3.7)
( -7.0)
( -7.2)
( -6.3)
f 0.8)
( 8.749)
( 3.965)
( 1,850)
Table 2 CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
MONETARY AGGREGATES CLASS.FOMC
SEPT. 12, 1975
ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
MONEY SUPPLY Adjusted U S TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS Nondeposit
Period Narrow Broad Credit Govt Other Sources of
(M) (M2) Proxy Deposits Total Than CD's CD's Funds
MONTHLY LEVELS-$BILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
WEEKLY LEVELS-SBILLIOMS
MA I I -A- I I
NOTE: DATA SHOWN IN PARENTHESES ARE CURRENT PROJECTIONS. P - PRELIMINARY
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
SEPTEMBER 12, 1975
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECT OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations 1/ Daily Average Reserve Effects 2/ In Reserve Categories Target
Bills Coupon Agency RP's Open Market 8 Member Other 4/ Req. res. against available res. 5/ vailable
& Accept Issues Issues Net Total Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) reserves5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month.
* Special certificate (Direct Treasury borrowing from F.R.) ** Reflects special certificate purchase.
P- Preliminary.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II --FOMC
SEPTEMBER 12, 1975
TABLE 4
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1/
($ millions, not seasonally adjusted)
Treasury Coupons Federal Agencies Net
Treasury Bills Change
Period Net Change 2/ Net Purchases 3/ Net Purchases 4/ Outright RP's
Within Over Within Over Holdings Net 6/
.. . . . d
Change from and-of-period to end-of-period.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts, and redemptions (-) in bill auctions.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts and short-term notes acquired in exchange for maturing bills. Excludes maturity shifts, rollovers
of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury borrowings from the System.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts only. Excludes redemptions and maturity shifts.
In addition to net purchases of securities, also reflects changes in System holdings of bankers' acceptances, direct Treasury borrowings fromthe System, and redemptions (-) of Agency and Treasury coupon issues.
Includes changes in both RP's (+) and matched sale-purchase transactions (-).
Revised to include short-term coupons acquired in exchange for maturing hills.
TABLE 5
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
(millions of dollars)
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
SEPTEMBER 12, 1975
U.S. Govt. Security
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Member Rank Reserve Positions
Corporate Municipal Excess** Borrowing at FRB** Basic Reserve Deficit
Period Bills Coupon Issues Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Others
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Aug. 6
*4,294
*5,070
*1,103
* 894
- 9,224
- 8,250
- 9,896
- 9,966
p
-10.293p
Government security dealer trading positions are on a commitment basis. Trading positions, which exclude Treasury bills financed by repurchase
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions issues
still in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserves less net Federal
funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are Friday figures.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL ** Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement
week figures.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
SEPTEMBER 12, 1975
TABLE 6
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(Per Cent)
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Federal
Funds
Treasury Bills
Panor
I
CD's New Issue-NYC
I .
(2) (3)
Long-Term
Aaa Utility Municipall U.S. Government
New Recently Bond (20-yr. Constant
Issue Offered IBuae Maturity)
FNMA
Auctions
Yelrs
Yields
Weekly data for columns 1 to 4 are statement week averages of daily data. Columns 5 and 6 are one-day Wednesday quotes. For columns 7,8, and 10 the
weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day quote for Thursday following the end of the
statement week. Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceeding the end of the statement week. The FNMA auction yield is the averageyield in bi-weekly auction for short-term forward commitments for Government underwritten mortgages.
Preliminary.
-'-- L' '"'
"(4)
- -~-------
l i- Ilav ol--I1 n l
APPENDIX TABLE 1-A
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATE MEASURES SEP T. 12, 1975
RESERVES 1/ BANK CREDIT MONEY STOCK
RESERVES MEASURES MEASURES
Available Total
Period Non to Ad Loans
Total borrowed Support Credit and M M M3  M4 M5 M6 M7
borrowed Pt proxy Invest.
Deposits ments
APPENDIX TABLE 1-B
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATE MEASURES
SEASONALLY ADJUSTED, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
SEPT. 12, 1975
-BANK CREDIT MONEY STOCK
RESERVES! MEASURES MEASURES
Available Total
Period Non to Adl Loans
Tota
l
No,Total borrowed SUP r t Credit and MI M 2  M3 M4 M5 M6 M7
proxy Invest
Deposits ments
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
AUG. P
SEPT. 3P
a3ee.
98341
APPENDIX TABLE 2-A SEPT. 12, 1975
COMPONENTS OF MONEY STOCK AND RELATED MEASURES
Time Mutual Short
Total Other Savings Credit ShortDemand me Other Bank Union CD's Savings I Term ICommerciaPeriod Currency osits Deposits Cns ank Union CD's B Inds . Gov't Pacer
(Per cent annual rates of growth)
APPENDIX TABLE 2-B SEPT. 12, 1975
COMPONENTS OF MONEY STOCK AND RELATED MEASURES
STTime Mutual Shrt
Demand Total Other Savings Credit Svr Non U S
Perod Currency Tome Bank Union CD's S Te C ia dposit Gov't
____Depos Cs and
D
S Shares Securities Funs
Shares,_ 1
Appendix Table III
Growth Rate in Money Supply
(Per cent change in an annual rate)
(Revised Series)
M1  M2  M3
M Q M Q M Q
M = Annual rates of growth calculated from average levels in the final
months of the quarters.
Q = Annual rate calculated from average levels in all three months of
the quarters.
Appendix Table IV
Impact of Benchmark Revisions on Money Stock Growth Rates
(Seasonally adjusted, per cent annual rates)
M
Old Revised
M2
Old Revised
Quarterly: end-of-quarter to end-of-quarter
Quarterly average:
Old Revised
