Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
August 15, 1975Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) August 15, 1975
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Growth of M1 slowed markedly in July, as expected, but
was a little stronger than the slightly negative number that had been
projected in the last blue book. Data for the first week of August showed
only a moderate pick-up in M1 expansion. For the July-August target period,
M1 growth is now projected at an annual rate of about 3½ per cent, in
the lower part of the range of tolerance specified by the FOMC at its
last meeting. Inflows of consumer-type time and savings deposits also
moderated significantly in July and slowed still further in early August.
For July and August combined, M2 now appears likely to expand at an
annual rate of 8½ per cent, also in the lower part of the Committee's
specified growth range.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
over July-August period
Reserve and monetary aggregates Ranges of
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance Latest Estimates
RPD -2 to ½ -4.6
Memo:
Federal funds rate Avg. for statement
(2) Early in the intermeeting period, incoming deposit data
seemed to be indicating a substantially less pronounced slowdown than
had been forecast, and the key aggregates seemed likely to expand
at rates close to or above the upper limits of the Committee's two-month
ranges of tolerance. In these circumstances, the Desk raised its operating
target for the Federal funds rate from around 6 per cent to a range of
shoot in monetary growth still seemed likely, the Desk sought no
further increase in the funds rate because of uncertainties with respect
to the behavior of the monetary aggregates and the approach of the Treasury's
August refunding. The average funds rate did, nevertheless, move up to
have been weaker than expected and projected aggregate growth rates
have been moved down progressively to the lower part of their ranges
of tolerance. Consequently, there was no further tightening of
the funds rate, and most recently the Desk did not overtly respond
when the rate tended to edge down to a little below 6-1/8 per cent.
(3) Other short-term rates responded to the initial rise
in the funds rate and have increased appreciably further in recent
weeks, due in part to the announcement of larger than expected Treasury
financing operations. Over the full period, Treasury bill rates have
advanced 3/8 to 3/4 of a percentage point, and private short-term rates have
moved up 1/4 to 1/2 of a percentage point. Bank prime rates have also
been raised, to 7-3/4 per cent, notwithstanding the persistence
of generally weak business loan demands.
(4) In longer-term securities markets, interest rates have
also moved higher since the July FOMC meeting. Quotes on Treasury
issues have led the advance, reflecting the weight of Treasury financings--
including the three-part August refunding and the subsequent auctions
of two- and four-year notes. Upward pressures on corporate bond yields
have been dampened to some extent by the July drop-off in new-issue
volume. More recently, unsettled market conditions resulted in the
postponement or cancellation of about 1/2 a billion of new
issues that had been scheduled for marketing in August. In the
municipal market, yields have risen to new records, reflecting the com-
bination of a continued sizable volume of offerings and the impact on
market attitudes of the financing problems of New York City and the
New York State agencies. The last-minute coverage of August financing
requirements for "Big Mac" and the New York State Housing Finance Agency
may have provided some temporary relief, but both borrowers will
require large additional amounts of credit again in September.
(5) The table on the following page shows (in percentage
annual rates of change) selected monetary and financing flows over
various time periods. Appendix Table III compares money supply growth
rates computed on a quarterly-average basis with those computed on
a last-month-of-quarter basis.
Past Past
Calendar Twelve Six Three Past
Year Months Months Months Month
July'74 Jan.'75 Apr.'75 June'75
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
(6) Summarized below for Committee consideration are specifica-
tions for three alternative short-run policy courses. More detailed
figures--including levels and quarterly growth rates of the monetary
aggregates associated with the Committee's 5-7½ per cent long-run growth
target for M1--are presented in the tables on pages 5a and 5b. Alternative
operating guides expressed in terms of nonborrowed reserves, as well as
other related reserve measures, are shown in appendix table IV.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges of tolerance
for Aug.-Sept.
M2  9 to 11½ 8¼ to 10¾ 7½ to 10
Federal funds rate
(intermeeting range) 5½ to 6¾ 6 to 7½ 6¼ to 8¼
(7) Since nominal GNP is now projected to expand at an average
rate of 15 per cent through the second quarter of 1976, it seems highly
probable that longer-run growth in M1 can be contained within the Committee's
further as the period progresses. For this reason none of the short-run
policy options presented contemplates an easing of money market rates
from recent levels. Under alternative A, the average funds rate would
remain close to recently prevailing levels for the time being, but
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2  M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
MEMO
Committee Target Ranges 5-7½ 8½-10½ 10-12
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Credit Proxy
M4
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Levels
1975 July
August
September
QIII
QIV
Alternatives B and C would both involve some immediate further
tightening of money market conditions.
(8) The short-run specifications for alternative C--which
contemplate a near-term rise in the Federal funds rate to around
to be consistent with a policy strategy geared to ultimate attainment
of the 6-1/4 per cent mid-point of the Committee's 5--7-1/2 per cent
long-run target range for M1. If the staff projection of significantly
more rapid growth in nominal GNP proves correct, we believe that
efforts to hold M1 expansion to the 6-1/4 per cent long-run target
will require further substantial increases in the Federal funds rate
during the fall and early winter--perhaps to 10 per cent or more
by early 1976.
(9) Alternative B--which contemplates a rise in the Federal
funds rate during the intermeeting period to 6-3/4 per cent (the
mid-point of the 6--7-1/2 per cent range presented)--is thought
to be consistent with the first stage of a possible longer-run
strategy that would hold M1 growth within the Committee's 5--7-1/2 per
cent target range--but near the top end of that range. It conforms
with the monetary assumptions underlying the Greenbook economic
projection and is thought likely to imply a Federal funds rate
approaching 9 per cent by early 1976. As noted in the Greenbook, a
rate of money growth in the upper part of the Committee's
long-run target range would help accommodate the special price
effects resulting from decontrol of old oil and the worsening
international outlook for food prices.
(10) Alternative A is also consistent with a longer-run
strategy that would allow growth in M1 near the top of the 5--7-1/2 per
cent target range. In this case, however, some delay is envisaged
in moving to limit monetary growth, in order to avoid near-term
money market tightening while the economy is still in the beginnings
of recovery. Holding money market conditions about unchanged for the
present, however,would probably require a more aggressive tightening
later on, after the recovery gathers momentum. Therefore, the staff
believes that this strategy would imply somewhat higher money market
rates early in 1976 than under alternative B.
(11) During the immediate August-September period, growth
in the monetary aggregates is expected to pick up from the depressed
July pace. The limited data available for early August suggests
only a moderate acceleration, but the improvement in economic
activity apparently underway seems likely to result in more rapid
monetary expansion later in the month and in September. Under
the unchanged money market conditions contemplated for alternative
A, M1 growth in September is thought likely to rise to around a
of about 6-1/4 per cent. Under alternative B, the average 50 basis
point advance in the funds rate would probably exert only a small
dampening influence on the aggregates during the two month projection
period; the average M1 growth rate for August-September might be reduced
to nearly 5-3/4 per cent. The steep rise in the funds rate contemplated
under alternative C--to a 7-1/4 per cent average in the weeks immediately
ahead--would be expected to exert a more pronounced restraint on near-
term monetary growth. M1 expansion might be held to an annual rate of
about 5-1/2 per cent in September, giving an August-September average
of 5-1/4 per cent.
(12) Although we anticipate that interest rates would need
to rise substantially as the year progresses under any of the longer-
run scenarios described above, the unchanged money market conditions
of alternative A would probably encourage general interest rate
stability for a time. In the absence of additional money market firming
there might even be some little rally if there are no disquieting
financial developments. Private credit demands remain quite weak on
balance, although there have been some fragmentary indications of the
beginnings of a pickup in recent weeks. The market appears to have
made its adjustment to the higher funds rate now prevailing, and the
Treasury announcement of its somewhat increased third quarter needs
has already been taken into account by market participants.
(13) The 50 basis points rise in the Federal funds rate
contemplated under alternative B would probably trigger roughly
commensurate advances in other short-term rates, and long-term
markets would also come under renewed upward rate pressure. Moderate
further tightening would tend to confirm the widespread expectation
that interest rates are now in a firming trend, and market professionals
could be expected to continue their recent generally cautious approach
to underwriting of new issues. Rising market interest rates would
exert further pressure on the bank prime rate, and rates on Treasury
and Federal agency securities would become increasingly competitive
for savings funds now flowing into the thrift institutions. Market
repercussions from the rise in the Federal funds rate of 100 basis points
or more contemplated under alternative C, of course, would be more
extreme. Securities markets for a time might experience difficulties
in handling flows of new debt offerings. The problem of disintermediation
at depositary institutions would become more serious and would arise
sooner than anticipated in the staff economic projection. This
would make early action on Regulation Q ceilings more urgent but,
even with such action, the general availability and cost of mortgage
financing could be significantly affected.
(14) Under any of the alternatives time deposit inflows
would be expected to moderate from those of the recent past. Some
slowing is already evident in the recent data, mainly because the
special Treasury payments to individuals have terminated. Increasingly,
however, higher market interest rates will come to impinge on savings
inflows to the intermediaries, and under alternative C this impact
would probably be quite pronounced by the fourth quarter. Because
of the developing squeeze, we have assumed an increase in Regulation Q
ceilings amounting to one-half a percentage point for longer-term certifi-
cates (to become effective by year-end) under all alternatives presented.
This assumption reduces, but does not eliminate, the marked slowing
that would otherwise have been projected in the rate of expansion
of consumer-type time deposits and the more broadly defined measures
of money supply.
(15) In the August-September period, we would expect savings
inflows to continue at the more moderate recent pace, but perhaps to
be drifting lower, particularly under alternative C. The bank credit
proxy is expected to remain quite weak, since banks are unlikely
to become aggressive in seeking funds through issuance of CD's
and non-deposit liabilities until business loan demand strengthens
(16) The continuing serious financing problems of New York
City--and, increasingly, of the State--pose major uncertainties for
the intermeeting period, with respect to both credit market develop-
ments and necessary policy responses. It is not inconceivable that the System
would have to give temporary priority to general liquidity needs rather
than to its objectives for the monetary aggregates. Short of this, the
directive phrase calling for account to be taken of developments in
financial markets may assume particular importance in the conduct
of Desk operations in this period.
Proposed directive
(17) Presented below are four alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive. The first three are
intended to correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives
discussed in the preceding session, while the fourth may be associated
with any of the policy alternatives. In all of the alternatives the
reference to "the forthcoming Treasury financing" included in the July
directive is deleted, since the Treasury's August refunding has been
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury and of] developments in domestic
and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to main-
tain about the prevailing bank reserve and money market conditions
over the period immediately ahead, provided that [DEL: growth in] monetary
aggregates [DEL: appears] APPEAR to be GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES
CURRENTLY EXPECTED [DEL: slowing substantially from the bulge during
the second quarter].
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury financing and of] developments in domestic
and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to
[DEL: maintain about the prevailing] ACHIEVE SOMEWHAT FIRMER bank
reserve and money market conditions over the period immediately
ahead, provided that [DEL: growth in] monetary aggregates DO NOT [DEL: appears
APPEAR to be GROWING AT RATES BELOW THOSE CURRENTLY EXPECTED
[DEL: slowing substantially from the bulge during the second quarter].
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury financing and of] developments in domestic
and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to
[DEL: maintain about the prevailing] ACHIEVE FIRMER bank reserve and
money market conditions over the period immediately ahead,
provided that [DEL: growth in] monetary aggregates DO NOT [DEL: appears
APPEAR to be GROWING AT RATES BELOW THE SPECIFIED SHORT-
RUN RANGES OF TOLERANCE [DEL: slowing substantially from the bulge
during the second quarter].
Possible substitute wording for all alternatives
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury financing and of] developments in domestic
and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to
[DEL: maintain about the prevailing] ACHIEVE bank reserve and money
market conditions CONSISTENT WITH MODERATE GROWTH IN MONETARY
AGGREGATES over the MONTHS AHEAD [DEL: period immediately ahead pro-
vided that growth in monetary aggregates appears to be slowing
substantially from the bulge during the second quarter].
CONFIDENTIAL FR)
CLASS II--FOMC
RESERVES AVAILABLE TO SUPPORT
PRIVATE NONBANK DEPOSITS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- 34
J I i I I 1 I
I I I I
M J J
1975
j 2
.,I
I I I I I I I
M J S D M J S D
RPD series has been adjusted to remove discontinuities associated with changes in reserve requirement ratios
CHART I
}4-
A S
! r i '
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES
BROADER MONEY SUPPLY M2
M J J
1975
A S
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS AND INTEREST RATES
PER CENT
14
- 10
- 8
CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
TABLE 1 CLASS II-FOMC
BANK RESERVES AUG. 15, 1975
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
AGGREGATE RESERVES REQUIRED RESERVESRESERVES AVAILABLE
Period FOR PRIVATE SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
Period
NONBANK DEPOSITS Total Nonborrowed Total Private Other Time CD's and Gov't. and
SA NSA Reserves Reserves Required Demand Deposits Nondeposits Interbank
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
WEEKLY LEVELS-SMILLIONS
Table 2 CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
MONETARY AGGREGATES 
CLASS II FOMC
ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED AUG. 15, 1975
MONEY SUPPLY Adjusted U.S. TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS Nondeposit
Period Narrow Broad Credit Govt Other Sources of
(Ml) (M2) Proxy Deposits Total Than CD's CD's Funds
MONTHLY LEVELS-$BILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
JULY-AUG. I 3.7) I 8.6) ( -4.7) I 2.5) ( 12.7) I -40.7)
WEEKLY LEVELS-SSILLIONS
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
AUGUST 15, 1975
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECT OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
r -I iT
Bills Coupon
A t I
Onen Market Oneratinn i/i flatly vrnes Reserve Effects 2/ A In Reserve Categories
S. r .. ----- - -----s ai l- ------- I U .. ..
Agency
l
RP's
W
Open Market
j
S Member
B k, BM i,
Other 4/
W .
Req. res. against
IT C A 4 Unta
p
-
39
p
(10)
341
Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month.
* Special certificate (Direct Treasury borrowing from F.R.) ** Reflects special certificate purchase.
p - Preliminary.
A Target
available
reserves 5/T t l
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II--FOMC
AUGUST 15, 1975
TABLE 4
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1/
($ millions, not seasonally adjusted)
Apr.
May
June
- 490
- 43
- 352
- 704
coupons, and direct Treasury borrowings from the System.
4/ Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts only. Excludes redemptions and maturity shifts.
5/ In addition to net purchases of securities, also reflects changes in System holdings of bankers' acceptances, direct Treasury borrowings from
the System, and redemptions (-) of Agency and Treasury coupon issues.6/ Includes changes in both RP's (+) and matched sale-purchase transactions (-).
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
AUGUST 15, 1975
TABLE 5
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
(millions of dollars)
U.S. Govt. Security
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Member Bank Reserve Positions
Corporate Municipal Excess** Borrowing at FRB** Basic Reserve Deficit
Period Bills Coupon Issues Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Others
-- High
Low
-- July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
*4,237
*4,241
*1,995
*1,150
(9)
-12,826
- 6,046
- 9,555
- 9,224
- 8,250
- 9,896
- 9,733p
-10,713p
** Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
Government security dealer trading positions are on a commitment basis. Trading positions, which exclude Treasury bills financed by repurchase
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions issues still
in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserves less net Federal funds
purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are Friday figures.
--~-~---- " Y ~II ----~
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
AUGUST 15, 1975
TABLE 6
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(Per Cent)
Short-Term ___Lng-Tan
Treasury Bills 90-119 Day CD's New Tsue-NYC AAa Utility Municipal U.S. Government FNMA
Federal Commercial New Recently Bond (20-yr. Constant Auctions
Period Funds 90-day 1-year Paper 60-89 Day 90-119 Day Issue Offered Buyer Maturity) Yields
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
(8)
10.52
quotes. For columns 7, 8, and 10
for Thursday following the end of
The FNMA auction yield is the
Weekly data for columns 1 to 4 are statement week averages of daily data. Columns 5 and 6 are one-day Wednesday
the weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day quote
the statement week. Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceeding the and of the statement week.
average yield in bi-weekly auction for short-term forward commitments for Government underwritten mortgages.
Preliminary.
- L " "
APPENDIX TABLE 1-B
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATE MEASURES
SEASONALLY ADJUSTED, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
RESERVE BANK CREDIT MONEY STOCK
RESERVES MEASURES MEASURES
Available Total
Period Non- to Adl Loans
Total Support Credit and Mi M2  M M4 MS M6  M7borrowed pt proxy Invest
Deposits ments
OC1.
NOV.
DEC.
z975--JAN.
FEB.
MAR.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY P
AUG. 6P
APPENDIX TABLE 2-B Aug. 15, 1975
COMPONENTS OF MONEY STOCK AND RELATED MEASURES
Time Mutual Short
Demand Total Other Savings Credits Term Commercial Non- U.S.
Period Currency Time Bank Union CD's Inss U Comera deposit Gov't
Dep s Cs epostsand S & L Shares Bonds es Papery Funds Demand
Shares Securit1es
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY P
AUG. 6P
RELATED INSTITUTIONS, AND EURODOLLAR BORROWINGS OF U.S.BANKS. WEEKLY DATA ARE DAILY AVERAGES FOR STATEMENT WEEKS. MONTHLY
DATA ARE DAILY AVERAGES. WEEKLY DATA ARE NOT AVAILABLE FOR M3, M5, M6, M7, TOTAL LOANS AND INVESTMENTS AND THRIFT INSTITU-
TION DEPOSITS.
1/ ESTIMATED MONTHLY AVERAGE LEVELS DERIVED BY AVERAGING END OF CURRENT MONTH AND END OF PREVIOUS MONTH REPORTED DATA.
Appendix Table III
Growth Rate in Money Supply
(Per cent change in an annual rate)
(Revised Series)
M M 2 M3
M Q M Q M Q
M = Annual rates of growth calculated from average levels in the final
months of the quarters.
Q = Annual rate calculated from average levels in all three months of
the quarters.
Appendix Table IV
SHORT-TERM OPERATING GUIDES*
Total Reserves Nonborrowed Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Excess Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A
Alt. B
* Adjusted for changes in reserve requirements.
Alt. A
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. C
