Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
July 11, 1975Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC July 11, 1975
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Growth of M1 accelerated further from May to June, on
average, to about an 18 per cent annual rate, but data for the two
statement weeks ending July 9--a period after Federal tax rebates and
special social security payments had ended--indicate a significant
decline in the level of the money stock. For June and July combined,
therefore, growth in M1 is now projected at an annual rate of about 8½
per cent--well within the Committee's two-month range of tolerance.
While growth of bank time and savings deposits other than large CD's
has also slowed recently, expansion of M2 still appears likely to run
somewhat above its two-month range of tolerance, as the table shows.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
over June-July period
Reserve and monetary aggregate Range of
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance Latest Estimates
M 1  6½-9½ 8.5
M2  9-12 
12.7
Memo:
Federal funds rate
(per cent per annum)
(2) Until the early days of July, incoming data on the monetary
aggregates were running well ahead of earlier staff projections, implying
growth in M1 and M2 at rates substantially in excess of the Committee's
ranges of tolerance. The Desk responded to this evidence of excessive
monetary growth, first by seeking a Federal funds rate moving up to
around 5¾ per cent, and then by raising the target to the 6 per cent
upper limit of the Committee's range. On June 26 a majority of the
Committee concurred with the Chairman's recommendation to increase the
upper limit of the funds rate range to 6¼ per cent, on the understanding
that the additional leeway would be utilized "only in the event that
another week's data confirm excessive strength in monetary aggregates".
In the early days of July, however, incoming data indicated a weakening
of the monetary aggregates relative to staff projections; thus, the
additional leeway was not used.
(3) Special factors affecting the Federal funds market did
force the average funds rate above 6 per cent, however, in late June
and early July. On the two trading days that preceded the Monday,
June 30 bank statement date, the daily funds rate rose to 6.31 and 6.61
per cent, respectively, as banks positioned themselves to minimize
borrowing on the statement date itself. As a result, even though the
rate then dropped back to around 6 per cent, the average for the week
was 6.31 per cent. On Thursday, July 3, banks scrambled to bolster
their reserve positions before the long holiday weekend. This forced
the funds rate up to about 6¼ per cent. After the holiday weekend,
however, the funds rate fell back, fluctuating generally between 5¾ and
nearly $1.5 billion just prior to the end-of-June statement date and
averaged $871 million in that week. In the statement week just ended
member borrowing averaged $223 million, still somewhat on the high side
of recent experience.
(4) Advances in short-term rates during the intermeeting
period were most pronounced in the Treasury bill market. The 3-month
bill--after reaching a peak rate of 6.20 per cent in last Monday's
auction--has traded most recently at around 6 per cent, which compares
with a level just above 5 per cent prevailing at the time of the last
meeting. The advance in bill rates was particularly large because
dealers had previously built up positions in anticipation of the
seasonal contraction in bill supply during the latter half of June.
When the funds rate then began to rise after mid-June, dealers pressed
aggressively to reduce their swollen positions. The impact of this
shift in dealer strategy was augmented when foreign buyers at the
same time began cutting back on demands for bills and the Treasury
shortly resumed its net additions to supply in bill auctions. Other
short-term rates responded to the rise in Federal funds and Treasury
bill rates--showing net advances of 75 to 100 basis points over the
intermeeting period.
(5) In longer-term securities markets, yield advances for
the intermeeting period amounted to about 20-30 basis points on Treasury
and new high grade corporate issues. Most recently, however, these
markets have stabilized, and new issues have been readily distributed.
Rates on State and local government securities showed little net change
for the period, but they were already close to their 1974 highs. Mortgage
rates have been generally stable, although the volume of mortgage offerings
accepted in FNMA secondary market auctions has grown.
(6) The table on the following page shows (in percentage
annual rates of change) selected monetary and financing flows over
various time periods. Appendix table III compares money supply growth
rates computed on a quarterly-average basis with those computed on a
last-month-of-quarter basis.
Past Past
Calendar Twelve Six Three Past
Year Months Months Months Month
June '74 Dec. '74 Mar. '75 May '75
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term arket Paper
(bnthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(7) Summarized below for Committee consideration are three
alternative short-run operating specifications for policy. More detailed
figures, including associated longer-run growth rates, are presented in
the tables on pp. 6a and 6b. Alternative operating guides expressed
in terms of nonborrowed reserves, as well as other related reserve
measures, are shown in appendix table IV.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges of tolerance
for July-Aug.
RPD -½ to 1½ -1½ to ½ -2½ to -½
Memorandum item:
6-month annual growth rate
(June '75- Dec. '75)
(8) The short-run specifications of alternative B involve
maintenance of prevailing money market conditions between now and the
next Committee meeting. Thus, the Federal funds rate range shown is
centered on 6 per cent. It is expected that growth in M1 and M2 over
the two-month July-August period will slow considerably from the recent
extreme pace. M1 is likely to expand in a 3½-5½ per cent annual rate
July
August
June '75 - Dec. '75
Dec. '75 - June '76
QII-Av.'75-QIV Av.'75
June '75 - June '76
QII-Av. 75-QII-Av.' 76
Alt. A
Alt. B
Alt. C
Longer-Run Growth Rates for Key
M
2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Longer-Run Growth Rates
Alt. A Alt. B
for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Credit Proxy
Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
June' 75-Dec. '75
Dec.' 75-June' 76
QII-Av.'75-QIV-Av.'75
QIV-Av.'75-QI-Av. '76
range, and M2 in an 8½-10½ per cent range. Preliminary data for M1 in
late June and early July indicate an unwinding of the recent deposit
expansion and support the view that the upsurge in good part reflected
temporary factors (tax rebates and one-time payments to social security
recipients). For July, M1 growth is expected to be slightly negative,
while growth in August is expected to resume at a pace more consonant
with underlying transactions demands, given prevailing money market
(9) While alternative B calls for maintenance of prevailing
money market conditions in the short-run, given the temporary slowing
expected in M1 growth, it appears likely that money market conditions will
need to be tightened further later on in order to achieve growth in the
aggregates as indexed by expansion in M1 over the next year at around
the center of the 5-7½ per cent range adopted by the Committee at its
last meeting. The staff at this point believes that the funds rate
might need to rise to the neighborhood of 8 per cent by fall, if the
projected 13 per cent annual rate of increase in nominal GNP for the
second half of 1975 materializes. On that assumption we would expect
M1 growth in the second half of 1975 to be at about a 7 per cent annual
rate; a lower growth rate in the first half of 1976 would hence be
required if the Committee's longer-run M1 target is to be achieved.
(10) In the table on p. 6a, under alternative B, the one-year
growth rate for M1 from June '75 to June '76 is shown as 5¾ per cent--
which is ½ point below the mid-point of the 5-7½ per cent target range.
The staff used such a rate in the alternative B calculations because
the substantial overshoot in M1 growth during June raised the base
level for that month by about $1.7 billion above the estimate made
at the previous FOMC meeting. Over the 12-month period from June 1975 to
June 1976, M1 would therefore have to grow about per cent less than
indicated earlier if the Committee wished to ensure that the June overshoot
did not permanently raise the money supply. The long-run growth rate under
alternative B measured on a quarterly average basis--that is, from the
average level for M1 in the second quarter of 1975 to the average level in the
second quarter of 1976--is around 6¾ per cent, as is also shown in the table.
(11) The same one-year growth rates are shown for alternative C
as for alternative B--with alternative C implying a somewhat different pattern
of monetary growth rates and interest rate movements over the two six month
periods, as will be noted below. Alternative A includes a growth rate for
the June '75-June '76 period of 6¼ per cent from the current estimate of the
June '75 base. Thus, it is keyed to the mid-point of the 5-7 per cent
range adopted by the Committee for that period at its last meeting and, in
effect, "forgives" the June overshoot. This alternative implies M1 growth
from QII '75 to QII '76 of around 6-3/4 per cent.
(12) The short-run specifications for alternative C contemplate
some further near-term tightening of the money market, involving a Federal
funds rate range of 6¼-7¼ per cent for the period until the next meeting.
Adoption of this alternative would introduce an increased monetary restraint
earlier than under alternative B. As a result, the staff would expect that
less additional pressure would have to be exerted on the Federal funds rate
later on to achieve targeted growth in the monetary aggregates over
the next year. Over the July-August period M1 growth under this
alternative would be expected to be at about a 3-5 per cent annual rate,
with growth over the last half of 1975 at around a 6 per cent annual
rate, or one percentage point less than under alternative B.
(13) If the Federal funds rate were to rise in coming weeks
to the 6¾ per cent mid-point of the alternative C range, a very sub-
stantial upward adjustment in other short-term rates would likely ensue.
The 3-month bill rate would probably move up to around 7 per cent, the
commercial paper rate to around 7 per cent, and the general level of
the prime loan rate would adjust upwards. However, if the Federal funds
rate were stabilized at around 6 per cent, as is contemplated under
alternative B, no more than minor upward market rate adjustments, if
any, would seem likely in the weeks immediately ahead. The Treasury
will be adding substantial amounts to weekly and monthly bill auctions,
but private short-term credit demands still appear weak enough so that
Treasury bills can probably be readily marketed to banks and other
(14) On July 23, the Treasury will announce the terms of its
mid-August refunding of $4.8 billion of maturing publicly-held coupon
issues and will probably also raise some new cash at that time. While
specific maturity areas of the new offerings are still uncertain, it
seems clear that intermediate-term issues will be involved and possibly
a longer-term option as well. In the corporate bond market, a continued
large volume of new issues is expected this summer, though less than in
June. The municipal volume will also be large, including another
$1 billion from the Municipal Assistance Corporation for New York City,
in late July or August and a third $1 billion by early fall. Given
these near-term demands on bond markets, any appreciable further tightening
of the money market in the weeks ahead would be likely to exert some
additional upward pressure on longer-term interest rates. Such pressures
could be moderated, of course, by postponements of corporate bond issues--
as might happen if borrowers thought that inflation was coming under
control and,therefore,that higher bond yields were not sustainable over
the longer run.
(15) Alternative A involves an easing of money market conditions
over the near-term, which in effect reverses the recent tightening.
Market interest rates would tend to decline in sympathy, but declines
might be quite modest as many market participants may assume that the
easing in money market conditions will be transitory, given the consensus
forecast of a strengthening in economic activity. Indeed, the staff
believes that under this alternative, short-term rates would have to
begin rising again by late summer or early fall to achieve longer-term
objectives for the monetary aggregates.
(16) Under all three alternatives net inflows of time and
savings deposits (other than large money market CD's) to banks and to
thrift institutions are expected to slow from their recent unusually
rapid pace that included the effects on savings of tax rebates and
one-time social security payments. The slowdown would be greatest over
the near-term under alternative C, which involves the probability of a
significant further rise in short-term market interest rates. Never-
theless, net inflows of consumer-type time deposits are still likely to
be good-sized during the summer. Later this fall reduced inflows might
be expected to exert more pronounced pressures on banks to raise
additional funds in the CD market and on thrift institutions to borrow
from Home Loan Banks and commercial banks under either alternatives B
or C.
Proposed directive
(17) Presented below are four alternative formulations for the
operational paragraph of the directive. The first three are intended to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in the
preceding section, while the fourth may be associated with any of the policy
alternatives. In all of the alternatives, it is proposed to include a
reference to Treasury financing because of the regular mid-August financing
that will be announced on July 23.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of
THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCING AND OF developments in
domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve SOMEWHAT EASIER bank reserve and money
market conditions OVER THE PERIOD IMMEDIATELY AHEAD, [DEL: con
sistent with moderate] PROVIDED THAT growth in monetary
aggregates APPEARS TO BE SLOWING SUBSTANTIALLY [DEL: over the
months ahead].
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of
THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCING AND OF developments in
domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to [DEL: acheive] MAINTAIN ABOUT THE PREVAILING bank reserve
and money market conditions OVER THE PERIOD IMMEDIATELY AHEAD,
[DEL: consistent with moderate] IN THE EXPECTATION THAT growth in
monetary aggregates WILL SLOW SUBSTANTIALLY [DEL: over the months
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of
THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCING AND OF developments in
domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve SOMEWHAT TIGHTER bank reserve and money
market conditions OVER THE PERIOD IMMEDIATELY AHEAD, [DEL: consistent
with moderate] IN ORDER TO ENCOURAGE A SUBSTANTIAL SLOWING OF
growth in monetary aggregates [DEL: over the months ahead].
Possible substitute wording for all alternatives
To implement this policy, while taking account of
THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCING AND OF developments in
domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions
consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates over
the months ahead.
CONFIDENTIAL(FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
RESERVES AVAILABLE TO SUPPORT
PRIVATE NONBANK DEPOSITS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- I I I I I I I I
J J
> 28
I I I I I I I
S D
RPD series has been adjusted to remove discontinuities associated with changes in reserve requirement ratios
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES
NARROW MONEY SUPPLY M1
S i I I iI I i
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
I I 1 I l I
BROADER MONEY SUPPLY M2
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS AND INTEREST RATES
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS PER CENT
l~ q
F.R. DISCOUNT
RATE
RESERVES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- NET BORROWED
Il ill1 III Ill1l 111111 A
INTEREST RATES Short-term PERCENT INTEREST RATES Long-term
PER CENT
TABLE 1
BANK RESERVES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
CLASS II-FOMC
JULY 11, 1975
RESERVES AVAILABLE AGGREGATE RESERVES REQUIRED RESERVES
FOR PRIVATE SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
Period FOR PRIVATE --------------- ------
---
Period
NONBANK DEPOSITS Total Nonborrowed Total Private Other Time CD's and Gov't. and
SA NSA Reserves Reserves Required Demand Deposits Nondeposits InterbankSA I NS
MONTHLY LEVELS-$MILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
WEEKLY LEVELS-$MILLIONS
! 3.0)
(34,888)
135,003)
I 6.2)
S 5.6)
( 6.91
(19,799)
S10,807)
( 4,330)
I 4.311)
( 1,874)
2,088)
Table 2 CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
MONETARY AGGREGATES CLASS II FOMCJULY 11, 1975
ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
MONEY SUPPLY Adjusted U.S. TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS Nondeposit
Period Narrow Broad Credit Govt. Other Sources of
(M1) (M2) Proxy Deposits Total Than CD's CD's Funds
MONTHLY LEVELS-$BILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
JUNE-JULY I 8.5) ( 12.71 ( 4.81 ( 9.71 ( 16.4) ( -17.51
WEEKLY LEVELS-$BILLIONS
P - PRELIMINARY
PE - PARTIALLY ESTIMATED
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
July 11, 1975
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECT OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations 1 Daily Average Reserve Effects 2/ A in reserve categories A Target
Bills Coupon Agency RP' Open Market Member Other 4/ Req. res. against available res. 5/ available
& Accept. Issues Issues Net Total Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) reserves 5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) - (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
July 290
Aug.
Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during 
the month.
P - Preliminary.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II--FOMC
July 11, 1975
TABLE 4
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1/
($ millions, not seasonally adjusted)
Treasury Bills
Net Purchases 2/
Treasury Coupons Federal Agencies
H Net Purchases 3/ 1 et PurchaAan /
Wl thin
Total 1-year
Over
Apr.
May
June
- 43
- 358
- 986
- 238
the System, and redemptions (-) of Agency and Treasury coupon issues.
5/ Includes changes in both RP's (+) and matched sale-purchase transactions (-).
Period
__I NetChange
Outright
Holdings
Total 4/Total
Net 5/
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
July 11, 1975
TABLE 5
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
(millions of dollars)
U.S. Govt. Security
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Member Bank Reserve Positions
Corporate Municipal Excess** Borrowing at FRB* Basic Reserve Deficit
Period Bills Coupon Issues Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Others
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
b - ----- -----.-. - -T- diI.4.J. i h ha 411o fnancedo by rpu,,rchaseNOTE:
** Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
Government security dealer tracing positions are on a commitment basis. Trading positions, which exclude Treasury bills financed by repurchase
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions issues still
in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserves less net Federal funds
purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are Friday figures.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
July 11, 1975
TABLE 6
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(Per Cent)
High
Low
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
Federal
Funds
Treasury Bills
CD's New Issue-NYC
Aaa Utility
New Recently
Issue Offered
Municipal
Bond
Burver
U.S. Government
(20-yr. Constant
FNMA
Auctions
Yields
P-- Preliminary.
Issue Ofee .. .. , auiv Yields.Fud 90, 1-ea Pa
