Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
February 14, 1975
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Class I - FOMC
February 14, 1975
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 contracted at an annual rate of about 9½ per cent in
January, and, with recent data suggesting only modest growth in February,
a net contraction in M1 during the two-month target period now seems
likely, as the table shows. Flows into time deposits other than money
market CD's have been generally well sustained, but, with M1 weak,
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
in January-February Period 1
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates
(Growth at SAAR in per cent)
Range of
Tolerance Latest Estimates
Ave, for statement
week ending
series. The new and old series are compared in appendix table V .
M2 appears to be growing at only about a 4½ per cent annual rate in the
January-February target period--also well below the lower end of the
Committee's range of tolerance. In the face of continued weak loan
demands, banks have reduced their reliance on non-deposit sources of
funds since year-end and have not pressed aggressively to issue large
CD's. As a result, the bank credit proxy is expected to show very little
growth during the January-February period.
(2) Immediately after the January FOMC meeting, the Account
Manager began providing reserves with a view to achieving an average
Federal funds rate around 7 per cent. When incoming data showed the
monetary aggregates expanding at annual rates below the lower ends of the
Committee's ranges of tolerance, however, the Desk moved to ease money
market conditions. As a result, by the statement week ending February 5,
the prevailing funds rate had declined to about 6½ per cent, the lower
limit of the range of tolerance agreed upon at the January meeting. On
February 5, the Committee concurred in the Chairman's recommendation to
reduce the lower limit of the funds rate constraint to 6¼ per cent, and
in the statement week just ended the average rate was 6.28 per cent,
As the funds rate dropped, member banks reduced borrowings from the
discount window further to near minimal levels; in the first two weeks
of February such borrowing averaged about $95 million--more than half
of which was special, longer-run borrowing--as compared with an average
of around $400 million in January.
(3) The further decline in the Federal funds rate, and the
February 3 reduction in the discount rate to 6¾ per cent, have contributed
to sharp reductions in other short-term interest rates as well. These
declines have ranged generally from 50 to 100 basis points since the last
Committee meeting. Rates on private short-term instruments have registered
the largest changes and are now 200-300 basis points below their year end
levels. The 3-month Treasury bill has traded most recently around 5.45
per cent. Although the rate on prime business loans at leading banks
has also been reduced during the inter-meeting period, the level now
prevailing at most key banks is 8¾ or 9 per cent; this is high relative
to the 6-3/8 per cent rate on 90-119 day commercial paper.
(4) The large inter-meeting declines in short-term rates
have contributed to a strong rally in long-term securities markets. As
a result, yields on corporate and municipal bonds are now 40-60 basis
points below their mid-January levels. In the market for longer-term
Treasury issues, yields have also moved lower, notwithstanding the
Treasury's enlargement of its February refinancing to raise new money
and the very heavy volume of Federal deficit financing forecast for the
weeks and months ahead by the new Federal Budget. The new note and
bond issues offered in the Treasury refinancing were all well received
and have most recently traded at premiums as much as 1 point above the
average prices at which they were initially auctioned.
(5) Savings flows to non-bank thrift institutions--like those
to banks--have displayed significant growth in January. However, with
mortgage demands remaining weak, these expanded flows have been used
for the most part to repay debt and rebuild liquid asset holdings. The
growth in savings flows, along with the continued modest volume of new
mortgage demands and the general decline in other interest rates, has
resulted in further reductions of some 40 basis points in conventional
mortgage rates since the turn of the year.
(6) The table on the following page shows (in percentage
annual rates of change) selected monetary and financing flows over various
recent time periods. Appendix table III compares money supply growth rates
computed on a quarterly-average basis with those computed on a last-
month-of-quarter basis. Projected figures on the two bases are shown in
Past Past Past
Calendar Twelve Six Three Past
Year Months Months Months Month
Jan.'74 July '74 Oct.'74 Dec.'74
Concepts of Money (Revised Series)
M2 (M1 plus time deposits
at commercial banks
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Nonbank commercial paper .4 .3 .4 .2 -.6
Prospective developments
(7) Alternative policy specifications are summarized below for
Committee consideration (with more detailed data shown in the table on
p. 6a).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D
Range of tolerance
for Feb.-March
Longer-run growth
rates 1/
(8) The specifications in the preceding paragraph assume not
only that staff GNP projections for the first three quarters of the year
are realized but also that a more normal relationship is re-established
between the transactions demand for money, narrowly defined, and
M1 M2
Feb.
M r.
Alt. A
Feb.
Mar.
Alt. B
Alt. A
Alt. C Alt. D
Credit Proxy
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B, Alt. C
Alt. D
Alt. D
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Alt. C
Alt. D
Alt. D-
, I'- ,H I I
nominal GNP. In particular a rebound in money demand is anticipated
for the weeks immediately ahead following the unusually large contraction
of recent weeks--an expectation that is supported in some degree by the
early February data. Thus, M1 growth is expected to be fairly sub-
stantial under any of the alternatives in the February-March period.
(9) Of the alternatives shown, alternative A encompasses the
last meeting in its longer-run targets for the first half of '75. This
alternative also shows a 9¾ per cent growth rate for M2, slightly higher
than the rate specified by the Committee last time. The projected
relationship between M 1 and M2 is changed because a further decline in
market interest rates is now assumed to be necessary if the indicated
M1 growth rate is to be attained by mid-year, and that should result
in larger inflows of consumer-type time and savings deposits.
(10) Given the January shortfall in M1 and the sharply weaker
economy now projected by the staff for the first and second quarters
of this year, we would expect it to be necessary for the Federal funds
rate to decline to around the middle of a 4-5 per cent range between now
and mid-March if the growth in the aggregates as shown under alternative
A were to be attained. Some further decline in the funds rate might be
needed by early spring.
(11) So steep a drop in interest rates would have a very
substantial cumulative impact on the demand for money, narrowly and
broadly defined. By the second quarter, the staff would expect M1 growth,
for example, to be at about a 10 per cent annual rate, and to accelerate
further in the third quarter when a sharp recovery in GNP is projected.
Thus, over the first nine months of the year, this alternative implies
an 8 per cent annual rate of growth in M1. If the Committee should wish
to get back on the 6 per cent growth trend after mid-year, a sharp rise
in interest rates would be necessary during the late spring and summer.
(12) The specifications of alternative B involve attainment
of a 6 per cent rate of growth in M1 by September, rather than by mid-
year. With the target horizon stretched out, interest rates are likely
to decline more moderately over the near-term, and the later upward
movement is likely to be more delayed and probably less sharp. The
annual growth rate for M1 over the first half of this year under
this alternative would be around 4½ per cent, while M2 would expand
at about a 7½ per cent rate.
(13) Alternative B contemplates a further decline in the
Federal funds rate over the next few weeks to about the middle of a
in the spring may not prove necessary, assuming that GNP is no weaker
than projected for the first half of this year and that the sharp
expansion in economic activity projected for the third quarter develops.
(14) Private short-term credit demands are expected to remain
weak into early spring, but the Treasury is likely to borrow an additional
$15-$18 billion of new cash between now and mid-April. The provision of
bank reserves and easing of money market conditions needed to sustain
growth in the monetary aggregates, as specified in alternative B, should,
at least over the near-term, permit the new Treasury debt to be absorbed
at declining interest rates, though the reductions may be modest. The
shift in borrowing demands from private sectors to the Treasury,
private short-term rates may decline more. Longer-term rates may
show rather modest further declines, however, since corporate and state
and local government demands on bond markets are expected to remain
(15) Alternative C contemplates a smaller reduction in the
funds rate than alternative B and hence a less rapid growth in the
monetary aggregates between now and the end of summer. Under this
alternative, M1 is indicated to expand at an annual rate of about
year is over, M1 may have grown at near a 6 per cent rate under this
alternative if economic activity in the second half of the year turns
out to be as strong as projected in the Green Book.
(16) Under alternative C, the funds rate would be expected
to decline to around 6 per cent--the mid-point of the range shown
in paragraph (7)--or a little below, between now and the next Committee
meeting. Such a decline is probably not much more than the market has
already discounted. As a result, interest rates may decline little
further over the next few weeks under this alternative. Moreover,
the weight of Treasury financings could place upward pressure on the
rate structure rather soon.
(17) Under alternative D, which involves money market
conditions in the neighborhood of those prevailing on average in the
period since the last meeting, M 1 would grow at a rate of about 4 per
cent over the first nine months of the year. If the funds rate was
around the 6½ per cent mid-point of the range shown for that alternative,
market rates would probably rise--possibly sharply in the Treasury
market--in the weeks immediately ahead. Net inflows of savings to
thrift institutions would not be likely to strengthen from their
recent pace, and might slacken somewhat--which would tend to limit
the extent of recovery in housing. In general, prospective market
developments under this alternative may have implications for the
projected pattern of economic recovery in the second half of the year.
Proposed directive
(18) Presented below are four alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in
the preceding section. In all four alternatives, it is proposed to
delete the reference to Treasury financing--because the quarterly financing
announced on January 22 has been completed--and the Board's action on
reserve requirements.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of the
[DEL: forthcoming Treasury financing,] developments in domestic and
international financial markets, [DEL: and the Board's action on
reserve requirments,] the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions consistent with more rapid
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead than has
occurred in recent months.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury financing,] developments in domestic and
international financial markets, {DEL: and the Board's action on
reserve requirements,] the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions consistent with SOMEWHAT
more rapid growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead
than has occurred in recent months.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury financing,] developments in domestic and
international financial markets, [DEL: and the Board's action on
reserve requirements,] the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions consistent with [DEL: more rapid
MODERATE growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead
than has occurred in recent months.]
Alternative D
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury financing,] developments in domestic and
international financial markets, [DEL: and the Board's action on
reserve requirements,] the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions consistent with [DEL: more rapid
MODEST growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead
than has occurred in recent months.]
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS AND INTEREST RATES
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS PER CENT
- 14
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
--1 q
INTEREST RATES Short-term PERCENT INTEREST RATES Long-term
PER CENT
- 11
- 9
I IL 3
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
FEBRUARY 14, 1975BANK RESERVES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
MONTHLY LEVELS-$MILLIONSI
---------- ---------- I
ANNUAL RATES OF CHANGE I
QUARTERLY:
---- ----- I
1974--1ST OTR.
I
MONTHLY:
1974--NOV.
JAN.-FEB. I
WEEKLY LEVELS-SMILLIONS
-------- ------ - - - ---- - -- ----- - -- ------ - - -------- --- - --- - --RESERVES-- -AVAILABLE------- --- - -- - --FOR---
RESERVES AVAILABLE FOR
PRIVATE NONBANK DEPOSITS
SEAS ADJ I NON SEAS ADJ
SEAS ADJ INON SEAS ADJ
(1) I
If
5,465 II
4,105) II
II
II
IIii
II
IIl
IIIt
II
II
!I
IIIIII
IIII
IIII
11
I!
II
5,058 II
4,050 II
II AGGREGATE RESERVES I REQUIRED RESERVES
II----------------------------------
II SEASONALLY ADJUSTEDSII-------------------
II TOTAL
I1 RESERVES
( -7.8)
NONBORROWED I PRIVATE OTHER CO*S AND GOV'T AND
RESERVES I DEMAND TIME DEP NON DEP INTERBANK
(4) 15) 16) (7) (8)
( 2.4 ) 0.4)
TABLE 1
------- - -- - - ------ - -------- - ------------- - ---------- - --
TABLE 2 CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
FEBRUARY 14, 1975MONETARY AGGREGATES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED)
S MONEY SUPPLY I ADJUSTED II U.S. I TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS I NONDEPOSIT
I NARROW I BROAD I CREDIT II GOVT. I I OTHER I I SOURCES OF
PERIOD I (Ml) I (M2) I PROXY II DEPOSITS I TOTAL I THAN CD S I CD S I FUNDS
MONTHLY LEVELS-SBILLIONSI
--------------------I
IPERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH I
-------- ---------- I
QUARTERLY
--------- I
MONTHLY
--- I
WEEKLY LEVELS-
-$ILLIONS
---------- I
FEB. 5 PI
12 PEI
(1)
I
( 4.7)
(3) II
II
II
495.8
( 0.8)
II
II
II
--- ---- - ------- --------- --------- --------- - ---- - - ---- - -- -- - - - ---------- ------- --- - -- - - - - ---- -
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
TABLE 3 FEBRUARY 14, 1975
RESERVE EFFECT OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations 1/ Daily Average Reserve Effects 2/ 4 in reserve categories / Target
Bills Coupon Agency RP's Open Market A Member Other 4/ req. res. against available res. 5/ available
& Accept. Issues Isques Net 3/ Total Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6+)(7)+(8)-(q) reserves 
5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 11
Feb. -670
Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
FEBRUARY 14, 1975
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
Millions of dollars
U.S. Govt. Security
Period Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Member Bank Reserve Positions
Corporate Municipal Excess** Borrowing at FRB** Basic Reserve Deficit
Bills Coupon Issues Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Others
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Feb. 5
*1,586
*2,308
*2,739
*3,555
- 9,920
- 9,555
- 9,224
- 8,250
- 8,689
- 9,715
- 9,744
- 9,889
- 9,016
- 8,504
- 8,663p
- 9,310p
Government security dealer trading positions are on a commitment basis. Trading positions, which exclude Treasury bills financed by repurchase
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings available for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions
are debt issues still in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserve
less net Federal funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate
which are Friday figures.
* STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL ** Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
TABLE 4
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
FEBRUARY 14, 1975
TABLE 5
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per Cent
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Federal Funds
Treabury Bills
Paper
(4)
CD's New Issue-NYC
Aaa Utility
New Recently Municipal
Issue Offered Bond Buyer
- 9.64
Lone-Term
U.S. Government
(10-yr. Constant
Maturity)
(10)
Auction
Yields
(11)
Weekly data for colums 1 to 4 are statement week averages o daily data. Columns 5 and 6 are one-day Wednesday quotes. For columns 7,
the weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day quote for Thursday following
the statement week. Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceeding the end of the statement week. The FNMA auction yield
average yield in bi-weekly auction for short-term forward commitments for Government underwritten mortgages.
_ -I ~-I I ~L--- ~1- _- -I
February 14, 1975
Appendix Table 2
RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
SEASONALLY ADJUSTED, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
RESERVES MONEY STOCK MEASURES BANK CREDIT OTHERMEASURES
Period Available Total Time Thrift
to M Adj Loans INon- U S.Non to 1 Ad Loans Total Other InstN
Total rowed Support P M 2  M 3  Credit and Time Than tuti
n
CD's deposit Gov't
Pvt Total Pvt Proxy Invest Funds Demand
Deposits Dep ments CD's D
Estimated monthly average levels derived by averaging end of current month and end of previous month rep rted data.
Reserve requirements On Eurodollar borrowings are included beginning October 16, 1969, and requirements on bank-related commercial paper are
included beginning October 1, 1970. Adjusted credit proxy includes mainly total member bank deposits subject to reserve requirements, bank-related
commercial paper and Eurodollar borrowings of U. S. banks. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks. Monthly data are daily FR 712 T
averages except for nonbank commercial paper figures which are foi last day of month. Weekly data are not available for M3, total loans and investment
and thrift institution deposits.
p - Preliminary.
