Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
March 14, 1975
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC
March 14, 1975
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 expanded at an annual rate of about 7 per cent in February,
and recent data suggest a roughly similar growth rate for March. For the
two-month target period, M 1 thus appears to be growing at a rate in the
upper half of the Committee's range of tolerance, as shown in the table.
Growth of M2 for the February-March period appears to be running at an
annual rate of about 9 per cent or ½ percentage point above the upper limit
of its range of tolerance, as time deposits other than money market CD's
expanded more rapidly than expected in February. Recent growth of both M 1
and M2 may have been bolstered to some extent by unusually large Federal
income tax refunds in February.
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
in February-March Period
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates Range of
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance Latest Estimates
Federal funds rate
(per cent per annum)
Avg. for statement
week ending
(2) Continued weak loan demand, together with the more rapid
growth of demand and other time deposits, permitted banks to reduce
reliance on nondeposit sources of funds and to let CD's run off. As
a result, the bank credit proxy is now expected to show a slight con-
traction, on average,over the February-March period.
(3) During the inter-meeting period, the Account Manager sought
reserve conditions that would be consistent with a gradual easing of the
Federal funds rate to around 5¾ per cent, the mid-point of the 5¼-6¾ per
cent range agreed upon by the Committee at the February meeting. The
Account Manager's task was complicated, however, by the unexpectedly large
volume of nonborrowed reserves being released by pre-tax-date attrition in
the Treasury's cash balance at Reserve banks. The balance dropped from
about $3¾ billion in late February to an overdraft position of more than
$1 billion last Wednesday. In the most recent statement week, the drop
in the balance exceeded expectations. As a result, despite $4.6 billion
of matched sale-purchase transactions arranged by the Desk on Tuesday
and Wednesday, the average Federal funds rate fell to just under 4 per
cent on the final day of the statement week, reducing the weekly average
to only 5.44 per cent. Because of repeated Desk actions to absorb reserves thus
far in March, and market awareness of reserve management problems arising from
the squeeze on Treasury cash prior to mid-March tax receipts, this latest
drop in the funds rate has not been generally interpreted as a signal of
further policy easing.
(4) Short-term market interest rates have shown mixed changes
since the February FOMC meeting. While private short-term rates have
dropped on balance by about 25 basis points--in response to the further
decline of the Federal funds rate--Treasury bill yields have risen 10-20
basis points, with the 3-month issue trading most recently around 5.40
per cent. The general slowing of declines in short-term rates has been
attributable in large measure to market expectations that the recent
pick-up in growth of the monetary aggregates may constrain further
declines in the funds rate. The continuing weakness in loan demand and
relatively low level of short-term rates has, nevertheless, induced most
large banks to reduce their prime lending rates to 8 per cent, and
several banks have moved to 7¾ per cent--the lowest level since June 1973.
(5) Bond yields have backed up as much as 40 basis points
during the inter-meeting period, reflecting the continued heavy volume of
new issues, and the apparent loss of downward momentum in short-term
rates. While yields on new corporate bonds resisted the general advance
for a time, most recently they too have shown substantial upward adjust-
ments. A special factor influencing municipal yields in the period was
increased investor caution emanating from the continuing financing problems
of New York City and the special difficulties of the New York State Urban
Development Corporation. Treasury yields were affected by the Treasury's
February 24 announcement of financing plans that involved about $7 billion
of new money to be raised by mid-April through five separate auctions of
coupon issues. Although the volume of money to be raised came as no great
surprise to the market, the exclusive focus on coupon issues was not anti-
cipated. The first two auctions--involving $1¾ billion of 6-year 8-month
attracted good bidding interest. As a result, yields on longer-term
Treasury issues have recently stabilized.
(6) Savings inflows to nonbank thrift institutions showed
additional strength in February, as market rates declined and Federal
income tax refunds exceeded usual proportions. The thrift institutions
have used these improved flows largely to rebuild liquidity and pay down
borrowings. However, conditions in mortgage markets have recently shown
further improvement; non-rate terms on mortgages reportedly have eased
somewhat, and average rates on conventional mortgages at selected S&L's
edged down to about 9 per cent in early March--20 basis points below
early February and roughly 100 basis points below last fall's peak.
(7) The table on the following page shows (in percentage
annual rates of changes) selected monetary and financing flows over
various recent time periods. Appendix table III compares money supply
growth rates computed on a quarterly-average basis with those computed
on a last-month-of-quarter basis. Projected figures on the two bases
are shown in Appendix table IV for the alternatives presented in the
next section.
Past Past Past
Calendar Twelve Six Three Past
Year Months Months Months Month
Feb.'74 Aug.'74 Nov.'74 Jan.'74
Concepts of Money
M (currency plus demand
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Nonbank commercial paper .4 .3 .4 .3 -.1
Prospective developments
(8) Alternative policy specifications are summarized below for
Committee consideration (with more detailed data shown in the table on
p. 6a).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Range of tolerance
for March-April
RPD 34-5k 2k-4k 1j-3k
Federal funds rate
(inter-meeting range) 4k-5k 5k-6k 6-7
Longer-run growth rates-
(9) Of the three alternatives presented, alternative A most
closely approximates the longer-run growth rates that accompanied the
specifications chosen by the Committee at its last meeting. It includes
growth in M1 at a 6 per cent annual rate over the first nine months of the
year. This implies, as is shown, an 8 per cent annual rate of growth over the
Alternative Longer-Run Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Mar.
Apr.
Growth Rates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Mar.
Apr.
Growth Rates
forthcoming 7 month period from February to September. Growth rates in
the other monetary aggregates are somewhat larger than the earlier speci-
fications because of shifting relationships among the various forms of
liquid assets.
(10) Under alternative A, a further decline in the Federal
funds rate to around 5 per cent--the mid-point of the 4½-5½ per cent
range shown--would be anticipated over the next few weeks. This reflects
staff expectations of continued near-term weakness in economic activity
and in the transactions demand for money during the second quarter. There-
after, without any further decline in the Federal funds rate, the sharp
rebound in economic activity projected for the third quarter is expected
to lead to a rapid rate of growth in M1 during the summer--large enough
to bring growth for the first nine months of the year up to a 6 per cent
annual rate. Given the rapid summer growth needed to attain a 6 per cent
rate over the nine month period, the funds rate and other interest rates
would likely need to rise fairly sharply in the late summer and fall if
the Committee wishes to maintain M1 growth in the period after September
at around the 6 per cent annual rate.
(11) Consumer-type time and savings deposits at banks and
thrift institutions would also be likely to expand somewhat more rapidly
than in recent months under alternative A, given the further decline in
market interest rates that is assumed. Meanwhile, banks may continue to
let large CD's run-off, at least until around mid-year, reflecting the
weakness in private credit demands, cautious bank management attitudes,
and the increased availability of demand deposits as well as other time
deposits. As a result, broader monetary aggregates excluding large
CD's (M2 and M3) would be expected to show more rapid growth over the
next few months than their counterparts including large CD's (M2 and M4,
(12) Alternative B shows the pattern of monetary aggregates
that would be associated with little change in money market conditions
from those recently prevailing. The Federal funds rate range centers
on 5¾ per cent. Growth rates in key monetary aggregates would, of course,
be slower than under alternative A--as indexed by a 7 per cent annual
growth rate in M1 over the seven month February-September period and
a 5¼ per cent growth rate over the first nine months of the year.
(13) Market interest rates probably would rise somewhat over
the weeks ahead under alternative B. The Treasury will continue to raise
sizable amounts of new cash, including continued cash additions to weekly
bill auctions, and dealer positions in Treasury issues are relatively
high. Moreover, the calendar of new corporate and municipal issues
remains exceptionally large. Stabilization of the funds rate around
Federal Reserve was no longer seeking actively to ease credit markets.
Thus, unless the economy turned out to be considerably weaker than currently
projected, the weight of Treasury and corporate long-term credit demands
would tend to exert upward pressure on market rates.
(14) Upward interest rate pressures would nonetheless be
limited by maintenance of the funds rate at the 5¾ per cent level. That
rate is still below rates on short-term market instruments other than
Treasury bills. With upward rate pressures limited, inflows of consumer-
type time and savings deposits to banks and thrift institutions would
probably be well maintained. Thus, mortgage market conditions would
continue to ease, and bank prime loan rates might drop a little further,
particularly since most banks are still at 8 per cent or above.
(15) Alternative C indicates growth paths for the monetary
aggregates intended to be consistent with some tightening of money market
conditions over the weeks ahead, A rise in the funds rate back above
initiate a sharp upward adjustment in yields on Treasury securities and
a turn-around, though perhaps less marked, in other market rates. Upward
rate pressures might be fairly severe for a time in corporate and municipal
bond markets, in view of the large volume of new issues currently over-
hanging the market and the possibility that investors would hold back
pending clarification of Federal Reserve intentions. With market interest
rates rising, the rate of growth in consumer-type time and savings deposits
at banks and thrift institutions would begin to diminish. And with the
change in prospects for savings inflows, mortgage market conditions would
not be likely to ease much, if any, further.
(16) Turning to the behavior of M1 in the March-April period,
expansion is indicated to be in a 4½-6½ per cent range, given prevailing
money market conditions (typified by a 5¾ per cent funds rate) as called
for by alternative B. Near-term growth, of course, would be somewhat more
rapid under the easier money market conditions of alternative A and some-
what less rapid under the tighter conditions of alternative C. Money growth
rates, in general, are expected to accelerate by early summer when tax
rebates are added to the public's cash and time deposit holdings (assuming
prompt passage of a tax reduction bill). And, as noted earlier, trans-
actions demands for cash balances are likely to intensify in summer as
GNP strengthens. We would expect that the acceleration in money growth
would be relatively modest under alternative C, however, since rising
interest rates would be working to restrain money demand.
Proposed directive
(17) Presented below are three alternative formulations
for the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in
the preceding section.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the
Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market
conditions consistent with SUBSTANTIALLY more rapid growth
in monetary aggregates over the months ahead than has occurred
in recent months.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent
with more rapid growth in monetary aggregates over the months
ahead than has occurred in recent months.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the
Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market
conditions consistent with SOMEWHAT more rapid growth in
monetary aggregates over the months ahead than has occurred
in recent months.
CONFIDENTIAL(FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
RESERVES AVAILABLE TO SUPPORT
PRIVATE NONBANK DEPOSITS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
M J S D M J S D
RPD series has been adjusted to remove discontinuities associated with changes in reserve requirement ratios
CONFIDENTIAL(FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- 520
- 480
I I J I 0
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- 39
- 37
Total and nonbo-rowed reserve series "av- been adjusted to remove discontinuities associated with changes in reserve requirement ratios
TABLE 1
BANK RESERVES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
MARCH 14, 1975
AGGREGATE RESERVES I REQUIRED RESERVES
SRESERVES AVAILABLE --------- ------- ------------------
FOR PRIVATE SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
NONBANK DEPOSITS ----------- ---------------------------- ------- --- --
----------------- TOTAL NPNBORROWED ( PRIVATE OTHER CD'S AND GOVT AND
SA I NSA RESERVES RESERVES I DEMAND TIME DEP NON DEP INTERBANK
- ------- ---------------------- -- - ---------- --- ------- ----- - -~ - -
(1) 12) 43) 141 (5) 16) 17) 18)
MONTHLY LEVELS-$MILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
WEEKLY LEVELS-$MILLIONS
-- ----------------------- - ------------------- ---- ------------ -- ----'--~----'"---~-- "--- - - - --- -----
TABLE 2
MONETARY AGGREGATES
CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED)
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
MARCH 14, 1975
I MONEY SUPPLY I ADJUSTED I U.S. I TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS I NONDEPOSIT
I NARROW BROAD I CREDIT I GOVT. I OTHER SOURCES OF
PERIOD I (M1) (M2) I PROXY I DEPOSITS I TOTAL THAN CD'S CD'S I FUNDS
MONTHLY LEVELS-SBILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
(285.5) (625.4) (495.2)
( 1.7) ( 7.2) ( 0.7)
( 0.5) (428.7) (339.9)
I 8.0) ( 12.0) ( -6.6)
FEB.-MAR. ( 7.0) ( 9.2) I -0.7) I 2.8) ( 11.0) ( -26.5)
WEEKLY LEVELS-$BILLIONS
MAR. 5 P
12 PE
(ACTUAL AND
( 6.3)
( 8.8)
( 6.6)
f 8.3)
( -1.5)
( -2.0)
( 9.6)
( -44.3)
------ -------- ------------------------------------------------------------------
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
MARCH 14, 1975
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECT OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
pen ilrket Operations 1/ f Daily Average Reserve Effects 2/ A in reserve categories I1 Target
Bills Coupon Agency RP's Open Market A Member Other 4, req. res. against available res. 5 available
& Accept. Issuea Isues Net 3/ Total Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) reserves 5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month.
Special certificate (Direct Treasury borrowing from P.R.). *Reflects special certificate purchase.
TABLE 4
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
(Millions of dollars)
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
MARCH 14, 1975
U.S. Govt. Security
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Member Bank Reserve Positions
Period Corporate Municipal Excess** Borrowing at FRB** Basic Reserve Deficit
Bills Coupon Issues Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Others
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
** Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings available for sale over the near-term. Other
issues still in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing atFederal funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issuesfigures.
* STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MARCH 14, 1975
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per cent
Short-Term Lon -Term
Treasury Bills 90-119 Day CD's New Issue-NYC Aaa Utility U.S. Government FNMA
Period Commercial New Recently Municipal (10-yr. Constant Auction
Federal Funds 90-Day 1-year Paper 60-89 Day 90-119 Day Issue Offered Bond Buyer Maturity) Yields
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
the weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged.
the statement week. Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceeding the
average yield in bi-weekly auction for short-term forward commitments for Government
II _ 7.49*
n.a.
and 6 are one-day Wednesday quotes. For columns 7,8, and 10
Column 9 is a one-day quote for Thursday following the end of
end of the statement week. The FNMA auction yield is the
underwritten mortgages.
* The Treasury has revised its procedure for computing the constant maturity yields. Data have been revised Back through December 1974 and
result in an average increase of about 8 basis points in the level of the 10 year yield.
TABLE 5
Appendix Table 1
RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES March 14, 1975
RESERVES MONEY STOCK BANK CREDIT
MEASURES MEASURES OTHER
Available Total Ti Tht
Period to Adjusted Loans m e  Thrift Non- U.S.
Total Non- Support M 1  M M 3  Credit and Total Other Insti- CD' deposit Gov't.borrowed Private 2 Proxy Invest- Time Than tution Funds Demand
Deposits ments CD's Deposits Funds
Appendix Table 2
RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
SEASONALLY ADJUSTED, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
March 14, 1975
RESERVES MONEY STOCK MEASURES BANK REIT OTHERMEASURES
Period Available 1 Total Time Thrift Non S
Non- to CAdi Loans Total Other InstiTotal b wed Support M2  M3  Credit and CD's deposit Gov'tTotalPvt Total Pvt Proxy Invest- Funds Demand
Deposits Dep ments CD's Deposits
paper and Eurodollar borrowings of U.S. banks. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks. Monthly data are daily averages except
for nonbank commercial paper figures which are for last day of month. Weekly data are not available for M3  total loans and investment and
thrift institution deposits.
p - Preliminary.
Appendix Table III
Growth Rate in Money Supply
(Per cent change at an annual rate)
M1 M2
M Q
M Q
M Q
M = Annual rates of growth calculated from average levels in the
final months of the quarters.
Q = Annual rate calculated from agerave levels in all three months
of the quarters.
Appendix Table IV
Growth Rates in Money Supply for Alternatives
M 1
M Q
M 2
M Q
Alt. A
Alt. B
Alt. C
M Q
M = Annual rates of growth calculated from average levels in last months
of the quarter.
Q = Annual rates calculated from average levels in all three months of
the quarters.
