Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
January 16, 1976Strictly Confidential (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Class I FOMC
By the staff
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) January 16, 1976
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Both M1 and M 2 appear to be growing at rates below the low
ends of the two-month ranges of tolerance adopted by the Committee at the
last meeting. M1 contracted at about a 2¾ per cent annual rate in December,
and data thus far available in early 1976 suggest that January will show
little net change. After adjustment for the preliminary new seasonal factors
presented at the time of the last meeting, M1 appears likely to expand at
less than a one per cent annual rate over the two-month period. Expansion
in time deposits other than money market CD's has, on balance, also been
somewhat slower than anticipated, and M2 is now projected to grow at about a
Growth in Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
over December-January Period
Latest Estimates - with
Reserve and monetary aggregates Ranges of Preliminary New Old
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance 1/ Seasonals 1/ Seasonals
RPD 4 to 7 n.a. 0.2
Memo: 2/ Avg. for statement
Federal funds rate 4½ to 5½ week ending
factors that were available at the time of the last meeting.
recommendation to instruct the Account Manager to hold the weekly average
Federal funds rate at approximately 4¾ per cent until the next FOMC meeting.
(2) Recent growth rates for both M1 and M2 continue to be
affected by increases in business savings accounts. Although expansion
in these accounts at weekly reporting banks has slowed recently, shifts
to such accounts may have reduced the annual rate of growth in M1 over the
December-January period by about 2½ percentage points, or about 1-1½ per-
centage points more than assumed in the previous blue book. Thus part of
the shortfall in M1 reflects greater-than-anticipated shifts out of demand
deposits to savings accounts.
(3) Data received a few days after the last FOMC meeting suggested
that the monetary aggregates--particularly M1--were growing at a substantially
slower pace than anticipated at the time of the meeting. However, since data
on the aggregates are typically volatile around year-end and because the
Committee had voted to give greater emphasis than usual to money market
conditions, the Desk continued to seek reserve conditions consistent with a
Federal funds rate centering around 5¼ per cent. When subsequent data
suggested further weakening in the aggregates, the Desk adopted a more
accommodative reserve posture, and the funds rate moved down in stages to
Chairman's recommendation to instruct the Account Manager to hold the weekly
average Federal funds rate at approximately this level until the January
meeting. In the statement week just ended the funds rate averaged 4¾ per
(4) Inter-meeting changes in prices and yields in securities
markets have been substantial. Interest rates on short-term market
instruments have declined 60-100 basis points, with the 3-month bill trading
most recently around 4.85 per cent. Yields on bonds declined 20-65 basis
points, while stock prices--as measured by the comprehensive New York Stock
Exchange index--have advanced 9¼ per cent. Short-term rates are currently
at their lowest levels since mid-1972, and corporate bond yields have
reached their lowest levels since the spring of 1974. The ceiling rate on
FHA/VA single-family mortgages was also cut, from 9 to 8¾ per cent, on
January 5, as yields on mortgages traded in the secondary market continued
to decline. However, rates on primary mortgages have, as usual, lagged
behind other long-term rates, dropping only about 5 basis points during the
inter-meeting period.
(5) The Board's December 24 action reducing reserve requirements
on certain time deposits, and the subsequent decline in the funds rate,
contributed importantly to the general decline of interest rates. At the
same time, year-end private economic forecasts tended to crystalize market
judgments on the longer-term economic outlook, encouraging the view that
moderate future economic growth and further progress on inflation were
likely to permit significant further reductions of the inflation premium
in long-term rates.
(6) The table on the following page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various time
Past Past
Calendar Calendar Six Three Past
Year Year Months Months Month
June '75 Sept.'75 Nov. '75
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change in
billions)
Prospective developments
(7) Shown below are alternative longer-run growth ranges for
the monetary aggregates, together with the ranges adopted by the Committee
in October. In keeping with past practice, the time period for the proposed
ranges has been shifted forward by one quarter; the alternatives apply to
the period from QIV 1975 to QIV 1976, whereas the current ranges relate to
the QIII '75-QIII '76 period.1 /
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Current
M1  6-8½ 5-7½ 4-6½ 5-7½
(8) Of the three alternatives, B calls for retaining the current
range for M, but reducing somewhat the growth ranges for the broader M's.
This is because growth in time and savings deposits (other than large CD's)
in the course of 1976 is likely to remain around the more moderate pace that
developed in the second half of last year. The current longer-run ranges
for M2 and M3 assume a more rapid pace.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
QIV '75-QII '76
QII '76-QIV '76
QII '75-QII '76
QIII '75-QIII '76
QIV '75-QIV '76
/ Figures in parentheses represent rates of growth based on the new seasonal factors and are consistent
with 2-month growth rates shown in summary table in paragraph (6).
I I I I I I
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M4 M5 Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
(9) Alternative A encompasses higher growth rates for the monetary
aggregates over the next year than alternative B, while alternative C
presents lower rates. The alternative A rates may be viewed as compensating,
in an arithmetic sense, for the shortfall in M1 growth relative to expecta-
tions in the fourth quarter. That is to say, under alternative A the
level of M1 in the third quarter 1976(using mid-points of the ranges) would
be the same as that implied by a 6¼ per cent growth rate measured from the
third quarter of 1975. To reach that level, M 1 would have to expand at
almost a 7½ per cent annual rate over the first three quarters of 1976.
(10) The M1 level for QIII '76 that is implied by the Committee's
current longer-run growth range probably should be adjusted downward,
however, on economic grounds to allow for recent shifts of business funds
from demand deposits into savings accounts and for expected future growth
of such accounts at the expense of demand deposits. The regulatory change
permitting businesses to hold savings accounts up to $150,000 in size
became effective in mid-November. By early January such accounts aggregated
about $2 billion, of which the staff estimates that about $1½ billion would
otherwise have gone into demand deposits. Growth in business savings
accounts has been slowing in recent weeks, and the staff expects it to slow
further as time goes on; by the third quarter of 1976, additional growth in
such accounts substituting for demand deposits might total $1 billion. In
sum then, a $2½ billion downward adjustment in the target level of M1 for
the third quarter might be a reasonable allowance for corporate savings
accounts. This would imply M1 growth over the next three quarters at close
to a 6¼ per cent annual rate, which is approximately the growth rate for
that period under alternative B. For the one year QIII '75-QIII '76 period,
the path contained in alternative B involves M1 growth of 5.3 per cent.
(11) Shorter-run alternative operating ranges corresponding
generally to the longer-run alternatives are summarized below (with more
detail presented in the tables on pp. 5a and 5b).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges of tolerance
for January-February
Federal funds rate 3½-4½ 4¼-5¼ 5-6
(intermeeting range)
(12) Alternative A involves a decline in the Federal funds rate
from the 4¾ per cent level recently prevailing to the mid-point of a 3½-4½
per cent range. Under such circumstances, M1 would be expected to expand
in a 4½-8½ per cent annual rate range in the two-month Jan.-Feb. period,
and M2 in a 7½-11½ per cent range. The pick-up in M1 growth relative to
recent behavior reflects mainly staff expectations that the projected
continuing rise in nominal GNP will be accompanied by resumed expansion
in money demand--given the unusual, and probably unsustainable, rise in the
velocity of money that has already occurred in the current cyclical expansion.
(13) We would expect a further drop in the Federal funds rate
of that magnitude to be accompanied by a decline in the 3-month Treasury
bill rate to around the 4-4¼ per cent area. Such an easing in the money
market would,of course, lead to additional downward adjustments in inter-
mediate- and longer-term interest rates. These rate declines might be
limited, however, to the extent that borrowers--particularly corporate
borrowers--took advantage of the more favorable market atmosphere to
accelerate security offerings. The Treasury will announce terms of its
mid-February refunding on January 27. It will refund $4.3 billion of
publicly-held maturing securities and will probably also raise $1-1½ billion
of new cash, with the exact amount depending in part on the market
(14) The lower funds rate assumed under alternative A would be
expected to persist until late spring or early summer. The funds rate
would then be expected to begin rising, given continued expansion in GNP.
The funds rate would be likely to be around 6 per cent by late 1976, assuming
money growth over the year is held to around 7¼ per cent under this
(15) A Federal funds rate centered around 4¾ per cent is con-
templated under alternative B, with M1 growth in a 4-8 per cent annual
rate range in the January-February period. Given such a funds rate,
interest rates generally may show little net change over the next few
weeks. If anything, short-term interest rates could drift up a little, as
expectations by some market participants of a further decline in the funds
rate, following the discount rate action announced today, are disappointed.
Longer-term market interest rates may remain around the recent reduced
levels, given the more moderate corporate bond calendar and the availability
of sizable funds for investment in longer-term markets from insurance
companies, savings banks, and pension funds. With business loan demand
slack, banks may show increased interest in intermediate-term Treasury
offerings to increase earnings, particularly in view of the steep slope
of the yield curve. Mortgage rates can be expected to decline somewhat
further since savings inflows to thrift institutions are expected to be
well maintained and since a more favorable yield spread of primary mortgage
rates over corporate bond rates has recently developed.
(16) If the Committee seeks to attain a 6¼ per cent growth rate
from QIV '75 to QIV '76 for M1, the staff would expect interest rates to
begin rising by late winter. A more gradual rise is now anticipated than
had been predicted earlier, with the funds rate reaching a level of around
(other than large CD's) are expected to slow as the year progresses, but
not so much as to require an upward adjustment in Regulation Q ceiling rates.
(17) Alternative C assumes that the Federal funds rate is adjusted
upward over the next few weeks to the middle of a 5-6 per cent range. This
approach is most consistent with a reduction in the longer-run growth
ranges. If the FOMC were to seek one-year growth in the aggregates as
indexed by M1 expansion of about 5¼ per cent from QIV '75 to QIV '76, the
staff believes that the funds rate would have to rise further to around 7¼
per cent by summer.
(18) Any significant near-term rise in the funds rate would
certainly be unexpected by the market. Thus, a sharp upward re-adjustment
of interest rates could be anticipated with the 3-month bill rate possibly
rising as high as 6 per cent between now and the next meeting. This would
again make thrift institutions uncertain about the strength of future
savings flows and might, therefore, bring the recent decline in mortgage
rates to a halt. In bond markets, yields would back up, and the rise
might be especially large in the Treasury market in view of the size of
dealer positions and the imminent refunding.
Proposed directive
(19) Presented below are four alternative formulations for the
operational paragraph of the directive. The first three are couched in
terms of desired growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead and
are intended to correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives
discussed in the preceding section. The fourth alternative is proposed in
the event that the Committee wishes to continue to formulate its instructions
in terms of money market conditions and wishes to maintain the conditions
now prevailing. No special reference to the Treasury's quarterly financing
to be announced on January 27 is proposed because Treasury financings have
been, and for some time will continue to be, frequent.
Alternative "Monetary Aggregate" Proposals
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE bank reserve and money market
conditions CONSISTENT WITH SUBSTANTIAL GROWTH IN MONETARY AGGREGATES
over the [DEL: period immediately] MONTHS [DEL: ahead, provided that monetary
aggregates-appear-to-be-growing-at-about the rates currently-expected.]
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE bank reserve and money market
conditions CONSISTENT WITH MODERATE GROWTH IN MONETARY AGGREGATES
over the [DEL: period immediately] MONTHS [DEL: ahead, provided that monetary
aggregates appear to be growing at about the rate currently expected.]
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE bank reserve and money market
conditions CONSISTENT WITH MODEST GROWTH IN MONETARY AGGREGATES
over the [DEL: period immediately] MONTHS [DEL: ahead, provided that monetary
aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates currently expected.]
"Money Market" Proposal
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to maintain prevailing bank reserve and money market conditions
over the period immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates
appear to be growing at about the rates currently expected.
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY
I I I I I I I I I
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- 540
- 520
- 500
- 480
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
39
- 37
- 35
I I
976
reserve requirement ratios
CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
TABLE 1 CLASS II-FOMC
BANK RESERVES JAN. 16, 1976
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
RSERVES AVAILABLE AGGREGATE RESERVES REQUIRED RESERVES
RSFOR PAVATE SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
FOR PRIVATE
Period NONBANK DEPOSITS Total Nonborrowed Total Private Total Time Gov't. and
S S Reserves Reserves Required Demand Deposits interbank
SA NSA
MONTHLY LEVFLS-SMILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH V V
------------- A A
QUARTERLY I I
L L
E E
QUARTERLY-AV
DEC.-JAN. ( 0.2) ( 11.6) ( 11.7) ( 12.9) ( -5.1)
WEEKLY LEVELS-SMILLIONS
Table 2 CONFIDENTIAL (F.
MONETARY AGGREGATES CLASS II FOMC
ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
MONEY SUPPLY Adjusted U.S. TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS Nondeposit
Period Narrow Broad Credit Govt. Other Sources of
(M1) (M2) Proxy Deposits Total Than CD's CD's Funds
MONTHLY LEVELS-$BILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
OEC.-JAN. ( -1.6) ( 4.9) ( 0.5) 6.5) ( 10.1 ( -8.8)
[ 0.7] [ 5.9]
WEEKLY LEVELS-$BILLIONS
P - PRELIMINARY
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
JANUARY 16, 1976
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations 1/ Daily Average Reserve Effects / I A In Reserve Categories A Target
Bills Coupon Agency RP's Open Market A Member Other 4/ Req. res. against available res. 5, available
Period & Accept. Issues Issues Net 3/ Total Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9 reserves 5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) - (7) (8) (9) (1) (11)
Jan. 960
Feb.
A uc
epresen s c a ge n ystem s port o o rom en -o -fer 0 Lo en -- perJo
Represents change in daly average level for preceeding period.
Includes matched sale-purchase transactions as well as RP's
Sum of changes in vault cash, currency in circulation, Treasury operations, F.R. float, gold and foreign accounts, and other F.R. accounts.
Reserves to support private nonbank deposits. Target change for December and January reflects the target adopted at the December 16, 1975 FOMC meeting.
Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month.
P - Preliminary,
n cludes redempt 
.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II -- FOMC
JANUARY 16, 1976
TABLE 4
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1/
($ millions, not seasonally adjusted)
Treasury Coupons Federal Agencies Net Change
Net Purchases 3/ Net Purchases 4/ Outright
rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury borrowings from the System.
4/ Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts only. Excludes redemptions and maturity shifts.
5/ In addition to net purchases of securities, also reflects changes in System holdings of bankers' acceptances, direct Treasury borrowings from the
System, and redemptions (-) of Agency and Treasury coupon issues.
6/ Includes changes in both RP's (+) and matched sale-purchase transactions(-).
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
JANUARY 16, 1976
TABLE 5
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
(millions of dollars)
U.S. Govt. Security Member Bank Reserve Positions
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Borrowing at FRB** Basic Reserve Deficit
Corporate Municipal Excess**
Period Bills Coupon Issues Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Others
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
*4,546
*4,296
*1,256
*1,437
- 9,744
- 9,533
- 9,896
- 9,966
- 9,015
-
8 ,686p
** Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
Government security dealer trading positions are on a commitment basis. Trading positions, which exclude Treasury bills financed by repurchase
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions issues
still in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserve less net Federal
funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are Friday figures.
*STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
TABLE 6
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(Per Cent)
Short-Term _Long-Term
Teasury Bills 90-119 Day CD's New Issue-NYC Aaa Utility Municipal U.S. Government FNMA GNMA
Federal Commercial New Recently Bond (20-yr. Constant Auction Guaranteed
Period Funds 90-Day 1-year Paper 60-89 Day 90-119 Day Issue Offered Buyer Maturity) Yield Securities
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
- 9.25
- 9.13
- 9.10
Weekly data for columns 1 to 4 are statement week averages of daily data. Columns 5 and 6 are one-day Wednesday quotes. For columns 7,8, and 10,
the weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day quote for Thursday following the end of
the statement wedk. Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceding the end of the statement week. Column 12 is a one-day quote for
the Monday preceding the end of the statement week. The PNHA auction yield is the average yield in bi-weekly auction for short-term forward
commitments for Government underwritten mortgages. GNKA yields are average net yields to investors on mortgage-backed securities for immediate
delivery, assuming prepayment in 12 years on pools of 30-year FHA/VA mortgages carrying the prevailing ceiling rate. c--Corrected
APPENDIX TABLE 1-A
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATE MEASURES
JAN. 16, 1976
i iBANK CREDIT MONEY STOCK
RESERVES9 MEASURES MEASURES
Available Total
Period to Adj. Loans
Total Support Credit and M M2  M3  4  M5  M6  Moi proxy Invest-
Deposits- ments
i i . .. . i I i ii i n t I I
APPENDIX TABLE 1-B
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATE MEASURES
SEASONALLY ADJUSTED, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
JAN. 16, 1976
. BANK CREDIT MONEY STOCK
RESERVES! MEASURES MEASURES
Available Total
Period Non to Adj. Loans
Total N o  Support Credit and Ml M2  M3 M4 MS M M7borrowed pvt. proxy Invest-
Deposits ments
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEPT.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC. P
DEC. 3
lOP
17P
24P
31P
APPENDIX TABLE 2-A
COMPONENTS OF MONEY TOCK AND RELATED MEASURES
JAN. 16, 1976
DEC. P
(Per cent annual rates of growth)
I I
P - PRELIMINARY.
JAN. 16, 1976
APPENDIX TABLE 2-B
COMPONENTS OF MONEY STOCK AND RELATED MEASURES
Time Mutual Short
Demand otal Other Savings Credit Savings Term Commercal Non-
Period TCurrency ime Bank Union CD's ds Commercial dpoit Gov'tDeposits Than Bonds US. Gov't Papery Funds Demand
SShares Demand
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEPT.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC. F
J I _I -,-- J........ .l.J -- I-~- ______
P - PRELIMINARY
OCTOBER 16, 1969, AND REQUIREMENTS ON BANK-RELATED
MONTH AND END OF PREVIOUS MONTH REPORTED DATA.
Appendix Table III
QIV '72-QIV '73
QIV '73-QIV '74
QIV '74-QIV '75
Growth Rate in Money Supply
(Per cent change in an annual rate)
M M2
M Q M Q
M q
M = Annual rates of growth calculated from average levels in the final
months of the quarters.
Q = Annual rate calculated from average levels in all three months of
the quarters.
Appendix Table IV
Projected Federal Funds Rates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
QrII 5k 6k 7k
Appendix Table V
Preliminary Revised Seasonal Factors
and Effects on M1 Growth
on Demand Deposits
Rates
May
June
July
August
Old factors
Preliminary factors
available on
Dec. 12, 1975
New factors
Effect on M1
growth (at
annual rate)-
new seasonal factors and includes effect of currency seasonals.
