Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
December 17, 1976
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 17, 1976
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) After expanding at a 13.7 per cent annual rate in
October, M1 remained unchanged on average during November. Available
data for December suggest a resumption of moderate growth, and for
the November-December period M1 is now projected to rise at a 2.1
per cent annual rate--somewhat below the Committee's operating range.
Despite the efforts of some institutions to slow inflows of high-cost
term funds by cutting rates or reducing advertising, growth of savings
and consumer-type time deposits at banks and thrift institutions has
continued at a rapid pace. Indeed, growth of time and savings deposits
(excluding CD's) at commercial banks is running somewhat stronger
than anticipated, and thus M2 is expected to increase at an 11.2 per
cent rate in the November-December period--near the midpoint of the
range specified by the Committee. With large CD's and interbank deposits
also rising unexpectedly and adding to the demand for reserves, nonbor-
rowed reserves appear to be increasing at a 7.5 per cent rate over the
two-month policy period.1/
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over November-December Period
(SAAR in per cent)
Ranges Latest Estimates
M2  9½ to 13½ 11.2
(2) Data available shortly after the November meeting indicated
that while M2 growth would be around the mid-point of the range set
by the Committee, M1 growth would be in the lower half of its range.
Consequently, the Desk proceeded to implement the Committee's directive
by seeking a reduction in the Federal funds rate from the prevailing
level of 5 per cent--first to 4-7/8 per cent and then to 4¾ per cent.
As December progressed, incoming data suggested a further weakening in
M1 growth, and the Desk became somewhat more accommodative in the pro-
vision of reserves. Most recently the Desk has been seeking reserve
conditions consistent with a Federal funds rate around 4-5/8 per cent.
(3) Market rates of interest have declined sharply since
the November Committee meeting, reaching lows for the current cycle.
Yields on most short-term instruments have dropped about 40 to 60
basis points, and bond yields have eased roughly 30 basis points.
Much of the impetus for the market rally was supplied by System actions:
the lowering of the Desk's funds rate objective and the quarter-point
cut in the discount rate announced on November 19. Expectations
of additional easing actions by the System, fostered by evidence of
sluggish growth in M1 and slow economic expansion, also contributed to
the rally. The prime lending rate at most commercial banks has declined
from 6½ to 6¼ per cent, and one major institution has posted a 6 per
cent rate. In the mortgage sector, secondary market rates have
fallen in sympathy with other yields, but rates on new home loans in
the primary market have been stable. Stock prices have risen signifi-
cantly since the November meeting.
(4) In November, total short-term business credit--that is,
business loans plus nonfinancial commercial paper--rose substantially
for the second consecutive month. At the same time, public bond offerings
by domestic corporations fell to the lowest level of the year. In
December, however, the volume of such offerings rebounded, partly
because of the decline in interest rates. Tax-exempt bond offerings
have remained at a high level, reflecting in part some acceleration of
planned borrowings. In the Government sector, the Treasury has borrowed
$6 billion, net, since the November meeting, primarily through an
addition to the November 2-year note and the sale of 4-year notes
and 132-day cash management bills.
(5) The table on the following page shows (in terms of
percentage annual rates of change) related monetary and financial flows
over various time periods.
Past Past
Calendar Twelve Six Three Past
Year Months Months Months Month
Nov. '76 Nov. '76 Nov. '76 Nov. '76
Concepts of Money
M2 (M1 plus time deposits
at commercial banks
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institu-
tions--which are derived from either end-of-month or last Wednesday-of-month
figures. Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are
adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when
reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(6) Summarized below are three sets of short-run specifi-
cations for the monetary aggregates and the Federal funds rate. More
detailed data, including longer-run growth rates, are shown in the
tables on pp. 5a and 5b.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for December-January
(7) Alternative B assumes that prevailing money market
conditions--indexed by a Federal funds rate around 4-5/8 per cent--
would be maintained between now and the next Committee meeting. M1
in the December-January period would, in consequence, be expected to
expand in a 2½-6½ per cent annual rate range. The mid-point of that
growth range is close to the average rate of growth in M1 over the
past six months--a period when the rate of expansion in nominal GNP
had slowed. A faster growth in M1 is expected to develop later in the
winter in reflection of the pick-up in economic expansion that is
currently projected by the staff.
(8) A continued sizable increase in M2 would be expected
over the next few weeks, given prevailing money market conditions.
Growth in M2 for the December-January period is projected in a 9-13
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
QII
QIII
Semi-annual
QIII '76-QI '77
QI '77-QIII '77
Annual
QIII '76-QIII '77
FOMC Longer-run Range
QIII '76-QIII '77
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
Semi-annual
QIII '76-QI '77
QI '77-QIII '77
Annual
QtII '76-QIII '77
per cent annual rate range. This reflects continued rapid expansion
in time and savings deposits other than money market CD's at banks.
The rate of growth in such deposits, however, is not expected to
accelerate from the pace of recent months despite recent declines in
market interest rates, as banks appear to be in process of lowering
offering rates on certain time certificates.
(9) Basically, credit demands over the next few weeks and
into early 1977 are likely to be generally moderate and will probably
have little net impact on the current level of market rates. Market
participants, however, remain quite sensitive to possible monetary
actions. For example, with the 3-month bill rate about 35 basis points
below the funds rate and dealer holdings of securities large,
it appears that the market is expecting a lower funds rate. Thus, if
the funds rate does not decline further, there could be a technical
re-adjustment in rate structure. Bill rates could rise somewhat. On
the other hand, the primary mortgage rate is likely to decline over the
next few weeks--even assuming no change in the funds rate--in lagged
response to earlier declines in market rates.
(10) As time goes on, and the pace of economic activity
picks up, private credit demands are likely to strengthen. Treasury
borrowing needs in the first quarter will be substantial and perhaps
more than the market is currently anticipating. Against this back-
ground, we would expect interest rates to begin rising by spring of
next year if growth in M1 is kept to around the mid-point of the
period. If growth in GNP during the first three quarters of 1977 is
at about the 11 per cent annual rate projected by the staff on the
assumption that taxes are cut, we would anticipate that the funds rate
may rise to an average of around 6 per cent in the third quarter of
next year, as shown in appendix table II. On the other hand, if there
were no additional fiscal stimulus, we would expect a smaller rise
in interest rates from current levels--perhaps an increase in the
funds rate to 5¼ per cent or so by the third quarter. This would of
course,mainly reflect the weaker expansion in nominal GNP and
transactions demand for money.
(11) Alternative A involves an easing of the money market
between now and the next Committee meeting, with the funds rate
dropping to the mid-point of a 3¾-4½ per cent range. Further declines
in market rates are likely to be generated, though such declines will
be limited if incoming economic evidence continues to suggest a more
vigorous economy and therefore leads market participants to believe
that interest rates may soon rise. Banks, in such circumstances,
may seek to issue money market CD's more aggressively--particularly
longer maturities--in an effort to lock in favorable yields. And
corporate and municipal borrowers may continue to accelerate marketings
of new bond issues.
(12) An easing of the money market would generate only
slightly more growth in M1 and M2 over the December-January period
than under alternative B. However, the lower level of market rates
will, with a lag, tend to strengthen the demand for money further.
Thus, M1 growth over the longer-run would likely be higher than the
mid-point of the Committee's one-year range. As a result, to contain
growth within desired bounds interest rates under this alternative may
have to rise to somewhat higher levels than under alternative B and
the rise may begin sooner.
(13) Alternative C contemplates a tightening in the money
market over the next few weeks, with the funds rate rising to around
would be likely to follow, since most market participants appear to have
adjusted their current positions to expectations that the funds rate
will either decline or remain about unchanged over the near-term.
The 3-month bill rate, for example, might move up to the area of 5-5¼
per cent. After the initial reaction, however, further rate increases
might be quite limited. Some rate increases, particularly in longer-
term markets, could be partly reversed as the funds rate tended to
level off at the new higher level. The staff would expect that little
further increase in the funds rate would, in practice, be required to
achieve the FOMC's longer-run monetary growth rates.
Proposed directive
(14) Given below is a proposed operational paragraph for the
directive if the Committee wishes to continue formulating its instruc-
tions in terms of desired growth in monetary aggregates over the months
ahead. No alternatives are presented for this formulation, in the
expectation that the reference to desired growth will be taken to apply
to the longer-term targets and that at this meeting the Committee will
not reconsider those targets.
"Monetary Aggregates" Proposal
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent
with moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the period ahead.
(15) Should the Committee desire to place main emphasis on
bank reserve and money market conditions, the language needed would
depend on the specific conditions sought. Three alternative "money
market" directives intended to correspond to the similarly lettered
policy alternatives are given below.
Alternative "Money Market" Proposals
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve SOMEWHAT EASIER bank reserve and money market
conditions [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates]
over the period IMMEDIATELY ahead, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES
APPEAR TO BE GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES CURRENTLY EXPECTED.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to [DEL: achieve] MAINTAIN PREVAILING bank reserve and money market
conditions [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates]
over the period IMMEDIATELY ahead, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES
APPEAR TO BE GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES CURRENTLY EXPECTED.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve SOMEWHAT FIRMER bank reserve and money market
conditions [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates]
over the period IMMEDIATELY ahead, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES
APPEAR TO BE GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES CURRENTLY EXPECTED.
