Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
February 13, 1976
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) February 13, 1976
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 appears to be growing at about a 4¼ per cent annual
rate in the January-February period--slightly above the lower limit of the
Committee's two-month range of tolerance--as the table shows. On the other
hand, M2 is expanding at around a 12 per cent rate--somewhat above the
upper limit of its range. The larger than expected increase in M2 mainly
reflects the sizable expansion in savings deposits that has occurred
since early January, when yields on some key short-term market securities
dropped below the 5 per cent ceiling rate on such accounts. In January, M1
grew at only a 1.6 per cent annual rate, but the pace of expansion picked
up during the early weeks of February.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
over January-February Period
Reserve and monetary aggregates Ranges of
(Growth at SAAR, in per cent) Tolerance Latest Estimates
M2  7 to ll½ 12.1
(2) The adjusted bank credit proxy declined somewhat on balance
in January and is projected to expand at no more than about a 2¼ per cent
annual rate in February. Bank loans have increased only modestly since the
beginning of the year, and banks have permitted CD's to run-off in large
volume. While most major banks cut their prime lending rate to 6¾ per cent
during the intermeeting period, the adjustment to earlier declines in
market rates was only partial, so that spreads of the prime over commercial
paper rates remained unusually wide.
(3) With strength in M2 offsetting weakness in M1 , the Desk
continued throughout the intermeeting period to aim at the 4¾ per cent
Federal funds rate prevailing at the time of the last meeting. Other
short-term market rates did drift down another 10-15 basis points in late
January when market participants were still anticipating some further
reduction in the funds rate, but these declines were reversed once it
became clear that such a cut was unlikely. As a result, most market
interest rates showed little net change over the intermeeting period.
However, the strong performance of deposit flows at thrift institutions
encouraged some additional decline in mortgage rates.
(4) The announcement of terms on the Treasury's February
refinancing--which involved a fixed price offering of a 7-year note and
auctions of a 3-year note and a re-opened long bond--exerted less upward
yield pressure on the market for outstanding issues than many had antici-
pated. As a result, the 8 per cent coupon on the offering of 7-year notes
at par was particularly attractive. Tenders were huge, and the Treasury
issued $6 billion of the note rather than the $3½ billion originally
planned. This issue has moved to about a 1½ point premium. Meanwhile,
the new 3-year note and the re-opened long bond have moved to small
discounts relative to their auction averages. Dealers were awarded
negligible amounts of the 8 per cent note and have acquired only modest
amounts through the secondary market. Awards of the short note and the
bond were fairly large. While reasonably good progress has been made in
distributing the issues, dealers' over-all position in coupon issues is
still sizable. Moreover, their holdings of Treasury bills are unusually
large, reflecting the cumulative impact of large Treasury cash raising
activities in that area.
(5) The table on the following page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various time
Calendar Calendar Six Three Past
Year Year Months Months Month
July '75 Oct.'75 Dec.'75
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change in
billions)
reserve requirements are changed.
Past Past
Prospective developments
(6) Summarized below for Committee consideration are alternative
shorter-run operating ranges for the monetary aggregates and the Federal
funds rate.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges of tolerance
for February-March
Federal funds rate 3¾ to 4¾ 4¼ to 5¼ 4¾ to 5¾
(intermeeting range)
(7) Each of these short-run alternatives is consistent with
a 6 per cent growth rate for M1 over the period from QIV '75 to QIV '76--
the mid-point of the longer-run M1 growth range adopted by the Committee
at its last meeting. Growth rates for M2 and M3 over the longer-run
for each of the alternatives are also around the middle of the 12-month
ranges for these aggregates adopted at the last meeting. There are some
minor differences in growth rates for the broader aggregates among the
alternatives because of projected differences in interest rate patterns.
Longer-run growth rates, as well as more detailed figures, are shown in
the tables on pp. 5a and 5b.
(8) Under alternative B, the Federal funds rate range is centered
on the recently prevailing 4¾ per cent level. Given such a funds rate, M1
growth over the February-March period is expected to be within a 5 to 9 per
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1  M2  M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Committee lpnger-run
Growth Ranges
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
J976 QI
QII
QIII
QIV
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
QIV '75-QII '76
QII '76-QIV '76
cent, annual rate, range. Tax refunds are projected to be very large
beginning in the second half of February--even a little larger than a
year ago, when refund payments in this period were unusually high. In
addition, the projected strength in economic activity in the first quarter
should involve rising transactions demands.
(9) Even if M1 growth in February-March is as rapid as implied
by the mid-point of the range stipulated for alternative B, M1 would
expand at only about a 3¼ per cent annual rate from the fourth quarter of
of about 12 per cent annual rate, another sizable rise in velocity appears
in store--as would be consistent with a further downward shift in the demand
for money. The staff is assuming only a small further downward shift after
the first quarter, and as a result interest rates can be expected to begin
rising in the spring if M1 growth is to be kept to around a 6 per cent rate
over the year. The funds rate under alternative B is expected to reach
an average level of around 6¾ per cent by the fourth quarter of this year.
Rate pressures would, of course, be stronger if the demand for money began
strengthening relative to GNP. Appendix Table IV shows Federal funds rates
expected over the course of the year for each of the alternatives.
(10) M2 growth in the February-March period under alternative
B is likely to be in a 10 to 13 per cent annual rate range. The rate of
growth in time and savings deposits (other than large CD's) may moderate
over the next few weeks from its recent exeptionally rapid pace, partly
in consequence of withdrawals in connection with payment for the new 8 per
cent 7-year Treasury note. A further slowing in such deposit flows can be
expected as the year progresses in view of the anticipated rise in
short-term market interest rates.
(11) Little further change in market interest rates would be
expected between now and the mid-March Committee meeting under the
specifications of alternative B. The 3-month bill rate could rise
somewhat because a substantial part--perhaps half--of the Treasury's
very heavy cash need of around $15 billion between now and mid-April may
be raised in the bill area, where dealer bill positions are already large.
Upward adjustment of interest rates in the 2 to 7 year maturity area may
also develop, since the Treasury will be offering additional notes
for cash in the forthcoming period; a $2 billion 21-month note to be
auctioned next Friday was announced today. Yields in the corporate bond
market are likely to fluctuate within a narrow range, with little signifi-
cant change anticipated over the next few weeks in the flow of new issues
coming to market. The municipal market is still subject to substantial
uncertainty because of persisting doubts as to how New York State and
certain other borrowers will cover forthcoming financing needs.
(12) Alternative A involves a decline in the Federal funds rate
to the mid-point of a 3¾ to 4¾ per cent range, and slightly higher growth
rates for M1 and M2 over the near-term than under alternative B. Such a
drop in the funds rate might be accompanied by only a modest decline in the
earlier. Long-term market rates would probably decline only temporarily,
if at all, in response to a drop in the funds rate, in view of the wide-
spread market expectations of continuing economic recovery and the
likelihood that borrowers would accelerate bond offerings should rates
soften noticeably.
(13) The staff would not expect a decline in the funds rate to
be sustainable, given the FOMC's longer-run monetary growth ranges. If
alternative A were adopted, the funds rate would probably have to start
rising by early spring, and during the third and fourth quarters would
reach levels somewhat above those resulting under alternative B. However,
reflecting the initially somewhat more accommodative reserve policy under
alternative A, growth in the aggregates would be a little stronger in the
first half of 1976 than under alternative B. Monetary growth would, of
course, be somewhat less rapid in the second half.
(14) Alternative C involves a rise in the Federal funds rate to
the mid-point of a 4¾ to 5¾ per cent range over the next few weeks. This
may engender increases of as much as 50 to 100 basis points in other
short-term rates and in yields on Treasury notes, given current market
expectations of near-term rate stability and the heavy prospective volume
of Treasury financing. Rate increases on longer-term market securities
would probably be less pronounced. The prospect for reduced flows to
thrift institutions would forestall any further decline in mortgage rates
and may set the stage for some back-up.
(15) However, under this alternative, mortgage markets, and
credit markets generally, may tighten less over the course of the year
than under either alternatives A or B. Given response lags, an early
tightening of the funds rate would mean that less pressure would have to
be exerted on markets later in the year to constrain growth in money. The
lower average level of market rates achieved under this alternative would
thus tend to limit pressures on thrift institutions during the second
half of the year compared with the other alternatives.
Proposed directive
(16) Given below is a proposed operational paragraph if the
Committee wishes to formulate its instructions in terms of desired growth
in monetary aggregates over the months ahead. No alternatives are presented
for this formulation, in the expectation that the reference to desired growth
will be taken to apply to the longer-term targets and that at this meeting
the Committee will not reconsider those targets.
"Monetary aggregates" proposal
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to [DEL: maintain-prevailing] ACHIEVE bank reserve and money market conditions
CONSISTENT WITH MODERATE GROWTH IN MONETARY AGGREGATES over the
period [DEL: immediately] ahead [DEL: , provided that monetary aggregates appear
to be growing at about the rates currently expected.]
(17) Should the Committee desire to continue placing main
emphasis on bank reserve and money market conditions, the language needed
would depend on the specific conditions sought. Three alternative "money
market" directives intended to correspond to the similarly lettered policy
alternatives are given below.
Alternative "money market" proposals
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE SOMEWHAT EASIER bank reserve and money
market conditions over the period immediately ahead, provided that
monetary aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates currently
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to maintain prevailing bank reserve and money market conditions over
the period immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates
appear to be growing at about the rates currently expected.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE SOMEWHAT FIRMER bank reserve and money
market conditions over the period immediately ahead, provided that
monetary aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates currently
TABLE 1
BANK RESERVES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
CLASS II-FOMC
FEB. 13, 1976
RESERVES AVAILABLE AGGREGATE RESERVES I REQUIRED RESERVES
Period FOR PRIVATE SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
Period NONBANK DEPOSITS Total Nonborrowed Total Private Total Time Gov't. and
S NSA Reserves Reserves Required Demand Deposits InterbankSA I NSA
MONTHLY LEVELS-SMILLIONS
.......................
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
WEEKLY LEVELS-$MILLIONS
( -6.0)
( 4, 145
.. 5
I -28.1)
( -11.4)
( -27.41
( -10.2)
I -22.4)
I -14.4)
Table 2 CONFIDENTIAL (F R )
CLASS II FOMCMONETARY AGGREGATES FEB. 13, 1976
ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
MONEY SUPPLY Adjusted U S TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS Nondeposit
Period Narrow Broad Credit Govt Other Sources of
(Ml) (M2) Proxy Deposits Total Than CD's CD's Funds
MONTHLY LEVELS-$6LLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
WEEKLY LEVELS-BILLIONS
P - PRELIMINARY
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
FEBRUARY 13, 1976
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations 1/ _ Daily Average Reserve Effects 2/ In Reserve Categories -A Target
Bills Coupon Agency RP's Open Market a Member Other 4/ Req. res. against available res. 5/ available
Period &Accept. Issues Issues Net 3/ Total Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) reserves 5
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
Feb. -1,110
Mar.
I/ Represents change in System's portfolio from end-of-period to end-of-period; includes redemptions in regular bill auctions.
/ Represents change in daily average level for preceeding period.
3/ Includes matched sale-purchase transactions as well as RP's.
4/ Sum of changes in vault cash, currency in circulation, Treasury operations, F.R. float, gold and foreign accounts, and other F.R. accounts.
5/ Reserves to support private nonbank deposits. Target change for January and February reflects the target adopted at the January 20, 1976
FOMC meeting. Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted
during the month.
P - Preliminary.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II -- FOMC
FEBRUARY 13, 1976
TABLE 4
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1/
($ millions, not seasonally adjusted)
Treasury Coupons Federal Agencies Net Change
Net Purchases 3/ Net Purchases 4/ Outright
rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury borrowings from the System.
4/ Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts only. Excludes redemptions and maturity shifts.
5/ In addition to net purchases of securities, also reflects changes in System holdings of bankers' acceptances, direct Treasury borrowings from the
System, and redemptions (-) of Agency and Treasury coupon issues.
6/ Includes changes in both RP's (+) and matched sale-purchase transactions (-).
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
FEBRUARY 13, 1976
Table 5
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
(millions of dollars)
U.S. Govt. Security Member Bank Reserve Positions
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Borrowing at FRB** Basic Reserve Deficit
Corporate Municipal Excess**
Period Bills Coupon Issues Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Others
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
*4,891
*4,294
*5,020
*4,936p
*1,637
*1,005
* 828
*1,750p
lip
n.a.
- .i _______ 1___________
- 9,896
- 9,966
- 9,015
- 9,202
-
9
Government security dealer trading positions are on a commitment basis. Trading positions, which exclude Treasury bills financed by repurchase
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions issues
still in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserve less net Federal
funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are Friday figures.
*STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL **Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
FEBRUARY 13, 1976
TABLE 6
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(Per Cent)
Short-Term _Long-Term
Treasury Bills 90-119 Day CD's New Issue-NYC Aaa Utility Municipal ..S. Government FNMA GNMA
Federal Commercial New Recently Bond (20-yr. Constant Auction Guaranteed
Period Funds 90-Day 1-year Paper 60-89 Day 90-119 Day Issue Offered Buyer Maturity) Yield Securities
(6)
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
N01TE: Weekly data for columns 1 to 4 are statement week averages of daily data. Columns 5 and 6 are one-day Wednesday quotes. For columns 7,8, and 10
the weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day quote for Thursday following the end of
the statement week. Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceding the end of the statement week. Column 12 is a one-day quote for
the Monday preceding the end of the statement week. The FNMA auction yield is the average yield in bi-weekly auction for short-term forward
commitments for Government underwritten mortgages. GNMA yields are average net yields to investors on mortgage-backed securities for immediate
deli-very, assuming prepayment in 12 years on pools of 30-year FHA/VA mortgages carrying the prevailing ceiling rate.
APPENDIX TABLE 1-A
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATE MEASURES
FEB. 13, 1976
r BANK CREDIT MONEY STOCK
RESERVES MEASURES MEASURES
Available Total
Period , to Adj. Loans
Total boNrowed Support Credit and M 1  M 2  M 3  M4 M5 M 6  M7borrowed pt. proxy Invest-
Deposits mentsTotal ' boroe 'jpr edt"dM
APPENDIX TABLE 1-B
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATE MEASURES
SEASONALLY ADJUSTED, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
FEB. 13, 1976
BANK CREDIT MONEY STOCK
RESERVESi MEASURES MEASURES
Available Total
Period to Adl Loans
Total Non Support Credit and M1  M M3  M4 M5 M M7borrowed Pvt proxy Invest
Deposits ments
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEPT.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
FEB. 4P
APPENDIX TABLE 2-A
COMPONENTS OF MONEY STOCK AND RELATED MEASURES
FEB. 13, 1976
Time Mutual Short
PDemand Toae Other ak ion CD's Savings Term CommercialPeriod Currency Depots osts Than and S & L Shares Bonds U.S. Gov't PaperI
Dep t CD' and Shares Securities
Shares 10
(Per cent annual
*ates of growth)
RESERVE REQUIREMENTS ON EURODOLLAR BORROWINGS ARE INCLUDED BEGINNING OCTOBER 16, 1969,
CUMMERCIAL PAPER ARE INCLUDED BEGINNING OCTOBER 1, 1970.
GROWTH RATES ARE BASED ON ESTIMATED MONTHLY AVERAGE LEVELS DERIVED BY AVERAGING END OF
PREVIOUS MONTH REPORTED DATA.
PRELIMINARY.
CURRENT MONTH AND END OF
FEB. 13, 1976
APPENDIX TABLE 2-B
COMPONENTS OF MONEY STOCK AND RELATED MEASURES
Time Mutual Short
Demand Total Other Savings Credit ings Term Commer Non- U.S.
Period Currency Time T Bank Union CD's U.S. Gov't PaCommercial deposit Gov'ts Deposits CD's and S & L Shares B Y Scuritie aper Funds Demand
Shares Seurities
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEPT.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
B. 4P
FEB. 4P
I - I - - I - I ~ ~ - - ~ ~ - I - J. -
NOTES: RESERVE REQUIREMENTS UN EURODOLLAR. BORROWINGS ARE INCLUDED BEGINNING
DATA.
P - PRELIMINARY
OCTOBER 16, 1969, AND REQUIREMENTS ON bANK-RELATED
MONTH AND END OF PREVIOUS MONTH REPORTED DATA.
Appendix Table III
Growth Rate in Money Supply
(Per cent change in an annual rate)
QIV '72-QIV '73
QIV '73-QIV '74
QIV '74-QIV '75
M Q
M2
M Q
M3
M Q
M = Annual rates of growth calculated from average levels in the final
months of the quarters.
Q = Annual rate calculated from average levels in all three months of the
Appendix Table IV
Projected Federal Funds Rates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
