Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
August 13, 1976
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) August 13, 1976
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent Developments
(1) Over the July-August period, M1 appears to be expanding
at an annual rate of about 6 per cent--the mid-point of the Committee's
operating range. Growth of M2 over the same period is now projected at
around a 10 per cent annual rate, somewhat above the mid-point of its
range. Expansion of the time deposit component of M2 in July was somewhat
more rapid than anticipated, reflecting a resumption of savings deposit
growth as short-term market interest rates declined. Deposit inflows to
nonbank thrift institutions also increased sharply during the month. Non-
borrowed reserves appear to be increasing at only about a 2½ per cent
annual rate over the July-August period, as a decline in the outstanding
volume of money market CD's of banks released reserves to support other
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over July-August Period
(SAAR in per cent)
Ranges Latest Estimates
M2  7½ to 11½ 10.4
(2) Given growth in M1 and M2 close to the mid-points of the
FOMC's short-run ranges, the Desk has continued to aim at a Federal
funds rate of around 5¼ per cent. With earlier market concern about a
near-term tightening in monetary policy allayed by the stability of the
funds rate--as well as by moderate growth in the monetary aggregates
and incoming economic data that seemed to indicate less than anticipated
strength in the economy--short-term market interest rates declined
another 10 to 20 basis points during the intermeeting period. The prime
rate at major banks was reduced ¼ percentage point to 7 per cent in
early August.
(3) Long-term credit markets have also been influenced by a
more optimistic assessment of the interest rate outlook. Corporate
and municipal bond yields have fallen 15 to 20 basis points since the
July Committee meeting, although this partly reflects a moderation in
the volume of new offerings coming to market during the period and
in immediate prospect. Mortgage rates have changed little over the
intermeeting period.
(4) The Treasury successfully marketed a substantial volume
of longer-term debt in connection with its mid-August refunding. To
redeem $4.5 billion of maturing obligations held by the public and to
raise new cash, the Treasury sold $10.6 billion of new securities. The
refunding package included $2 billion of 3-year notes, $7.6 billion of
issue totaled $2444 billion), and $1 billion of 25 -year bonds. While
dealers were awarded most of the new bond, they received only minimal
allotments of the 10-year note. In when-issued trading, however, they
have taken a large volume of 10-year securities into their positions.
Total dealer positions in Treasury coupon issues are large, but dealers
thus far appear to be willing holders as all three new issues are selling
at sizable premiums over their issue prices and there is a very sizable
positive carry on the longer-term issues.
(5) The table on the following page shows (in terms of
percentage annual rates of change) related monetary and financial flows
over various time periods.
Past Past Past
Calendar Twelve Six Three Past
Year Months Months Months Month
July '76 July '76 July '76 July '76
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change in
billions)
Nonbank commercial paper -.2 -- .4 .4 .1
Prospective developments
(6) Summarized below for Committee consideration are three
alternative short-run specifications for the monetary aggregates and the
Federal funds rate.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for August-Sept.1/
Federal funds rate 4¼-5¼ 4¾-5¾ 5¼-6¼
(intermeeting period)
(7) Longer-run projections of levels and growth rates are shown
in the tables on pp. 5a and 5b. Under all three alternatives, the monetary
growth rates shown for the QII '76-QII '77 period are around the mid-points
of the longer-run ranges adopted by the Committee at its last meeting.
Expected behavior of the funds rate between now and mid-1977 under these
assumptions is shown in Appendix Table II.
(8) Over the longer-run, the three alternatives would differ
in the distribution of monetary ease or restraint--whether measured by
monetary growth rates or interest rate levels--between the second half
of 1976 and the first half of 1977. Alternative A--which involves an
easing of the money market over the next few weeks--encompasses more
monetary ease in the second half of this year than the other two alterna-
tives, and more monetary restraint in the first half of next year. At the
other end of the spectrum, alternative C--which assumes a tightening of the
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Semi-annual
QII '76-QIV '76
QIV '76-QII '77
Annual
QII '76-QII '77
FOMC Longer-run Range
QII '76-QII '77
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
Semi-annual
QII '76-QIV '76
QIV '76-QII '77
Annual
QII '76-QII '77
money market between now and the next Committee meeting--focuses monetary
restraint more in the second half of this year. Alternative B lies in
between. The differences among the alternatives, as indexed by growth rates
for M1 and the average level of the funds rate, are summarized in the table
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
(9) The intermeeting range for the Federal funds rate under
alternative B is centered on 5¾ per cent, the rate recently prevailing.
Given the projected increase in nominal GNP at about an 11 per cent annual
rate on average over the next few quarters, the staff still expects that
interest rates will begin rising fairly soon if longer-run M1 growth is
held to around a 5¾ per cent annual rate. By the second quarter of 1977,
we would expect the funds rate to average around 7¼ per cent.
(10) Under alternative B, M1 is expected to expand in a 4-8 per
cent, annual rate, range over the August-September period and M2 in a
in September than in August, in part because of a sharp drop in Treasury
balances. These balances have built up substantially in August, reflecting
the unexpectedly large amount of net new money raised in the recent
Treasury financing operation.
(11) M2 growth is likely to be sustained by sizable inflows of
time and savings deposits other than money market CD's, given continued
stability in the funds rate and little change in other short-term rates.
The rate of increase in such time deposits may be more rapid in September
than in August, when expansion apparently is being restrained by the diver-
sion of funds to purchase the Treasury's new 8 per cent, 10-year note.
Over the longer run, the prospective rise in interest rates would likely
dampen savings and time deposit flows. It appears likely that, by the
spring of 1977, Regulation Q ceilings would need to be increased in order
to maintain M2 and M3 growth rates near the mid-points of their respective
longer-run ranges.
(12) Demands on credit markets are expected to be relatively
modest over the next few weeks. In the August-September period, the
average monthly volume of new issues may amount to only about $1-1/2 bil-
lion for publicly offered corporate bonds, and about $2 billion for state
and local government issues--down from average monthly volumes of about
$2-1/2 billion and just under $3 billion, respectively, in the first half
of the year. There are signs of some pick-up in short-term business credit
demands, but these demands remain relatively light. However, there is a
very large inventory of U.S. Government securities in dealer hands that
has not yet been distributed to ultimate holders. Dealers hold $9 bil-
lion in U.S. Government and Federal agency issues, including $1-1/4 billion
of the new 10- and 25-year Treasury issues.
(13) Alternative C involves a tighter monetary policy over the
next few weeks and assumes that the Federal funds rate rises to the mid-
point of a 5-1/4 to 6-1/4 per cent range. Such an increase would be likely
to spark substantial efforts by Government dealers to unload their posi-
tions, and would therefore probably lead to considerable short-run upward
adjustment in yields on Treasury securities. The 3-month bill rate might
rise 40 to 60 basis points to the 5-1/2 to 5-3/4 per cent area, and Trea-
sury note and bond yields could increase 20 to 30 basis points.
(14) While alternative C involves more near-term restraint than
B, the early move toward tightening would work to limit interest rate
increases needed over the longer run to maintain M1 growth over the QII
'76-QII '77 period at around 5-3/4 per cent. The staff believes that the
funds rate could peak out at around 6-3/4 per cent during the fall under
an alternative C approach. At such a rate level, it appears that an
upward adjustment in Regulation Q may not be needed to enable the Com-
mittee to attain its longer-run M2 and M3 objectives.
(15) Alternative A assumes an easing of money market conditions
between now and the next meeting--with the funds rate dropping to the mid-
point of a 4-1/4 to 5-1/4 per cent range. Given the outlook for GNP, such
a near-term easing would probably need to be reversed shortly in order to
attain a 5-3/4 per cent growth in M1 from QII '76 to QII '77. If the
reversal were begun in early fall, the funds rate might peak out at around
under alternative B. An upward adjustment in Regulation Q ceiling rates
might be required somewhat earlier than under B, perhaps in the winter of
next year.
(16) Market reactions to an easing of money market conditions
over the next few weeks are difficult to evaluate. Downward yield adjust-
ments may be limited by expectations that such an easing is likely to be
reversed soon. On the other hand, if economic news also continues to be
suggestive of a pause in activity, an easing of the money market could be
accompanied by fairly substantial rate declines in short- and long-term
markets. The 3-month bill rate, for example, might well return to around
inflows to banks and thrift institutions would probably become even larger.
This would exert pressure on these institutions to seek higher yielding
longer-term investments, and thus would place downward pressure on bond
yields and also on mortgage rates. However, some institutions--fearful
of being locked into longer-term securities should there be a reversal of
interest rates and a strengthening of credit demands--might elect to reduce
time and savings deposit rates, or at least to cut back their advertising
for deposits.
Proposed directive
(17) Given below is a proposed operational paragraph for the
directive if the Committee wishes to continue formulating its instructions
in terms of desired growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
No alternatives are presented for this formulation, in the expectation that
the reference to desired growth will be taken to apply to the Longer-term
targets and that at this meeting the Committee will not consider those
"Monetary Aggregates" Proposal
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent
with moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the period ahead.
(18) Should the Committee desire to place main emphasis on bank
reserve and money market conditions, the language needed would depend on
the specific conditions sought. Three alternative "money market" direc-
tives intended to correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives
are given below.
Alternative "Money Market" Proposals
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve SOMEWHAT EASIER bank reserve and money market condi-
tions [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates] over the
period IMMEDIATELY ahead, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES APPEAR
TO BE GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES CURRENTLY EXPECTED.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to [DEL: achieve] MAINTAIN PREVAILING bank reserve and money market
conditions [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates]
over the period IMMEDIATELY ahead, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES
APPEAR TO BE GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES CURRENTLY EXPECTED.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve SOMEWHAT FIRMER bank reserve and money market condi-
tions [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates] over the
period IMMEDIATELY ahead, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES APPEAR TO
BE GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES CURRENTLY EXPECTED.
