Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
June 18, 1976
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) June 18, 1976
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent Developments
(1) Growth in M1 slowed to a 6 per cent annual rate in May--
following April's exceptionally rapid advance--and appears to be
moderating somewhat further in June. Thus, for the May-June period,
M1 expansion is now projected at around a 5½ per cent annual rate, just
below the mid-point of the Committee's range. M2 is projected to expand
at around an 8¾ per cent rate during May and June, also well below its
pace in April, but near the upper bound of the Committee's range. Growth
in the time deposit component of M2 has been somewhat greater than expected
in recent weeks, despite a marked diminution of inflows to savings
deposits, as market rates moved above the ceiling rate on passbook savings.
Inflows of funds to nonbank thrift institutions were well maintained in
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over May-June Period
(SAAR in per cent)
Ranges Latest Estimates
(2) Following the May 18 FOMC meeting, the Desk promptly became
somewhat less accommodative in the provision of reserves and sought a
Federal funds rate around 5-3/8 per cent, a shade above the then prevail-
ing 5-1/4 per cent and equal to the mid-point of the 5 to 5-3/4 per cent
range newly adopted by the Committee. When incoming data during the latter
part of May suggested that May-June growth in both M1 and M2 would be near
the upper ends of the Committee's ranges, the Desk raised its funds rate
objective to 5-1/2 per cent. Subsequent data tended to confirm this projec-
tion of M2 growth, but indicated that M1 growth might be weaker than earlier
believed. Under the circumstances, the Desk has continued to seek a Federal
funds rate averaging about 5-1/2 per cent.
(3) Nonborrowed reserves in the May-June period appear to be
increasing at about a 3-1/2 per cent annual rate, on average, rather than
decreasing slightly as the staff had thought would be consistent with the
short-run ranges for the monetary aggregates adopted by the FOMC at its
last meeting.1/ Since the banking system held more free reserves (excess
reserves minus borrowings) than anticipated, this growth rate did not support
more monetary expansion than expected. With Federal funds generally trading
around the 5-1/2 per cent discount rate, member bank borrowing did nonethe-
less increase and averaged about $125 million in the interval between Com-
mittee meetings, as compared with about $50 million in the preceding two months.
(4) Since the May FOMC meeting, private short-term interest
rates have generally increased 1/4 to 1/2 of a percentage point, on balance,
while Treasury bill rates have changed little. Most of the increase in
private rates occurred in late May and early June, as the Federal funds
rate rose. When the funds rate subsequently stabilized around the 5-1/2
per cent level, and published data indicated a substantial slowdown of
growth in M1 the upward movement of rates stopped. The spread between
private short-term rates and Treasury bill rates widened, in part reflect-
ing some firming in business demands for short-term credit while the Trea-
sury continued to redeem maturing bills in its weekly auction. The volume
of commercial paper increased modestly further in May. Business loans at
banks also rose a little over this period, and banks-perhaps expecting a
further increase in business loans and rising interest rates--have increased
their outstanding CD's.
(5) Bond yields continued to move higher in late May, but
declined in June as short-term markets stabilized, and on balance were
down a little over the intermeeting period. The bond markets have absorbed
a substantial volume of new corporate and municipal issues in recent weeks.
Treasury borrowing activity over the period was less heavy than had pre-
viously been projected by the Treasury--reflecting an unexpected shortfall
in outlays--but was still on the large side for the period of the year.
Although yields in the secondary mortgage market have moved in sympathy
with bond market rates, rates in the primary market for home loans have
continued to edge upward in the past few weeks. Net acquisitions of
mortgages by savings and loan associations remained at a relatively high
level in April, and loan commitments increased to their highest level in
(6) The table on the following page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) related monetary and financial flows over various time
Past Past Past
Calendar Twelve Six Three Past
Y____a_ Months Months Months Month
May '76 May '76 May '76 May '76
Concepts of Money (Revised Series)
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change in
billions)
loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institu-
tions--which are derived from either end-of-month or last Wednesday-of-month
figures. Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are
adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when
reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(7) Three alternative sets of short-run specifications for
the monetary aggregates and the Federal funds rate are summarized below
for Committee consideration. (More detailed data, as well as longer-run
growth rates, are shown in the tables on pp. 6a and 6b, while reserve
aggregates believed to be consistent with these specifications are presented
in appendix Table I.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for June-July
(8) If the Federal funds rate between now and the next meeting
of the Committee remains around the recently prevailing 5½ per cent--the
mid-point of the alternative B range--the staff would expect that the annual
rate of M1 growth may be in a 4-8 per cent range over the June-July period.
In light of the data already reported for the early part of the month,
growth in June is expected to be around a 5 per cent annual rate. Such a
growth rate may reflect, in part, continued adjustment by cash-holders to
the April bulge in M1 growth. Recently available deposit ownership survey
figures suggest that much of the April increase was in balances of consumers,
who may take a longer time than busineses and other holders to restore their
balances to desired levels. The staff expects M1 growth in July to be at
a somewhat higher rate, in view of the projected rise in nominal GNP.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2  M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M4 M5  Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
eonthly:
Quarterly Averages:
(9) Given the prevailing Federal funds rate, time deposits
other than large money market CD's are expected to grow over the next two
months at an annual rate around 10 per cent. With short-term market rates
generally above the 5 per cent passbook rate, interest-sensitive holders,
including businesses and state and local governments, may continue to
reduce holdings of savings deposits. However, this may be offset by further
expansion of ceiling-free time certificates of deposit, including large-
denomination certificates issued by non-money market banks. Thus, for
the June-July period, M2 growth may be in a 6½-10½ per cent annual rate
range under alternative B.
(10) In the near-term, if the money market remains stable,
short- and long-term interest rates are likely to change little. Longer-
term market interest rates could edge down further once the market has
absorbed the very large volume of new corporate and municipal bond offerings
scheduled for June. The Treasury has a very large third-quarter deficit
to finance, but it is expected to end the current fiscal year with a large
cash balance and will probably raise the bulk of the new cash it needs later
this summer.
(11) Over the longer run, the outlook is still for upward
pressures on interest rates, particularly short-term rates. Credit demands
on banks and in short-term markets are expected to strengthen as the year
progresses--with consequent upward pressure on CD and commercial paper
rates. And by early winter the Treasury may have to finance itself
increasingly outside the banking system, even if some upward adjustment in
Regulation Q ceiling rates has been made by then, as we assume. As may be
seen from appendix Table II, under alternative B the staff would expect a
Federal funds rate of around 8 per cent by early next year, given a growth
rate in M1 from QI '76 to QI '77 of 5¾ per cent.
(12) The specifications of alternative C include a tightening
of the funds rate over the next few weeks to the mid-point of a 5½-6½
per cent range. This would clearly entail further upward adjustments in
market rates, with the 3-month bill rate moving to the 6 per cent area and
the 3-month commercial paper rate rising to perhaps around 6¼-6½ per cent.
However, such a near-term tightening of the money market would tend to
moderate the need for restraint as the year progresses, as compared with
alternative B. The funds rate under alternative C would be expected to
peak at around 7¼ per cent by late this year, again assuming a 5¾ per cent
growth rate in M1 over the QI '76-QI '77 period,
(13) Growth in M1 in the June-July period may be in a 3½-7½
per cent, annual rate, range under alternative C, only a little less than
under alternative B. In the short run, member banks could be expected
to offset the greater constraint on nonborrowed reserves that is specified
under alternative C by increasing their borrowing through the discount
window, as suggested in appendix Table I. Expansion of M2 over the forth-
coming 2-month period might be in a 5½-9½ per cent annual rate range, in
part reflecting reduced inflows to time and savings deposits (other than
money market CD's) as funds are increasingly diverted from such accounts to
higher-yielding market instruments.
(14) Alternative A assumes an easing in the Federal funds rate
to the mid-point of a 4½-5½ per cent range between now and the next
Committee meeting. Such an easing would encourage more rapid money growth
in the third and fourth quarter than under alternatives B and C. However,
if the FOMC also wished to constrain longer-run M1 growth to 5¼ per cent,
alternative A would entail a more pronounced slowing in the rate of expansion
of M1 in early 1977 and a sharper rise in interest rates in late 1976 and
early 1977 than would the other two alternatives.
Proposed directive
(15) Given below is a proposed operational paragraph for the
directive if the Committee wishes to continue formulating its instructions
in terms of desired growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
No alternatives are presented for this formulation, in the expectation that
the reference to desired growth will be taken to apply to the longer-term
targets and that at this meeting the Committee will not reconsider those
"Monetary Aggregates" Proposal
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent
with moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the period ahead.
(16) Should the Committee desire to place main emphasis on bank
reserve and money market conditions, the language needed would depend on
the specific conditions sought. Three alternative "money market" direc-
tives intended to correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives
are given below.
Alternative "Money Market" Proposals
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve SOMEWHAT EASIER bank reserve and money market condi-
tions [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates] over the
period IMMEDIATELY ahead, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES APPEAR
TO BE GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES CURRENTLY EXPECTED.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to [DEL: achieve] MAINTAIN PREVAILING bank reserve and money market
conditions [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates]
over the period IMMEDIATELY ahead, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES
APPEAR TO BE GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES CURRENTLY EXPECTED.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee
seeks to achieve SOMEWHAT FIRMER bank reserve and money market condi-
tions [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates] over the
period IMMEDIATELY ahead, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES APPEAR TO
BE GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES CURRENTLY EXPECTED.
