Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
October 14, 1977Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared or the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) October 14, 1977
CLASS I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M-1 growth picked up to a 7.7 per cent annual rate in
September, and for the September-October period is projected at an 8.8
per cent annual rate, almost 2 percentage points above the upper end of
the Committee's range. Growth in the time and savings deposit component
of M-2 has shown little net change in recent weeks, despite further advances
in short-term market interest rates. Thus, M-2 is projected to increase at
about an 8.6 per cent annual rate over September and October, somewhat over
the Committee's range. Funds continued to flow into deposit accounts at
nonbank thrift institutions in September at a rate only slightly below
August's very strong pace. Reflecting the recent strong expansion of
demand and time deposits, nonborrowed reserves are expected to rise at a
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over September-October period
(SAAR in per cent)
Ranges Latest Estimates
(2) In light of the policy agreed upon by the FOMC at its
September meeting, the Desk began to aim for a Federal funds rate of 6-1/4
per cent on the day following that meeting. Thereafter, as incoming data
suggested that growth rates of the key aggregates would be near or above
the FOMC's ranges, the funds rate was raised to 6-3/8 per cent and then
to the 6-1/2 per cent upper end of its range. Short-term market inter-
est rates have generally increased about 30 to 65 basis points since
the September FOMC meeting, and long-term market yields have moved up 10
to 20 basis points. As short-term rates rose relative to the discount
rate, member bank borrowing at the discount window increased, reaching an
average of $1,051 million in the statement week just passed. The System's
$2.5 billion direct loan to the U.S. Treasury, extended on September 30
in anticipation of the lapse in the Treasury's temporary debt ceiling,
was repaid on October 4, 1977.
(3) Aggregate demands for credit have been fairly well maintained
in recent weeks. Although outstanding short-term business debt was about
unchanged in September following two months of moderate growth, corpora-
tions continued to issue fairly substantial amounts of long-term debt.
State and local governments and the U.S. Treasury have raised a substan-
tial volume of funds in securities markets in recent weeks, and households
have apparently continued to borrow heavily in the mortgage market. With
sales of autos and other durables slackening somewhat in September, how-
ever, expansion in consumer instalment credit probably slowed a bit from
August's strong pace.
(4) The table on the following page shows (in terms of
percentage annual rates of change) related monetary and financial
flows over various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average Sept. '76 Mar. '77 June '77 Aug. '77
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective Developments
(5) Displayed below for Committee consideration are four alter-
native sets of longer-run ranges for the monetary aggregates applicable
to the QIII '77-QIII '78 period. Also shown are the ranges currently
in place that pertain to the QII '77-QII '78 period.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D Current
(6) Alternative B retains the growth range for M-1 adopted by
the Committee in July. However, the associated ranges for M-2 and M-3
are lower than those currently in place. The staff has assumed that
a higher average level of market interest rates would be required in
the QIII '77-QIII '78 period than had been earlier contemplated to keep
M-1 growth at the mid-point of a 4-6½ per cent range in the face of an
apparently strengthened demand for cash balances. Higher interest rates
would work to constrain growth in the time and savings deposit component
of M-2 and M-3 by more than would be implied by the mid-points of the
current ranges for those aggregates. Alternatives A and C encompass,
respectively, slightly higher and slightly lower longer-run growth ranges
for the aggregates. Alternative D reflects a larger downward adjustment
in growth ranges, including a reduction in the M-1 range sufficient to
compensate for the third-quarter overshoot in M-1 growth.
(7) The implications of mid-points in the proposed growth
ranges for M-1 and M-2 for growth rates in these aggregates over 15-month
and 18-month periods beginning in QII '77 and QI '77, respectively, and
ending in QIII '78 are shown in the table below.1/
Growth Rates in Monetary Aggregates
Assuming Growth over QIII '77-QIII '78
Period at near Mid-Points of Alternative Ranges
(Annual rates, compounded quarterly)
Period A B C D
(8) It may be seen that under alternative D growth in M-1 at
around a 4¼ per cent rate over the QIII '77-QIII '78 period would lead to
expansion in the QII '77-QIII '78 period at a 5¼ per cent annual rate
--the mid-point of the current longer-run range. Growth would be somewhat
higher if measured from QI '77 since there was also an overshoot in the
second quarter for which alternative D does not compensate. Growth of
M-1 of around 5¼ per cent in the QIII '77-QIII '78 period, as called
for under alternative B, would be associated with expansion over the
in the upper part of the FOMC's current longer-run range. Under all of
the alternatives, however, growth rates in M-2 over the more extended
the lower half, of its current 7-9½ per cent range.
(9) Proposed shorter-run specifications to guide Desk opera-
tions in the interval between FOMC meetings (and that are believed
consistent with longer-run proposals) are summarized below for Committee
consideration. (More detailed, and longer-term, data are shown in the
tables on pp. 8 and 9).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C (or D)
Ranges for October-November
Federal funds rate
(intermeeting period) 5¾-6¼ 6¼-6¾ 6¾-7¼
(10) Alternative B includes a Federal funds rate centered
on the recently prevailing level of about 6½ per cent. With such a funds
rate, M-1 growth during October-November may be in a 3-8 per cent, annual
rate, range. A relatively rapid growth appears to be in train for October,
given data thus far available for the month. The mid-point of the October-
November range assumes a substantially slower rate of growth in November
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D
Growth Rates
Monthly:
1977 October
Quarterly Average:
1977 QIV
Semi-Annual:
QIII '77-QI '78
QI '78-QIII '78
Annual:
QIII '77-QIII '78
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D
Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D
Growth Rates
Monthly:
1977 October
Quarterly Average:
1977 QIV
Semi-annual:
QIII '77-QI '78
QI '78-QIII '78
Annual:
QIII '77-QIII '78
(which would represent a pattern similar to last year's), and is consistent
with growth in M-1 from the third to the fourth quarter at about a 6 per
cent annual rate. Such a moderation in M-1 growth from the advanced
rates of the past two quarters is likely as a result of the lagged effect
on money demand of the rise of about 1¼ percentage points in short-term
rates that has occurred since mid-year.
(11) The staff expects, however, that even further increases
in interest rates would be required as time goes on if growth in M-1
over the QIII '77-QIII '78 period is to be held to the mid-point of the
longer-run 4-6 per cent range associated with alternative B. This would
first three quarters of 1978. Given staff GNP projections and our assess-
ment of the likely strength of money demand, the Federal funds rate may
peak out at about 7 per cent in the second quarter of 1978, as shown in
appendix I.
(12) Our projection of the Federal funds rate still assumes
some downward shift in demand for M-1 relative to GNP in the year ahead.
However, given the rapid growth in M-1 of the past two quarters, we have
assumed a somewhat slower downward shift than in the year ending in
QIII '77. If the downward shift proceeds even more slowly, or stops
entirely, upward interest rate pressures would be larger than we have
projected. On the other hand, a rebound in economic confidence could
well be accompanied by an increased willingness to spend out of existing
cash balances by businesses and consumers, as appears to have occurred in
earlier stages of the current economic expansion; if this takes place, a
rebound in velocity need not entail significant interest rate pressures.
(13) Growth in M-2 over the October-November period is likely
The time and savings deposit component of M-2 is expected to expand by
only slightly more than its reduced August-September pace. We continue
to anticipate little, if any, growth in outstanding large CD's at banks--
including the large-denomination time deposits that are included in M-2--
as short-term credit demands on banks remain moderate. In addition,
market rates are above bank ceiling rates on time deposits under $100,000
and maturing in less than four years, and this may be tending to con-
strain inflows of such deposits.
(14) If the Federal funds rate remains around 6 per cent
over the next few weeks, short-term market rates generally may show little
further change. There has been a substantial upward adjustment of Treasury
bill rates in the last few days, and this market appears to have fully
adjusted to a 6½ per cent funds rate. In long-term markets, an enlarged
volume of corporate and municipal bond offerings is expected in October and
November. In addition, longer-term markets will have to absorb a sizable
Treasury debt offering to be announced October 21. At that time the Trea-
sury is expected to offer $5½ to $6 billion of new issues to refund about
$2½ billion of publicly-held issues maturing in mid-November and to
raise about $3 to $3½ billion of new cash. Recent upward adjustments in
intermediate- and longer-term rates may have been sufficient to accomodate
this enlarged volume of bond offerings, but some further rise cannot be
ruled out.
(15) A tightening of the funds market to the mid-point of a
alternatives C or D--alternatives that over the longer-run involve lower
growth ranges for the monetary aggregates than alternative B. Such a
rise in the funds rate in the weeks immediately ahead would probably be
associated with a 2½-7½ per cent annual rate range for M-1 and a
(16) Under both alternatives C and D, interest rates would
probably have to rise further in late 1977 and in 1978 to achieve the
mid-points of their respective longer-run ranges for the monetary aggre-
gates. Rate increases would, of course, be larger under alternative D,
which involves M-1 growth over the QIII '77-QIII '78 period at a mid-
point rate of 4¼ per cent. The funds rate under this alternative
would be expected to reach around 8¼ per cent by the third quarter of
Under alternative D, we have assumed an upward adjustment in Regulation
Q ceilings on time deposits of ¼ percentage point across the board in
the second quarter of next year.
(17) A rise in the funds rate to around 7 per cent over the
next few weeks would probably entail an increase in the 3-month bill rate
to around 6-3/4 per cent, with commensurate adjustments in other short-term
rates. Long-term rates may be somewhat more sensitive to increases in
short rates over the period ahead than has been the case in the past
several months. Deposit flows to thrift institutions would very likely
begin to slow and this could cause mortgage yields to begin rising; given
the current wide spread of mortgage over bond rates, bond yields could
also be expected to adjust upwards. Still, upward pressures on longer-
term market rates would be moderated by the sizable cash flow to insur-
ance companies and pension funds.
(18) The easing in money market conditions over the next few
weeks under alternative A would be consistent with a shift to somewhat
higher longer-run growth ranges than those of alternative B. A decline
in the funds rate would have to be soon reversed, though, given the
staff's GNP projections. We would expect the funds rate to rise to
around 7-1/4 per cent by the second quarter of 1978 under this alternative.
Directive language
(19) Given below are alternatives for the operational paragraphs
of the directive. The first formulation, like the directive adopted at
the last meeting, places main emphasis on near-term rates of growth in
monetary aggregates; it shows--in strike-through form--the specifications
adopted at the last meeting. The second formulation places main emphasis
on money market conditions. As suggested below, the particular language
needed in the opening lines of the money market formulation would depend
on the specific conditions sought; the three alternatives shown--calling,
respectively, for somewhat easier, prevailing, and somewhat firmer money
market conditions--are intended to be associated with the specifications
discussed in the preceding section under alternatives A, B, and C.
"Monetary Aggregates" Formulation
The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of growth
in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed to be reasonably consistent
with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the
preceding paragraph. Specifically, at present, it expects the
annual growth rates over the [DEL: September-October] OCTOBER-NOVEMBER
period to be within the ranges of [DEL: 2-to-7] ____ to ____ per cent
for M-1 and [DEL: 4-to-8] ____ to ____ per cent for M-2. In the judg-
ment of the Committee such growth rates are likely to be associated
with a weekly-average Federal funds rate of about [DEL: 6-1/4] ____
per cent. If, giving, approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2,
it appears that growth rates over the 2-month period will deviate
significantly from the midpoints of the indicated ranges, the
operational objective for the Federal funds rate shall be modified
in an orderly fashion within a range of [DEL: 6 to 6-1/2] ____ to ____
per cent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the operating constraints specified above are proving to be sig-
nificantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the
Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls for
supplementary instructions from the Committee.
"Money Market" Formulation
At this time, the Committee seeks to maintain about the
prevailing money market conditions (or to achieve somewhat easier
or somewhat firmer money market conditions) during the period
immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates appear to be
growing at approximately the rates currently expected, which are
believed to be on a path reasonably consistent with the longer-run
ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the preceding paragraph.
Specifically, the Committee seeks to maintain the weekly-average
Federal funds rate at about ____ per cent, so long as M-1 and
annual rates within ranges of ____ to ____ per cent and ____
to ____ per cent, respectively. If,giving approximately equal
weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates over the 2-
month period are approaching or moving beyond the limits of the
indicated ranges, the operational objective for the weekly-average
Federal funds rate shall be modified in an orderly fashion
within a range of ____ to ____ per cent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting
that the operating constraints specified above are proving to
be significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify
the Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls
for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
