Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
December 16, 1977Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 16, 1977
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M-1 declined at a 1.8 per cent annual rate in November,
following its sharp advance in October. With growth apparently resuming
in December, M-1 is projected to increase at a 2 per cent annual rate
over November and December, 1 percentage point above the lower end of
its FOMC range. Expansion in M-2 also weakened significantly in
November and for November-December is projected at an annual rate of
range. Growth in the interest-bearing component of M-2 has remained
relatively strong in recent weeks, reflecting a sharp rise in the large
denomination time deposits included in this measure. Balances in small
time and savings deposit accounts, on the other hand, are estimated
to have declined somewhat in November, apparently in lagged response
to the rise in market interest rates that occurred in late summer and
early fall. Inflows to deposit accounts at nonbank thrift institutions
also weakened markedly in November.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over November-December Period
(SAAR in per cent)
Ranges Latest Estimates
(2) Throughout the period since the November 15 FOMC meeting,
projections of growth rates of the key monetary aggregates for the
November-December period have been well within the ranges specified
by the Committee. Accordingly, the Account Management has continued
to aim for reserve conditions consistent with Federal funds trading
around 6½ per cent.
(3) Total reserves are projected to expand at a moderate
reserves, however, are expected to rise at an 18 per cent annual rate,
reflecting the substantial decline in member bank borrowing over the
past several weeks. In response to the October 26 increase in the
discount rate, member bank borrowing from Federal Reserve Banks dropped
from the average October level of $1.3 billion to an average of about
$550 million in the first two weeks of December.
(4) In addition to the sizable increase in large denomination
time deposits included in M-2, negotiable CD's at weekly reporting
banks also expanded sharply further in November. Together, the
increase in both forms of large denomination time deposits amounted
to a record $9½ billion, substantially greater than October's
relatively large increase of just over $5 billion. Banks have been
issuing substantial volumes of such instruments recently in order to
raise funds to meet strong credit demands at a time when flows into
demand and other time and savings deposits have been weak.
(5) The substantial further rise in bank credit in November
was concentrated in loan portfolios, as continued liquidation of
Treasury securities more than offset a further rise in other security
holdings. Business loans again expanded at a rapid pace, and gains
in mortgages and consumer loans are also estimated to have been quite
large. The advance in business loans--which apparently occurred at
both large and small banks--extends the more rapid upward trend observ-
able since around mid-year.
(6) With the Federal funds rate remaining essentially
unchanged and published data indicating that growth in the aggregates
was weakening significantly, most market participants appear to have
concluded that the System would not change its funds rate target over
the remainder of this year. Against this background, the general level
of short-term interest rates has remained essentially unchanged. How-
ever, some minor realignments in relationships among individual rates
have occurred: rates on private short-term instruments have edged a
bit higher, apparently in response to the large volume of bank CD's being
offered, while Treasury bill rates have edged down somewhat, reflect-
ing, in part, the impact of substantial foreign central bank acquisi-
tions of these securities.
(7) In longer-term markets, on the other hand, yields have
generally moved somewhat higher. The increase in longer-term yields
appears to reflect in part an upward revision in interest rate projec-
tions for next year, as market participants apparently have interpreted
recently published data, such as the upward revision in third quarter
GNP and the November rise in employment, as indicating stronger than
previously anticipated economic activity in prospect for next year.
In addition, market expectations may have been influenced by larger
than anticipated Treasury borrowing in recent weeks, as well as by
increased prospects for a tax cut in 1978.
(8) The table on the following page shows (in terms of
percentage annual rate of change) related monetary and financial
flows over various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average Nov. '76 May '77 Aug. '77 Oct. '77
Concepts of Money
M-1 (Currency plus demand
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(9) The table below presents, for the Committee's con-
sideration, three alternative sets of specifications for the monetary
aggregates and the Federal funds rate for the forthcoming inter-
meeting period. (More detailed and longer-term data for the aggregates
are shown in the tables on pp. 7 and 8).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for December-January
Federal funds rate 5¾ to 6¼ 6¼ to 6¾ 6¾ to 7¼
(Inter-meeting period)
(10) In view of the underlying strength of the economy, it
is unlikely that the weakness in M-1 behavior in November will persist.
Given projections of nominal GNP, money demand can be expected to be
relatively strong over the months ahead as the restraining effect of
the 1 to 2 percentage point rise in short rates since last spring
wears off. While the growth in GNP will probably generate less demand
for money than historical relationships would suggest, it appears likely,
on the basis of recent experience, that demand will be stronger relative
to economic activity than was the case in 1975 and 1976.
(11) Against that background, M-1 growth is likely to pick
up in the December-January period. Given the Federal funds rate assump-
tions of alternative B--where the rate is centered at the prevailing
level of 6-1/2 per cent--M-1 growth over this period is likely to be
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
1977 December
1978 January
Quarterly Average:
1977 QIV
Semi-Annual:
QIII '77-QI '78
QI '78-QIII '78
Annual:
QIII '77-QIII '78
FOMC Range
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
1977 December
1978 January
Quarterly Average:
1977 QIV
Semi-annual:
QIII '77-QI '78
QI '78 QIII '78
Annual:
QIII '77-QIII '78
FOMC Range
in a 3-1/2 to 9-1/2 per cent annual rate range. If the staff's December
projection of 6 per cent annual rate of increase in M-1 proves correct,
growth in the fourth quarter would be at a 6-1/2 per cent annual rate,
significantly below the rates of growth for the second and third
quarters. For the year 1977 (measured from QIV '76 to QIV '77) M-1
would grow at around a 7-1/4 per cent rate.
(12) Growth in M-2 over the December-January period is likely
to be in a 6-10 per cent annual rate range under alternative B.
Commercial bank savings deposits, after contracting in November, are
likely to resume modest growth over the period, even though market
yields will remain above rate ceilings on such deposits, as the most
interest sensitive holders have probably shifted to other instruments.
Small denomination time deposits with maturities in excess of 4 years,
whose rates are still above those on marketable securities of com-
parable maturity, are also expected to grow moderately in the December-
January period. As in October-November, however, most of the expansion
in the interest bearing component of M-2 is likely to occur in large
denomination time deposits not subject to interest rate ceilings.
(13) At thrift institutions, inflows over the months ahead
are likely to remain well below the unusually rapid pace of July-
October, when these institutions were apparently successful in capturing
a substantial volume of maturing wild card deposits from commercial banks.
Saving deposits at S&L's and MSB's have already slowed considerably in
reflection of the higher level of market yields, but longer-term deposits
at these institutions, where offering rates remain above market yields,
can be expected to grow at a relatively rapid pace in December-January.
While thrift institutions have only limited ability to supplement
deposit flows with ceiling-free large denomination deposits, they
appear to be in a position to fulfill their record level of mortgage
commitments by reducing liquid asset holdings and continuing to draw
on FHLB advances.
(14) If the Federal funds rate remains near its present
alternative B, short-term rates probably will remain fairly
near their current levels. Credit demands are not likely to exert
upward pressures on short-term rates in the weeks immediately ahead.
The Treasury is not expected to expand the supply of bills until late
January or early February. In private short-term markets, banks are
likely to issue a sizable amount of new large, negotiable CD's in
coming weeks, though the amount issued will probably drop below
the exceptional volume of the fourth quarter, as other deposit
inflows pick-up somewhat and loan demands moderate.
(15) Over the longer-run, however, short-term rates can be
expected to rise further. Given the 11 per cent increase in nominal GNP
projected for the first three quarters of 1978, further increases in
interest rates seem required to restrain M-1 growth during that period
to about the 4¾ per cent annual rate necessary to achieve the mid-
point of the Committee's longer-run range of 4-6½ per cent for the
QIII '77-QIII '78 period. The Federal funds rate may have to begin
rising around mid-January and reach a level of about 7¾ per cent by
spring, as shown in Appendix I. This would probably be accompanied by
a rise of 1½ percentage points or so in other short rates and of about
a ½ percentage point in bond yields. Mortgage rates may rise somewhat
less, given prospective Federal support programs.
(16) Alternative C contemplates an increase in the Federal
funds rate to the mid-point of a 6¾-7¼ per cent range between now
and mid-January. With additional monetary restraint in place sooner,
the staff would expect growth in the monetary aggregates to be some-
what slower over the next few months than under alternative B. Con-
sequently, interest rates would have to rise somewhat less next year
in order to achieve the mid-points of the Committee's longer-run ranges
for the QIII '77-QIII '78 period.
(17) In light of the recent moderation in the growth of the
monetary aggregates, an increase in the Federal funds rate to the
would probably surprise market participants and involve a substantial
upward adjustment in short rates--with the 3-month bill rate, for
example, rising to about 6½ per cent. Longer-term rates would also
probably be subject to upward pressures, but the large volume of invest-
ible funds from insurance companies and pension funds would very likely
restrain the net increase in such rates. Member bank borrowing from
the discount window would rise substantially, and pressure for another
increase in the discount rate would develop.
(18) An easing in the Federal funds rate to 6 per cent, as
envisioned under alternative A, could stimulate a substantial downward
adjustment in short-term market rates. However, the lower level of
rates could not be maintained for long if growth in the aggregates
is to be held within the Committee's longer-run ranges. Thus,
interest rates would soon need to begin rising, and would reach levels
next year higher than those necessary under alternatives B and C.
Under alternative A, M-1 is likely to expand at a 6¼ per cent average
rate of growth over the fourth quarter of 1977 and the first quarter of
in the second and third quarters of 1978 to about a 4 per cent annual
rate. The projected Federal funds rate pattern to achieve such a
slowdown calls for an increase to around 8¼ per cent in the third
quarter of 1978. Such rate levels would likely warrant consideration
of adjustments to Regulation Q ceilings by next summer.
Directive language
(19) Given below are alternatives for the operational
paragraphs of the directive. The first formulation places main
emphasis on near-term rates of growth in monetary aggregates. The
second formulation, like the directive adopted at the last meeting,
places main emphasis on money market conditions; it shows--in strike-
through form--the specifications adopted at the last meeting. As
suggested below, the particular language needed in the opening lines
of the money market formulation would depend on the specific conditions
sought; the three alternatives shown--calling, respectively, for some-
what easier, prevailing, and somewhat firmer money market conditions--
are intended to be associated with the specifications discussed in
the preceding section under alternatives A, B, and C.
"Monetary Aggregates" Formulation
The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of growth
in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed to be reasonably consistent
with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the
preceding paragraph. Specifically, at present, it expects the
annual growth rates over the December-January period to be
within the ranges of ____ to ____ per cent for M-1 and
____ to ____ per cent for M-2. In the judgment of the Committee
such growth rates are likely to be associated with a weekly-
average Federal funds rate of about ____ per cent. If, giving
approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that
growth rates over the 2-month period will deviate significantly
from the mid-points of the indicated ranges, the operational
objective for the Federal funds rate shall be modified in an
orderly fashion within a range of ____ to ____ per cent.
IN THE CONDUCT OF DAY-TO-DAY OPERATIONS, ACCOUNT SHALL BE
TAKEN OF EMERGING FINANCIAL MARKET CONDITIONS.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the operating constraints specified above are proving to be
significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify
the Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls
for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
"Money Market" Formulation
At this time, the Committee seeks to maintain about the
prevailing money market conditions (OR TO ACHIEVE SOMEWHAT
EASIER OR SOMEWHAT FIRMER MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS) during the
period immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates
appear to be growing at approximately the rates currently
expected, which are believed to be on a path reasonably con-
sistent with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited
in the preceding paragraph. Specifically, the Committee seeks
to maintain the weekly-average Federal funds rate at about
[DEL: the current level] ____, so long as M-1 and M-2 appear to
be growing over the [DEL: November-December] DECEMBER-JANUARY period
at annual rates within ranges of [DEL: 1 to 7] ____ TO ____ per
cent and [DEL: 5 to 9] ____ TO ____ per cent, respectively. If,
giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears
that growth rates over the 2-month period are approaching or
moving beyond the limits of the indicated ranges, the operational
objective for the weekly-average Federal funds rate shall be
modified in an orderly fashion within a range of [DEL: 6¼-to-6¾]
____ TO ____ per cent. IN THE CONDUCT OF DAY-TO-DAY
OPERATIONS, ACCOUNT SHALL BE TAKEN OF EMERGING FINANCIAL MARKET
If it appears during the period before the next meeting
that the operating constraints specified above are proving to
be significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify
the Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls
for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
