Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
January 14, 1977
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC
January 14, 1977
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 expanded at an 8.1 per cent annual rate in December,
after remaining unchanged in November. For the December-January period
growth is estimated at about a 7-1/4 per cent annual rate--somewhat
above the Committee's operating range. Savings deposits at commercial
banks have continued to expand at a very rapid pace in December and early
January, but inflows of M2-type time deposits have slowed considerably.
Consequently, for the two-month period M 2 is expected to grow at around
an 11 per cent annual rate, near the mid-point of the Committee's range.
Deposit flows at nonbank thrift institutions accelerated somewhat in
December from their November pace. Nonborrowed reserves appear to be
rising at about a 10 per cent annual rate over the December-January
period, reflecting strong bank demands for excess reserves in recent
statement weeks as well as the pick-up in growth of demand deposits.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over December-January period
(SAAR in per cent)
Ranges Latest Estimates
Memorandum:
Federal funds rate
(Per cent per annum)
Avg. for statement
week ending
(2) Throughout most of the intermeeting period, incoming data
suggested that growth in M1 and M2 over the December-January period would
be within their respective two-month ranges, and the Desk continued to
seek a Federal funds rate of around 4-5/8 per cent. While data available
in the past few days suggested that M1 growth for the period may be some-
what above its range, M growth remained near the mid-point of its range,
and the Desk--with the FOMC meeting only a few days away--decided to con-
tinue aiming for a funds rate of around 4-5/8 per cent.
(3) Interest rates were generally stable in the last half of
December, but in early January there were substantial upward rate pres-
sures, especially on intermediate-term Treasury coupon issues. The
continued stability of the funds rate at a time when many market partici-
pants had expected this rate to decline further appears to have contributed
somewhat to the backup in market rates. Rate increases were intensified
by press reports regarding possible fiscal stimulus and Federal deficits,
by indications that the pace of economic activity has picked up in recent
months, and by more rapid M1 growth than anticipated. On balance, since
the last FOMC meeting, rates in short-term markets have advanced 10 to 30
basis points; yields on intermediate Treasury issues have increased as
much as 60 basis points; and interest rates on long-term corporate and
Treasury bonds have risen 10 to 25 basis points.
(4) Short-term business credit demands increased modestly in
December as a rise in commercial paper issuance was nearly offset by a
decline in business loans at commercial banks. Activity in the capital
markets was light over much of the intermeeting period reflecting the
normal holiday lull. Most recently, however, the volume of corporate
and municipal issues brought to market has increased sharply and the
forward calendar has built up substantially, apparently reflecting the
decision of borrowers to take advantage of the relatively low yields
prevailing in bond markets. The Treasury has raised $3.8 billion of new
money since the December meeting, and is expected to borrow much more
heavily in the four weeks following the January meeting.
(5) The table on the following page shows (in terms of per-
centage annual rates of change) related monetary and financial flows over
various time periods.
Past Past
Calendar Calendar Six Three Past
Year Year Months Months Month
Dec. '76 Dec. '76 Dec. '76
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Nonbank commercial paper -.2 .2 -.1 .2 .7
Prospective Developments
(6) Three alternative sets of longer-run ranges for the
monetary aggregates applicable to the one year QIV '76-QIV '77 period
are shown below. Alternative B continues the same ranges currently in
place except for the bank credit proxy for which the range is higher
than the present 5-8 per cent. The relationship of the proposed ranges to
shorter-run specifications and longer-run interest rate and monetary
developments is discussed in ensuing paragraphs. (End-point levels for
M1 and M 2 implied by current and proposed longer-run ranges are compared
in appendix I).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M1  5½-7½ 4½-6½ 3½-5½
(7) Shorter-run specifications for monetary aggregates
and the Federal funds rate consistent with the longer-run ranges are
summarized below. More detailed short-run and longer-run data are shown
in the tables on pp. 5a and 5b.1/
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for January-February
(Intermeeting period)
reserves--and related measures--believed consistent with the
alternative longer-run growth rates in the monetary aggregates.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Semi-annual
QIV '76-QII '77
QII '77-QIV '77
Annual
QIII '76-QIV '77
QIII '76-QIII '77
QIV '76-QIV '77
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
QIV '76-QII '77
QII '77-QIV '77
QII '76-QIV '77
QIII '76-QIII '77
QIV '76-QIV '77
(8) Under alternative B, with a Federal funds rate centered
cent annual rate range over the January-February period. This represents
a slightly higher 2-month range than has been presented in recent blue
books, and reflects the pick-up in M1 growth that has occurred during the
past few weeks as well as the stronger demand for money expected to be
associated with the projected acceleration in growth of nominal GNP in
the first quarter.
(9) Growth in M2 over the January-February period may be in a
savings deposit component of M2 is expected to grow less than in the
fourth quarter, largely because banks have become less aggressive in
seeking out time deposit funds. Offering rates reportedly have been cut,
and longer-term certificates are apparently not being offered by some
(10) Interest rates might show little further change between
now and the next Committee meeting if the funds rate remains around 4-5/8
per cent, although some further rate increase would not be surprising
in view of market conditions. Demands by corporations and state and
local governments on bond markets are expected to be quite heavy, as a
large number of new issues have been accelerated to take advantage of
current relatively low yield levels. Treasury cash needs in the first
quarter are large--probably about $24 billion. The Treasury may raise
about $4-5 billion of new cash in connection with the mid-February-
refunding, to be announced on January 26. Perhaps the chief factor that
could cause market rates to rise somewhat over the next few weeks, however,
would be the effect on market expectations of any further evidence of a
strengthening in the economy, monetary aggregates, and fiscal stimulus.
(11) To maintain growth in monetary aggregates over the
QIV '76-QIV '77 period within the longer-run ranges proposed under
alternative B, the staff expects that the Federal funds rate would have
to begin rising by early spring, and would reach a 1977 peak of around
rates more generally that would be associated with such an increase in
the funds rate would tend to curb the growth in time and savings deposits
at banks and thrift institutions. As a result growth in M2 and M3 is
expected to slow progressively as the year goes on. At the same time
banks would probably begin to offer CD's more aggressively to accommodate
credit demands generated by the projected substantial expansion in GNP.
Bank credit expansion in 1977 is likely to be considerably more rapid
than in 1976, when banks permitted outstanding CD's to drop sharply.
(12) Growth in M1 also is expected to be slower in the second
half of the year than in the first half, partly reflecting the cumulative
impact on money demand of a gradual tightening in money market conditions.
In addition, growth in the first half is likely to be raised relative
to the second half as a result of the particular fiscal stimulus being
proposed. We have assumed that $10 billion of tax rebates and one-time
social security payments would be made during the spring, which would
enlarge growth in M1, as well as M2 and M3, in that period. Tax refunds
in late winter and early spring are expected to be larger than last year
and could also have a transitory impact on M1.
(13) Alternative A encompasses a reduction in the Federal
funds rate to the mid-point of a 3-4 per cent range over the next
few weeks. Under this assumption, M1 and M 2 over the January-February
period would be expected to grow at annual rates of 4-8 and 8-12 per
cent respectively. Interest rates would be expected to decline over
the next few weeks, but reductions maybe limited, particularly in
long-term markets. Expectations that interest rates would soon rise
might develop as the market observes faster growth in the aggregates and
as the pace of economic expansion picks up.
(14) Over the longer-run, under alternative A, we would not
expect a very substantial rise in interest rates to develop, however,
since the higher longer-run growth in the monetary aggregates embodied
in that alternative would be more accommodative of money and credit
demands. The funds rate would probably have to rise under this alterna-
tive, given the projected strength of the economy, but perhaps to no
more than an average level of around 5¼ per cent by the fourth quarter
of the year.
(15) Alternative C involves a tightening of the Federal funds
rate over the next few weeks to the mid-point of a 4 ¾-5½ per cent range.
Over the January-February period M1 growth may be in a 3-7 per cent
range--a step toward attaining the lower longer-run ranges for the
monetary aggregates proposed for this alternative. The staff would
expect that further pressures would have to be applied to the money
market as the year progresses if growth in M1 over the QIV '76-QIV '77
period is to be constrained to around the mid-point of the 3½-5½ per
cent alternative C range. The funds rate might reach about 7¼ per cent
by the fourth quarter.
(16) An increase in the funds rate over the next few weeks
by about ½ percentage point would probably cause the 3-month bill rate
to rise into a 5-5¼ per cent range. And rate increases in the intermediate-
term Treasury coupon market could be substantial, since dealer coupon
positions remain fairly sizable and because of the large amount of cash
that may be raised in this area in connection with the forthcoming
Treasury refunding. Corporate and municipal bond yields would also be
likely to rise, but postponements of issues recently scheduled to take
advantage of lower rates could moderate the increase.
Proposed directive
(17) Presented below are four alternative formulations for the
operational paragraph of the directive. The first three are couched in
terms of desired growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead and
are intended to correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives
discussed in the preceding section. The fourth alternative is proposed
in the event that the Committee again wishes to formulate its instructions
in terms of money market conditions and to maintain the conditions now
Alternative "Monetary Aggregates" Proposals
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE bank reserve and money market condi-
tions CONSISTENT WITH SUBSTANTIAL GROWTH IN MONETARY AGGREGATES over
the period [DEL: immediately] ahead [DEL:, provided that monetary aggregates appear
to be growing at about the rates currently expected].
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE bank reserve and money market condi-
tions CONSISTENT WITH MODERATE GROWTH IN MONETARY AGGREGATES over
the period [DEL: immediately] ahead [DEL: , provided that monetary aggregates appear
to be growing at about the rates currently expected].
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE bank reserve and money market condi-
tions CONSISTENT WITH MODEST GROWTH IN MONETARY AGGREGATES over the
period [DEL: immediately] ahead, [DEL: provided that monetary aggregates appear
to be growing at about the rates currently expected].
"Money Market" Proposal
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to maintain prevailing bank reserve and money market conditions over
the period immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates appear
to be growing at about the rates currently expected.
