Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
February 11, 1977
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC
February 11, 1977
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 and M2 appear to be expanding at annual rates of around
in both cases just below the mid-point of the Committee's operating range.
The recent reduction in offering rates at some banks and thrift institu-
tions on time and savings accounts, in combination with the rise in market
interest rates, seems to have had the expected moderating impact on growth
of the time and savings deposit component of the broader monetary aggregates.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over January-February period 1/
(SAAR in per cent)
Memorandum:
Federal funds rate
(Per cent per annum)
Latest Estimates
Avg. for statement
week ending
(2) Immediately following the January FOMC meeting the Desk
aimed for a Federal funds rate in the 4-5/8--4-3/4 per cent area in accor-
dance with the Committee's instructions. This objective has been maintained
throughout the intermeeting period, as incoming data have suggested M1 and
M2 growth well within their respective two-month ranges. With negotiable
CD's declining since year end and demand deposits falling in late January,
nonborrowed reserves are expected to decrease in February after increasing
rapidly in January.1/
(3) Since the mid-January FOMC meeting, interest rates on
Treasury securities, especially coupon issues, have fluctuated within a rela-
tively wide range. Interest rates rose in late January following announce-
ment of the terms of the Treasury's mid-February financing package and
likely cash needs over the balance of the first quarter. Subsequently,
with the funds rate remaining near 4-5/8 per cent and growth in the mone-
tary aggregates slowing, interest rates declined. Interest rates generally
showed little change, on balance, over the intermeeting period, but most
interest rates remained significantly above their December lows.
(4) Credit demands have generally remained strong recently.
Public offerings of corporate bonds were substantial in January despite
some postponements and cancellations in response to higher interest rates.
State and local governments have issued new securities at a rapid pace so
far in 1977. On the other hand, the pace of business borrowing in short-term
markets appears to have slackened somewhat over the past two months.
(5) The Federal government has borrowed appreciable amounts
of new cash since the January FOMC meeting, raising $2.8 billion through
a late January sale of 2-year notes and $3.7 billion in connection with its
mid-February refunding. In the refunding the Treasury auctioned $3.0
billion of 3-year notes at an average rate of 6.62 per cent, $2.0 billion
of 7-year notes at an average rate of 7.25 per cent, and $750 million of
two notes have been trading at prices above their auction averages, and
dealers have made reasonable progress in distributing their awards of
these issues. The bond has been trading slightly below its average issuing
price; dealers still hold most of the relatively sizable awards they
received of this issue.
Six
Months
Past
Three
Mon t h.
Past
Mnnth
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(6) Summarized below are alternative short-run specifications
for the monetary aggregates and the Federal funds rate. (More detailed
short-run and longer-run data are shown in the tables on pp. 5a and 5b).
Each of the alternatives is believed to be consistent with growth ranges
for the monetary aggregates over the QIV '76-QIV '77 period adopted by
the Committee at its previous meeting. The differing patterns of
Federal funds rates and velocity implied by the three alternatives--
given the projected growth in nominal GNP--are shown in appendices II and
III, respectively.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for February-March
(7) Growth in M1 over the February-March period is expected
to be in a 3-7 per cent annual rate range, assuming a Federal funds
rate centered in a 4¼-5 per cent range, as in alternative B. The rate
of expansion that is anticipated for M1 reflects in part the retardation
in economic activity caused by the recent cold snap and associated fuel
(8) M2 expansion under alternative B may be in a 7-11 per
cent annual rate range over the February-March period. Time and savings
deposits other than large CD's are likely to continue rising at close
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2  M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Semi-annual
QIV '76-QII '77
QII '77-QIV '77
Annual
QIV '76-QIV '77
FOMC longer-run range
QIII '76-QIV '77
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Quarterly Averages:
Semi-annual
QIV '76-QII '77
QII '77-QIV '77
Annual
QIV '76-QIV '77
to their reduced January pace, as banks remain less aggressive in
offering time deposits over the next few weeks in light of moderate
bank credit demands from business and other customers. Also, the rise
in yield on intermediate-term Treasury obligations since the beginning
of the year has made such securities somewhat more attractive to savers
as compared with time certificates of deposit.
(9) M1 and M2 under alternative B may be expected to rise at
annual rates of about 5½ and 10 per cent, respectively, in the first
quarter. Growth in these aggregates, especially M1, is likely to
strengthen in the second quarter, as a result of the temporary impact
of tax rebates. M1 growth in the second quarter would be further augmented
by increased money demands associated with the rapid expansion in nominal GNP
projected for the spring as the fuel shortage subsides.
(10) A considerably slower growth in monetary aggregates would
be required in the second half of 1977 than in the first half if growth
over the year is to be around the mid-points of the longer-run ranges
adopted at the previous Committee meeting. Growth in the aggregates
would probably slow to some extent as a natural reaction to the sharp
expansion in money that is likely to accompany rebate payments. To
achieve the amount of slowing needed, however, it is very likely that
short-term interest rates will have to rise as the year progresses, given
the projected expansion in nominal GNP over the year. Under alternative
B, the staff would expect the Federal funds rate to begin rising in the
spring and reach around 6½ per cent by the fourth quarter of this year.
(11) Interest rates are expected to show little net change over
the next few weeks, though, given the specifications of alternative B.
The Treasury will probably raise $7-9 billion of new money between now
and the next meeting through routine offerings of 2- and 4-year notes,
additions to the weekly and monthly bill auctions, and cash management
bills. Much of this need has probably already been discounted by the
market, but rates on Treasury securities could rise a little in the process
of distributing the issues. The municipal bond volume is expected to
remain at around the advanced January pace over the weeks immediately
ahead, but new issues of publicly offered corporate bonds seem to be
moderating in reaction to the recent rise in bond yields.
(12) Bank credit is expected to continue expanding at a
moderate pace in the first quarter. Business loan expansion may be only
a little above the reduced December-January average rate, but banks can
be expected to continue to be active lenders in the consumer and mortgage
loan markets. The higher level of yields on intermediate-term Treasury
issues since the beginning of the year may encourage some pick-up in
bank buying of such securities. Banks are expected to obtain sufficient
funds to finance such credit expansion from demand deposits and time
deposits other than money market CD's. The outstanding volume of CD's
will probably continue to decline modestly.
(13) Alternative C contemplates a tightening of the money
market over the next few weeks, with the funds rate rising to the mid-
point of a 4¾-5½ per cent range. Such a rise in the funds rate in the
weeks immediately ahead has probably not been discounted by the market,
and thus a fairly substantial upward adjustment in interest rates could
be expected to ensue. The 3-month bill rate would probably rise to
levels somewhat above 5 per cent. Yields on intermediate- and longer-term
issues would also increase, though probably by less than the rise in
short rates, given increases that have already occurred in longer-term
interest rates.
(14) The tightening of the money market and slower near-term
growth in nonborrowed reserves under alternative C would also tend to
hold down expansion of the monetary aggregates over the February-March
period as compared with alternative B. It would also be likely to lead
to slower growth in the aggregates over the first half of 1977, assuming
that the funds rate were permitted to rise somewhat further in the spring.
However, alternative C would require a more rapid growth in the aggregates
than alternative B in the second half of 1977 to attain the longer-run,
QIV '76-QIV '77 ranges for the aggregates adopted by the FOMC. Thus,
monetary policy would have to be more accommodative in the latter part
of 1977, and the Federal funds rate would not be likely to rise as
high as under alternative B. We estimate that the rate would, as a result,
peak at about 6 per cent in the summer of this year.
(15) The near-term easing of the money market encompassed by
alternative A would, of course, lead to declines in interest rates over
the next few weeks and higher growth rates in the monetary aggregates.
Most market participants would probably view the drop in the funds rate
as temporary, and this would work to limit interest rate declines. In
bond markets, for example, corporations would be likely to accelerate
offerings of new issues.
(16) With monetary growth rates more rapid over the next
few months than under the alternatives discussed above, alternative A
would imply more restraint later in the year if growth in the aggregates
is to be constrained within current longer-run ranges. A funds rate of
around 6¾ per cent is expected by the end of 1977 under this alternative.
Proposed directive
(17) Given below is a proposed operational paragraph for the
directive if the Committee wishes to continue formulating its instructions
in terms of desired growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
No alternatives are presented for this formulation, in the expectation
that the reference to desired growth will be taken to apply to the longer-
term targets and that at this meeting the Committee will not reconsider
those targets.
"Monetary Aggregates" Proposal
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with
moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the period ahead.
(18) Should the Committee desire to place main emphasis on bank
reserve and money market conditions, the language needed would depend on
the specific conditions sought. Three alternative "money market" direc-
tives intended to correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives
are given below.
Alternative "Money Market" Proposals
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to achieve SOMEWHAT EASIER bank reserve and money market conditions
[DEL: consistent with moderate growth monetary aggregates] over the period
IMMEDIATELY ahead, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES APPEAR TO BE
GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES CURRENTLY EXPECTED.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to [DEL: achieve] MAINTAIN PREVAILING bank reserve and money market condi-
tions [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates] over
the period IMMEDIATELY ahead, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES
APPEAR TO BE GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES CURRENTLY EXPECTED.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to achieve SOMEWHAT FIRMER bank reserve and money market conditions
[DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates] over the
period IMMEDIATELY ahead, PROVIDED THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES APPEAR
TO BE GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES CURRENTLY EXPECTED.
