Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
April 15, 1977
By the staff
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) April 15, 1977
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 expanded at about a 5 per cent annual rate in
March. However, growth accelerated sharply in the early weeks of
April, partly, it seems, as a result of earlier-than-usual disburse-
ment of the regular monthly social security payments. For the March-
April period, M1 is now projected to increase at about a 9¼ per cent
annual rate--above the 8 per cent upper limit of the Committee's desired
range. M2 grew at somewhat more than an 8 per cent annual rate in
March. While its growth also accelerated in early April, this was due
entirely to the more rapid expansion of M1; the March-April growth for
M2 still appears to be well below the upper limit of the Committee's
range. Nonborrowed reserves fell in March. With the recent pick-up in
deposit growth at member banks, however, they are expected to grow
rapidly in April.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over March-April period 1/
(SAAR in per cent)
Ranges Latest Estimates
M1  4½ to 8½ 9.2
(2) Over most of the intermeeting period, incoming data
suggested that March-April growth rates for M and M2 would be well
within their respective ranges. The Desk, therefore, continued to aim
for a Federal funds rate in the area of 4-5/8--4¾ per cent. Most recently,
with growth in M1 exceeding its two-month range, the Desk has sought
a funds rate around 4¾ per cent.
(3) Credit demands have remained sizable in recent weeks.
Business short-term borrowing appears to have slackened from the high
rate of January-February, but public offerings of long-term corporate
bonds have picked up a little. State and local governments security
issues have remained very large. The Federal Government borrowed
$3.6 billion of new cash through issues of 2- and 5-year notes since
the March FOMC meeting. In addition the Treasury sold $4.5 billion of
short-dated cash management bills to bridge a low point in its cash
balance prior to the April tax date.
(4) Market interest rates showed little change over most of the
intermeeting period. But when the President's intention to withdraw the
rebate program became known, interest rates fell sharply. The subsequent
publication of data indicating a record weekly growth of M1 in early April
had very little offsetting market impact. On balance, over the inter-
meeting period, most short-term rates have declined 5 to 15 basis points,
bond yields are down 10 to 20 basis points, and intermediate-term
Treasury coupon yields are off as much as 35 basis points.
(5) The table on the following page shows (in terms of
percentage annual rates of change) related monetary and financial flows
over various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average Mar. '76 Sept. '76 Dec. '76 Feb. '77
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(6) Alternative longer-run ranges for the monetary aggregates
are shown below for Committee consideration. Alternatives A through C
are the staff's estimates of consistent sets of specifications that pertain
to the one-year QI '77-QI '78 period. The ranges earlier adopted by the
Committee for the QIV '76-QIV '77 period are shown in the fourth column.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Current
(7) Alternative B encompasses a one-year growth rate for M1
of 4½-6½ per cent, the same range as is currently in place. However,
growth ranges for M2 and M3 under this alternative are lower--by ½ percen-
tage point for M2 and 1 percentage point for M3 . Lower ranges for the
broader aggregates relative to M1 are expected mainly because the new
ranges now apply to a period that excludes QIV '76, when relatively low
market rates produced large inflows of time and savings deposits at
depository institutions, and instead includes QI '78, when relatively
high market interest rates are expected to dampen such flows.1/
(8) Shorter-run ranges for the monetary aggregates and
the Federal funds rate that are thought to be consistent with the
various longer-run ranges are presented below. (Detailed data are
shown in the tables on pp. 7 and 8).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for April-May
Federal funds rate 3¾-4¾ 4¼-5¼ 4¾-5¾
(intermeeting period)
(9) Under alternative B (as well as the other two alternatives),
growth in M1 is expected to be relatively sizable in the April-May period,
reflecting the large increase in M1 that is apparently under way in April.
We expect the exceptionally large April growth to be partly offset by
relatively small growth rates in May and June. However, for the second
quarter, M1 is anticipated to grow at about a 7 per cent annual rate, a
more rapid pace than in the past few quarters, reflecting the recent
strengthening of economic activity and presumably also of transactions
demands for money.
(10) M2 growth under alternative B is expected to be in an
expand at about a 9¼ per cent annual rate from the first to second
quarter. Time and savings deposits other than large CD's are expected
to expand over the next few weeks at close to their recent pace, given
a Federal funds rate around the mid-point of a 4¼-5¼ per cent range.
(11) Over the next few weeks, demands on credit markets are
likely to be quite moderate. Without the rebate program, Treasury
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Semi-annual
QI '77-QIII '77
QIII '77-QI '78
Annual
QIV '76-QIV '77
QI '77-QI '78
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M M 5  Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
borrowing in the second quarter will be reduced by about $8 ½ billion.
As a result, the Treasury probably will raise no, or very little, new
cash in the market between now and mid-year. The Treasury will announce
terms of its mid-May refunding on April 27, and this may well be a routine
package of intermediate- and longer-term coupon issues to replace $4.3
billion of publicly held maturing obligations. Corporate bond offerings
during the spring are expected to run below the monthly average pace of
the first quarter, according to market reports, but offerings of municipal
bonds are expected to remain sizable.
(12) After mid-year, Treasury demands on credit markets will
strengthen considerably. Total private credit demands are also expected
to expand along with continued relatively rapid growth in economic activity.
With demands for money also anticipated to be rather substantial, interest
rates, particularly short-term rates, are likely to rise substantially
in the second half of the year if growth in the monetary aggregates is
to be maintained around the mid-points of the longer-run ranges shown
for alternative B. As shown in appendix III, the staff expects the funds
rate under alternative B to average around 4-7/8 per cent in the current
quarter, to rise to 5½ per cent in the third, and to reach about 6½
per cent by the first quarter of 1978.
(13) These interest rate projections are a little lower than
shown in recent blue books for a longer-run M1 growth rate in a 4½-6½ per
cent range. In part this reflects reduced Treasury credit demands. But
it also takes account of the possibility that the demand for money
may be somewhat less relative to GNP than we earlier thought--as might
be suggested by the acceleration in the income velocity of M1 that occurred
during the first quarter of this year without any accompanying rise in
short-term rates. Velocity figures for all three alternatives are shown
in appendix IV.
(14) The projected rise in market interest rates will lead
to slower inflows of time and savings deposits other than large CD's to
banks and thrift institutions as the year progresses even though institu-
tions that had earlier reduced offering rates on such deposits are likely
to re-establish ceiling rates. With loan demands at banks expected to
be at least as strong as in the past few months, banks can be expected
both to cut down on acquisitions of Treasury securities and also to
expand their outstanding volume of CD's. Thrift institutions are also
likely to reduce their liquidity over the year--with savings and loan
associations increasing their borrowing from the Home Loan Bank System--
in order to accommodate outstanding commitments and to become more
cautious in making new commitments. As a result the mortgage market would
come under increasing pressure. The extent of upward rate pressure in
long-term markets in general under this alternative may be fairly moderate,
though, given the large cash flow to institutional investors, particularly
insurance companies, and assuming inflationary expectations do not worsen.
(15) Alternative A contemplates an easing of money market
conditions between now and the next Committee meeting, with the funds
rate dropping to the mid-point of a 3¾-4¾ per cent range. Such a move
would be accompanied by somewhat greater growth in the monetary
aggregates than under alternative B over the April-May period. In
particular, there may be substantial inflows into savings deposits as
short-term market rates drop significantly further below ceiling rates
on such deposits. This would, of course, increase pressure on institutions
to shave their offering rates.
(16) The lower interest rates associated with this alternative
over the next few weeks are not likely to prove sustainable, however. In
view of the apparent strength of the economy, interest rates may be
expected to rise even with the more rapid longer-run growth in the
monetary aggregates encompassed by alternative A. The increase in rates
would probably be moderate, though, with the funds rate rising to about
(17) Alternative C involves an increase in the Federal funds
rate between now and the next Committee meeting to around 5¼ per cent,
the mid-point of a 4¾-5¾ per cent range. Such a funds rate increase at
this time may be accompanied by a rise in bill rates of roughly the same
magnitude over the next few weeks. The extent of adjustment in bill,
as well as longer-term, rates will depend in large part on the market's
assessment of the interest rate outlook and on the market's technical
condition. At present, dealer positions are relatively low, particularly
in the coupon area, and this would tend to moderate upward interest
rate adjustments. On the other hand, if many market participants
do not expect the Fed to let the money market tighten at this time,
evidence of a tightening could cause a more substantial market reaction.
(18) The immediate tightening of the money market contemplated
under alternative C would also more quickly set in train the market and
institutional responses described in paragraph (14). Inflows of time
and savings deposits would begin to slow in the weeks ahead as the bill
rate moved close to and perhaps above the passbook ceiling rate. Large
commercial banks could be expected to become more aggressive in the market
for CD's and nondeposit sources of funds. And thrift institutions would
begin re-evaluating their mortgage market participation.
(19) If the growth in M1 over the QI '77-QI '78 period is
to be constrained to around the mid-point of the 3½-5½ per cent longer-
run range of alternative C, further firming in money market conditions
would probably be required as the year progresses. Pressures on financial
institutions would, of course, intensify. The staff expects that the
Federal funds rate would have to rise to about 6¼ per cent in the third
quarter and 7¼ per cent by early 1978.
Directive language
(20) Given below are alternatives for the operational para-
graphs of the directive. The first formulation, like the directive
adopted at the last meeting, places main emphasis on near-term rates of
growth in monetary aggregates; it shows--in strike-through form--the
specifications adopted at the last meeting. The second formulation
places main emphasis on money market conditions. As suggested below,
the particular language needed in the opening lines of the money market
formulation would depend on the specific conditions sought; the three
alternatives shown--calling, respectively, for somewhat easier, prevail-
ing, and somewhat firmer money market conditions--are intended to be
associated with the specifications discussed in the preceding section
under alternatives A, B, and C.
"Monetary Aggregates" Formulation
The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of growth
in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed to be reasonably consistent
with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the
preceding paragraph. Specifically, at present, it expects the
annual growth rates over the [DEL: March-April] APRIL-MAY period to be
within the ranges of [DEL: 4-1/2 to 8-1/2] ____ to ____ per cent
for M-1 and [DEL: 7 to 11] _____ to ____ per cent for M-2. In the
judgment of the Committee such growth rates are likely to be
associated with a weekly average Federal funds rate of
about [DEL: 4-5/8 to 4-3/4] ____ per cent. If giving,
approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth
rates over the 2-month period will deviate significantly from the
midpoints of the indicated ranges, the operational objective for
the Federal funds rate shall be modified in an orderly fashion
within a range of [DEL: 4-1/4 to 5-1/4] ____ to ____ per cent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting
that the operating constraints specified above are proving to
be significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify
the Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls
for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
"Money Market" Formulation
At this time, the Committee seeks to maintain about the
prevailing money market conditions (or to achieve somewhat
easier or somewhat firmer money market conditions) during the
period immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates
appear to be growing at approximately the rates currently
expected, which are believed to be on a path reasonably con-
sistent with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited
in the preceding paragraph. Specifically, the Committee seeks
to maintain the weekly average Federal funds rate at about
____ per cent, so long as M-1 and M-2 appear to be growing
over the APRIL-MAY period at annual rates within ranges of
____ to ____ per cent and ____ to ____ per cent,
respectively. If, giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and
M-2, it appears that growth rates over the 2-month period are
approaching or moving beyond the limits of the indicated ranges,
the operational objective for the weekly average Federal funds
rate shall be modified in an orderly fashion within a range of
____ to ____ per cent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting
that the operating constraints specified above are proving to
be significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify
the Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls
for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
