Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
March 11, 1977Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) March 11, 1977
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) For both M1 and M2 , current projections of February-
March growth rates are in the lower half of the Committee's operating
ranges. M1 expanded at an annual rate a little below 1 per cent in
February. Growth is expected to pick up in March and expansion for the
M2 has been affected by a sharp deceleration of flows into savings
deposits, and for February-March it appears to be running at about a 7¼
per cent rate. At thrift institutions, there was also an appreciable
slackening of deposit inflows during February--the latest period for
which data are available. Nonborrowed reserves fell in February and
are projected to decline in March, reflecting the weakness in member
bank deposits that had developed in January and persisted through the
end of February.1/
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over February-March period
(SAAR in per cent)
Ranges Latest Estimates
M2  6½ to 10½ 7.3
(2) In the weeks immediately following the February FOMC
meeting, incoming data suggested that February-March growth rates in
both M1 and M2 would be close to the midpoints of their respective ranges.
Consequently, the Desk continued to aim for a Federal funds rate in the
area of 4-5/8--4¾ per cent. When subsequent information indicated that
both aggregates were expanding at rates in the lower halves of their
ranges, the Desk shaded its funds rate objective toward 4-5/8 per cent.
(3) Short-term interest rates changed little on balance over
the inter-meeting period, but long-term rates rose 10 to 15 basis points.
The modest rise in long rates apparently reflected the effects on market
expectations of strengthening economic news. Yields in secondary mortgage
markets rose in sympathy with bond rates, but rates on primary mortgages
were virtually unchanged.
(4) With yields in long-term markets up after the turn of
the year, offerings of new corporate bonds fell substantially in February.
Partly in consequence, business demands for short-term credit expanded
rapidly. Bond offerings by State and local governments were maintained
at a very rapid pace in February, and during the inter-meeting period
the Treasury raised about $4.1 billion through new issues of 2- and 4-year
(5) The table on the following page shows (in terms of
percentage annual rates of change) related monetary and financial flows
over various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average Feb. '76 Aug. '76 Nov. '76 Jan. '77
Concepts of Money
M2 (M1 plus time deposits
at commercial banks
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(6) Short-run specifications for the monetary aggregates
and the Federal funds rate are summarized below, with more detailed
short-run and longer-run figures shown in the tables on pp. 5 and 6.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for March-April
(7) Assuming the Federal funds rate remains around 4-5/8 per
cent--the midpoint of the alternative B range--we expect M1 growth
in the March-April period to accelerate and be at an annual rate in a
view of the strengthening in economic activity that appears to be in
process. Tax rebates are not likely to be disbursed until May, and thus
will not directly influence monetary growth rates in March and April. The
rebates will have a substantial effect on growth in money in the following
months; alternative projections of their impact on M1 and M2 over the
spring and summer will be shown in next month's blue book. At the moment
the staff is tentatively estimating that the rebates will raise the
second-quarter growth rate in M1 (relative to what it otherwise would be)
by about 2 percentage points, and lower the third-quarter rate by about
the same amount. (Such estimated impacts are included in the tables on
pages 5 and 6.)
(8) Growth in time deposits other than large CD's is expected
to continue at about the recent reduced pace. The rise in yields on
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Semi-annual
QIV '76-QII '77
QII '77-QIV '77
Annual
QIV '76-QIV '77
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
Semi-annual
QIV '76-QII '77
QII '77-QIV '77
QIV '76-QIV '77
intermediate-term Treasury issues has increased the attractiveness of
market instruments relative to time deposits, especially in view of
earlier rate-cutting by some commercial banks. Growth in M2 over the
March-April period under current money market conditions is expected
to move up in a 7-11 per cent annual rate range, however, because
of the strengthening anticipated in M1 growth.
(9) Credit demands over the next few weeks are likely to
be sizable. The forward calendars suggest that new corporate bond
offerings in March will be substantially above the reduced February
pace and that municipal bond offerings will continue large. In addition,
the Treasury is expected to raise about $6 to 9 billion in new cash
between now and the mid-April tax date, although over half of these funds
will probably be raised through short-term cash management bills. Business
loan demands at banks are expected to remain moderately strong, but the
net increase in loans outstanding may be held down in the next few weeks
as proceeds of capital market financing are used to pay off earlier bank
loans associated with advance refundings.
(10) Given stability in the funds rate, the large near-term
credit demands are likely to be financed with only slight, if any,
upward pressure on other interest rates over the next few weeks. Stronger
upward rate pressures might emerge if favorable economic news and sharply
rising money supply figures turned bond market participants bearish. Over
the longer run, in any event, the staff expects that interest rates,
particularly short-term rates, would have to rise significantly further
if growth in the monetary aggregates over the QIV '76-QIV '77 period is
to be kept within the ranges adopted by the Committee. Appendix tables
II and III show longer-run projections for the Federal funds rate and
the velocity of money under each of the three alternatives.
(11) Alternatives A and C contemplate an easing and tightening
of the money market, respectively. A decline in the funds rate to the
midpoint of the 3 to 4 per cent alternative A range could be accompanied
by relatively modest reductions in other interest rates, if market
participants were to view such a decline as temporary in light of the
recent indications of strengthening economic activity. Rate declines would
be most pronounced in the very short-term area. A rise in the funds rate,
as under alternative C, could be accompanied by fairly substantial upward
adjustments in short-term rates--of about 50 basis points or so. Increases
in intermediate- and longer-term rates might be more modest, in view of
rate increases that have already occurred in that area and the current
relatively light dealer positions.
(12) The decline in the funds rate under alternative A would
probably have to be reversed shortly if the Committee is to attain growth
rates in the aggregates within its longer-run ranges. The easing of the
money market would generate more rapid growth in the aggregates over the
next few months than under alternative B, and higher interest rates would
be required later in the year to restrain growth. The tightening of the
money market under alternative C would introduce monetary restraint earlier
in the year and hence would require less of a rise in interest rates by
year-end than either alternative A or B.
Directive language
(13) Given below are alternatives for the operational
paragraphs of the directive. The first formulation, like the directive
adopted at the last meeting, places main emphasis on near-term rates
of growth in monetary aggregates; it shows--in strike-through form--the
specifications adopted at the last meeting. The second formulation
places main emphasis on money market conditions. As suggested below,
the particular language needed in the opening lines would depend on the
specific conditions sought; the three alternatives shown--calling,
respectively, for somewhat easier, prevailing, and somewhat firmer
money market conditions--are intended to be associated with the specifi-
cations discussed in the preceding section under alternatives A, B, and
"Monetary Aggregates" formulation
The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of growth in
M1 and M2 on a path believed to be reasonably consistent with the longer-run
ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the preceding paragraph. Specifi-
cally, at present, it expects the annual growth rates over the [DEL: February-
March] MARCH-APRIL period to be within the ranges of [DEL: 3 to 7] ____ to ____
per cent for M1 and [DEL: 6½ to 10½] ____ to ____ per cent for M2. In the
judgment of the Committee such growth rates are likely to be associated
with a weekly average Federal funds rate of about [DEL: 4-5/8-to-4¾] ____ to
____ per cent. If, giving approximately equal weight to M1 and M2 , it
appears that growth rates over the 2-month period will deviate significantly
from the midpoints of the indicated ranges, the operational objective
for the Federal funds rate shall be modified in an orderly fashion
within a range of ____ to ____ per cent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the operating constraints specified above are proving to be significantly
inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the Chairman who will
then decide whether the situation calls for supplementary instructions
from the Committee.
"Money Market" formulation
At this time, the Committee seeks to maintain about the prevailing
money market conditions (or to achieve somewhat easier or somewhat firmer
money market conditions) during the period immediately ahead, provided
that monetary aggregates appear to be growing at approximately the rates
currently expected, which are believed to be on a path reasonably con-
sistent with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the
preceding paragraph. Specifically, the Committee seeks to maintain the
weekly average Federal funds rate at about ____ per cent, so long as M1
and M 2 appear to be growing over the March-April period at annual rates
within ranges of ____ to ____ per cent and ____ to ____ per cent,
respectively. If, giving approximately equal weight to M1 and M2 , it
appears that growth rates over the 2-month period are approaching or
moving beyond the limits of the indicated ranges, the operational
objective for the weekly average Federal funds rate shall be modified in
an orderly fashion within a range of ____ to ____ per cent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting
that the operating constraints specified above are proving to be
significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the
Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls for
supplementary instructions from the Committee.
