Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
June 17, 1977
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) June 17, 1977
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M-1 increased at a 1.1 per cent annual rate in May
following April's record rise, and over the May-June period it appears
to be growing at around a 1¾ per cent annual rate, slightly below the
mid-point of the Committee's desired range. M-2 appears to be increasing
at nearly a 6 per cent annual rate in May-June, a little above the
mid-point of the Committee's range. Nonborrowed reserves apparently
will decline on balance over May-June--with a small June increase not
quite offsetting a May decline--primarily because of a flattening of
growth in demand deposits and an increase in member bank borrowing since
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over May-June period 1/
(SAAR in per cent)
Memorandum:
Federal funds rate
(per cent per annum)
Latest Estimates
Avg. for statement
week ending
(2) In accordance with the Committee's directive, following
the May meeting the Account Management aimed at a Federal funds rate of
about 5-3/8 per cent. Subsequently, with incoming data suggesting that
growth rates in the monetary aggregates would be within the Committee's
desired ranges, the Desk has continued to seek a funds rate around that
(3) Short-term market interest rates generally increased about
declined and are now little different from their levels at the time of
the May meeting. The recent tendency for such rates to decline appears
to be attributable in part to the steadiness of the Federal funds rate
and to the slowing of growth in the aggregates. Short-term credit demands
also have eased somewhat in recent weeks. The Treasury has continued to
redeem bills in its regular weekly and monthly auctions, and short-term
borrowing by State and local governments has dropped back to relatively
moderate levels following a bulge in April. In addition, business demands
for short-term funds at banks and in the commercial paper market moderated
in May, after showing exceptional strength in April. Most major banks
recently raised the prime rate in two steps from 6¼ to 6¾ per cent, although
most recently one large bank posted a 6½ per cent prime rate. Even with
the prime rate at 6¾ per cent, the spread over the cost of open market
funds has narrowed by about ¼ of a percentage point since the previous
prime rate adjustment in mid-December.
(4) Most long-term yields have declined about 10 to 20 basis
points since the time of the last FOMC meeting, in part because short-term
rates did not rise in the manner expected by many market participants.
These yield declines also reflected reduced offerings of long-term
Treasury and corporate debt and strong institutional demands for municipal
securities. Yields on primary mortgages, on the other hand, have changed
(5) The table on the following page shows (in terms of
percentage annual rates of change) related monetary and financial flows
over various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average May '76 Nov.'76 Feb.'77 Apr.'77
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
branches.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data
on total loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and
thrift institutions--which are derived from either end-of-month or last
Wednesday-of-month figures. Growth rates for reserve measures in this and
subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from
breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(6) Summarized below for Committee consideration are
alternative short-run operating specifications for the monetary
aggregates and the Federal funds rate. (Detailed data are shown in
the tables on pp. 6 and 7.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for June-July
M-1 3½ to 7½ 3 to 7 2½ to 6½
M-2 6½ to 10½ 6 to 10 5½ to 9½
Federal funds rate 4½ to 5¼ 5 to 5¾ 5½ to 6¼
(Intermeeting period)
(7) Assuming the Federal funds rate remains around the
M-1 growth in the June-July period to strengthen to an annual rate in
the range of 3 to 7 per cent. Available weekly data suggest that M-1
growth will remain relatively slow in June. By July, however, most
of the adjustment to the April bulge should have already occurred, and
M-1 is expected to grow more rapidly in response to the projected expansion
in GNP and the associated increases in transactions demands for money.
The July expansion in M-1 is likely to be buoyed further by an earlier-
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2  M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
FOMC longer-run range
QI '77-QI '78 4-64 7-94 84-11
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M4  M5 Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
than-usual distribution of social security checks, leading to more than
normal amounts of funds held in demand deposit accounts over the long
holiday weekend.1/
(8) Under alternative B growth in M-2 over June-July would
be expected to pick up somewhat, due mainly to the anticipated
strengthening in M-1. However, growth in the time and savings deposit
component of M-2 also should recover somewhat from the reduced pace of
recent months. The stimulative effects on time and savings deposit
inflows of a continued rise in personal income and advances in offering
rates at some banks are expected to be about counterbalanced by the
delayed impact of earlier increases in short-term market rates.
(9) Over the next few weeks aggregate demands on credit
markets may change little. Households probably will continue borrowing
substantial amounts in the residential mortgage and consumer credit
markets, and business demands for short-term credit may strengthen from
May's temporarily reduced pace. However, offerings of long-term bonds
by businesses are expected to remain light into the summer, and offerings
by State and local governments are likely to decline somewhat.
Furthermore, the Treasury may continue redeeming bills on into July.
Although it is widely expected that the Treasury will market about
$1.5 billion of 15-year bonds in the last week of June, it appears that
this will be the only new money it will raise in the coupon market until
early August.
(10) Given this background, and assuming that Federal funds
continue to trade at around 5-3/8 per cent as contemplated under
alternative B, it seems probable that short-term rates will remain
close to current levels in the near term. However, there might well be
some backup in long-term rates in the aftermath of the recent rally that
carried corporate and municipal yields to around their lowest levels in
several years.
(11) Over the longer run, interest rates, particularly in
short-term markets, are likely to come under upward pressure. The
Treasury's need for new money will be expanding substantially. Business
demands for funds may strengthen in the latter part of the summer and in
the autumn as rising expenditures on plant and equipment and inventories
outpace growth in internal sources of funds. Also, credit demands of
households and State and local governments are likely to remain strong.
(12) The staff projections suggest that under alternative B
the Federal funds rate would have to advance to an average of about 6
per cent in the first quarter of next year if M-1 growth in the QI '77-
QI '78 period is to be held near the mid-point of the Committee's
shown in the last blue book, reflecting both the slower second-quarter
growth of the aggregates than projected then and the slightly slower
growth of nominal GNP now expected in late 1977 and early 1978. Inflows
of interest-bearing deposits are still expected to slow sufficiently to
keep growth in M-2 and M-3 in the lower part of their respective one-year
(13) The alternative C specifications involve an increase of
the funds rate over the next few weeks to the mid-point of a 5½-6½ per
cent range. This may be accompanied by growth in M-1 in the June-July
period at an annual rate in a range of 2½ to 6½ per cent. Money market
firming of the degree contemplated under this alternative probably would
produce a prompt, appreciable rise in short-term interest rates and some
increase in bond yields. The rise in short-term market rates probably
would induce more depository institutions to raise offering rates on
savings and time deposits to ceiling levels. Short-term rates might rise
far enough to trigger sizable outflows of savings funds to market
instruments and to induce banks to bid aggressively for negotiable CD's and
for the types of large-denomination time deposits included in M-2. If
ceiling rates are unattractive relative to market rates, beginning in July
some institutions may experience substantial withdrawals in connection
with heavy maturities of "wild card" accounts.1/
(14) The immediate tightening of the money market under
alternative C would tend to lessen the degree of restraint that would be
needed later to achieve growth in M-1 over the QI '77-QI '78 period near
the mid-point of the Committee's one-year range. The funds rate under
this alternative would be expected to reach 6½ per cent in the fourth
quarter of this year and to remain around that level in early 1978.
Because short-term market interest rates also would be expected to be
lower than under alternative B or A, banks and thrift institutions
should be able to maintain stronger inflows of interest-bearing
deposits at that time. Although growth in M-2 and M-3 would consequently
be stronger in late 1977 and early 1978 than under the other alternatives,
even under alternative C the growth rates projected for M-2 and M-3
over the year ending QI '78 are in the lower part of their respective
(15) An easing of the Federal funds rate over the near term
to the mid-point of a 4½ to 5¼ per cent range--as called for under
alternative A--and the associated decline in short-term rates might
well be accompanied, at least temporarily, by significant declines in
long-term rates. At present dealer positions in Treasury coupon issues
are relatively low and forward calendars for long-term Treasury and
corporate debt are quite light. In order to achieve growth rates in M-1
at the mid-point of the Committee's one-year range, however, the Federal
funds rate would have to begin to rise relatively soon and to reach a
level above those envisioned under alternatives B and C. Thus, under
alternative A, the Federal funds rate would be expected to average around
Directive language
(16) Given below are alternatives for the operational para-
graphs of the directive. The first formulation, like the directive
adopted at the last meeting, places main emphasis on near-term rates of
growth in monetary aggregates; it shows--in strike-through form--the
specifications adopted at the last meeting. The second formulation places
main emphasis on money market conditions. As suggested below, the
particular language needed in the opening lines of the money market
formulation would depend on the specific conditions sought; the three
alternatives shown--calling, respectively, for somewhat easier, prevail-
ing, and somewhat firmer money market conditions--are intended to be
associated with the specifications discussed in the preceding section
under alternatives A, B, and C.
"Monetary Aggregates" Formulation
The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of growth
in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed to be reasonably consistent with
the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the preceding
paragraph. Specifically, at present, it expects the annual growth
rates over the May-June JUNE-JULY period to be within the ranges of
[DEL: 0-to-4] ____ to ____ per cent for M-1 and [DEL: 3½ to 7½] ____ to
____ per cent for M-2. In the judgment of the Committee such
growth rates are likely to be associated with a weekly average
Federal funds rate of [DEL: 5-3/8] ____ per cent. If, giving approximately
equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates over the
the indicated ranges, the operational objective for the Federal
funds rate shall be modified in an orderly fashion within a range
of [DEL: 5¼ to 5¾] ____ to ____ per cent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the operating constraints specified above are proving to be
significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the
Chairmanwho will then decide whether the situation calls for
supplementary instructions from the Committee.
"Money Market" Formulation
At this time, the Committee seeks to maintain about the
prevailing money market conditions (or to achieve somewhat easier
or somewhat firmer money market conditions) during the period
immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates appear to
be growing at approximately the rates currently expected, which
are believed to be on a path reasonably consistent with the
longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the preceding
paragraph. Specifically, the Committee seeks to maintain the
weekly average Federal funds rate at about ____ per cent, so long
as M-1 and M-2 appear to be growing over the June-July period at
annual rates within ranges of ____ to ____ per cent and
to ____ per cent, respectively. If, giving approximately equal
weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates over the
indicated ranges, the operational objective for the weekly average
Federal funds rate shall be modified in an orderly fashion within
a range of ____ to ____ per cent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting
that the operating constraints specified above are proving to be
significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the
Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls for
supplementary instructions from the Committee.
