Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
September 16, 1977
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) September 16, 1977
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M-1 grew at an annual rate of 5.5 per cent in August, and
for the August-September period is projected to increase at a 6.1 per
cent annual rate, about one percentage point above the upper end of the
Committee's range. Savings deposit inflows to banks strengthened in
August and early September, but the time deposit component of M-2 weakened
considerably. Accordingly, the M-2 growth projection for the August-
September period--at 6.7 per cent--is within the Committee's range, but
in the upper half. Deposit growth at thrift institutions was maintained
in August at the very rapid July pace. Nonborrowed reserves fell substan-
tially in August, as member banks met a greater portion of their reserve
requirements by borrowing at the System's discount window. Following the
rise in the discount rate from 5-1/4 to 5-3/4 per cent in late August,
member bank borrowing dropped back to around its July level, and nonborrowed
reserves are projected to increase rapidly in September.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over August-September period
(SAAR in per cent)
Ranges Latest Estimates
(2) In the weeks immediately following the August FOMC meeting,
incoming data indicated that M-1 and M-2 were, respectively, growing at
rates in the upper half and near the mid-point of their ranges. Conse-
quently, the Desk continued to seek a Federal funds rate of around 6 per
cent. More recently, however, as M-1 growth appeared to be exceeding the
upper limit of its range, and with M-2 in the upper half of its range, the
Desk has sought a firming in the Federal funds rate to around 6-1/8 per cent.
(3) Credit demands generally have been maintained at a high level
in recent weeks. In the short-term area, business borrowing in August was
somewhat stronger than in July, and the Treasury tapped the bill sector for
a substantial sum of new money for the first time since late last year.
The Federal Government also has continued to be an active borrower in the
coupon market, and bond offerings by corporations and State and local
governments--encouraged in part by favorable market conditions--have
remained sizable. Moreover, households apparently have continued to raise
a large volume of funds in mortgage and consumer credit markets.
(4) The strengthening in short-term credit demands, market
response to the large increase of M-1 in the last week of August, and a
rise in the Federal funds rate have contributed to an increase in short-
term interest rates amounting to as much as 30 basis points since the
August FOMC meeting. Long-term rates, on the other hand, have been
unchanged or have declined somewhat on balance since mid-August, as
demands for bonds from institutional investors have remained strong.
Stock prices have edged lower over the intermeeting period.
(5) The table on the following page shows (in terms of
percentage annual rates of change) related monetary and financial flows
over various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average Aug. '76 Feb. '77 May '77 July '77
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(6) Summarized below for Committee consideration are three
alternative specifications for the Federal funds rate and the monetary
aggregates for the forthcoming intermeeting period. (More detailed and
longer-run data on the aggregates are shown in the tables on pp. 6 and 7).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for September-October
(7) Assuming a Federal funds rate centered in the 5¾-6½ per
cent range specified for alternative B, M-1 over the September-October
period is expected to expand in a 5-9 per cent annual rate range. Incoming
data suggest that M-1 will grow at about a 6½ per cent annual rate in
September, and the staff would anticipate a slight acceleration to about
a 7½ per cent annual rate in October. Strength in the demand for M-1 is
likely to be sustained in the fall, given the pick-up in growth of nominal
GNP that is projected and recent indications that the public may be
reducing the extent to which it is shifting out of M-1 into other liquid
(8) Growth in M-1 from the second to the third quarter will be
at about a 9¼ per cent annual rate. To restrain M-1 growth over the one
year QII '77-QII '78 period to around the mid-point of the 4-6½ per cent
range adopted by the Committee in July would require a considerable slowing
in M-1 growth in the fourth and subsequent quarters. The required
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1 M-2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
1977 September
Quarterly Average:
1977 QIII
Semi-annual:
QII '77-QIV '77
QIV '77-QII '78
Annual:
QII '77-QII '78
FOMC Range: 7-10
constraint on reserves would entail further increases in the funds rate.
If the funds rate were to begin rising by mid-October, and reached 7¼
per cent by the end of the year, M-1 growth in the fourth quarter may be
at around a 6 per cent annual rate. The effects on monetary growth would
be more pronounced in the first half of next year, given the lagged
relationship between interest rates and money demand. We have assumed
that the 7¼ per cent funds rate would lead to the 2½-3 per cent annual
rate of growth in M-1 during the first half of 1978 that is necessary to
meet the mid-point of the FOMC's current longer-run range, but it is
quite possible we may be underestimating the strength of money demand,
given GNP, and that higher interest rates would be required.
(9) Under alternative B, in the September-October period M-2
is expected to expand in a 5½-9½ per cent annual rate range, assuming
that short-term market interest rates show little change from currently
prevailing levels in the period between now and the next meeting. Net
inflows of time and savings deposits other than negotiable CD's are
expected to be relatively low in September, but to pick up to a pace
more consonant with existing interest rate relationships later in the
fall. Some of the recent weakness in the time deposit component of M-2
appears to have reflected shifts of funds from maturing "wild card" certi-
ficates at banks to higher rate certificates at thrift institutions.
Indeed, at nonbank thrift institutions deposit inflows expanded sharply
over the summer, as these institutions became more aggressive in seeking
deposit funds in view of their large mortgage commitments and in light
of uncertainties about their own substantial "wild card" maturities.
(10) But with higher short-term interest rates projected by
year-end, and in the first half of 1978, it is likely that growth of
interest-bearing deposits at banks and thrift institutions will slow.
Assuming a 3-month bill rate of around 7¼ in the early part of next
year, and no adjustment in Regulation Q ceiling rates, such deposits may
increase at about an 8-9 per cent annual rate during the first two quarters
of 1978. This rate of inflow is somewhat higher than might be expected
on the basis of past experience with similar interest rate relationships;
it reflects the continued sizable rate of expansion in nominal income that
is projected for next year. Nonetheless, even with savings inflows
reasonably well maintained, large demands for mortgage credit, including
takedowns of the very high level of outstanding commitments, would tend
to exert substantial pressures on the position of thrift institutions.
They would be forced to reduce liquidity and increase short-term borrowing.
Under such circumstances, an upward adjustment in the Q ceiling rate might
have to be considered.
(11) Alternative C involves a more prompt rise in interest
rates than alternative B and somewhat slower monetary growth rates over
the balance of this year. It contemplates an increase in the Federal
funds rate to the mid-point of a 6¼-7 per cent range between now and
the next Committee meeting. With additional monetary restraint in place
somewhat sooner, the staff would expect interest rates to rise a little
less over the longer-run than under alternative B.
(12) Between now and the next Committee meeting an upward
adjustment in the funds rate to around the 6-5/8 per cent mid-point
of the alternative C range would probably be associated with an increase
in the 3-month Treasury bill rate to the 6¼-6½ per cent area. Other
short-term rates would adjust commensurately, member bank borrowing from
the discount window may once again rise substantially, and pressures
for another upward adjustment of the discount rate would build. Long-
term rates would probably rise for a time in response to the advance
in short rates, but in the absence of indications of stronger economic
activity or of a worsening of inflationary pressures such rate increases
are not likely to be sustained.
(13) An easing in the funds rate to the mid-point of a 5¼-6
per cent range is encompassed under alternative A. The lower interest
rates and more rapid near-term growth in the monetary aggregates would
require more upward interest rate pressure, and less monetary growth, in
early 1978--as compared with alternatives B and C--if growth in the
monetary aggregates over the QII '77-QII '78 period is to remain within
the FOMC's longer-run ranges. The projected funds rate pattern for
alternative A, as well as the other alternatives, is presented in
Appendix I.
(14) Given below are alternatives for the operational paragraphs
of the directive. The first formulation, like the directive adopted at
the last meeting, places main emphasis on near-term rates of growth in
monetary aggregates; it shows--in strike-through form--the specifications
adopted at the last meeting. The second formulation places main emphasis
on money market conditions. As suggested below, the particular language
needed in the opening lines of the money market formulation would depend
on the specific conditions sought; the three alternatives shown--calling,
respectively, for somewhat easier, prevailing, and somewhat firmer money
market conditions--are intended to be associated with the specifications
discussed in the preceding section under alternatives A, B, and C.
"Monetary Aggregates" Formulation
The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of growth in
M-1 and M-2 on a path believed to be reasonably consistent with the
longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the preceding
paragraph. Specifically, at present, it expects the annual growth
rates over the [DEL: August-September] SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER period to be within
the ranges of [DEL: 0 to 5] ____ to ____ per cent for M-1 and [DEL: 3 to 8] ____
to ____ per cent for M-2. In the judgment of the Committee such
growth rates are likely to be associated with a weekly-average
Federal funds rate of about [DEL: 6] ____ per cent. If, giving approx-
imately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates
over the 2-month period will deviate significantly from the midpoints
of the indicated ranges, the operational objective for the Federal
funds rate shall be modified in an orderly fashion within a range
of [DEL: 5-3/4 to 6-1/4] ____ to ____ per cent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the operating constraints specified above are proving to be signif-
icantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the Chairman
who will then decide whether the situation calls for supplementary
instructions from the Committee.
"Money Market" Formulation
At this time, the Committee seeks to maintain about the prevail-
ing money market conditions (or to achieve somewhat easier or some-
what firmer money market conditions) during the period immediately
ahead, provided that monetary aggregates appear to be growing at
approximately the rates currently expected, which are believed to
be on a path reasonably consistent with the longer-run ranges for
monetary aggregates cited in the preceding paragraph. Specifically,
the Committee seeks to maintain the weekly-average Federal funds rate
at about ____ per cent, so long as M-1 and M-2 appear to be growing
over the September-October period at annual rates within ranges of
____ to ____ per cent and ____ to ____ per cent, respectively.
If, giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that
growth rates over the 2-month period are approaching or moving beyond
the limits of the indicated ranges, the operational objective for
the weekly-average Federal funds rate shall be modified in an orderly
fashion within a range of ____ to ____ per cent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the operating constraints specified above are proving to be signif-
icantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the Chairman
who will then decide whether the situation calls for supplementary
instructions from the Committee.
