Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
April 14, 1978
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I FOMC
April 14, 1978
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Growth in M-1 was at a moderate annual rate of 3.5 per
cent in March, but it is projected to accelerate to a rate of almost 10
per cent in April. Over the March-April period, growth of M-1 is thus pro-
jected at about a 6-3/4 per cent rate, somewhat above the mid-point of
the range specified by the FOMC at its March meeting. The interest-
bearing component of M-2 has been increasing at a rate near the reduced
pace of recent months, and M-2 appears to be expanding over March and
April at a 7 per cent annual rate, near the mid-point of the Committee's
range. Deposit growth at nonbank thrift institutions remained weak in
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over March-April Period
Memo: Federal funds
rate (per cent
per annum)
Latest Estimates
Avg. for statement
week ending
(2) The System Account Manager continued to aim for a
Federal funds rate of around 6-3/4 per cent throughout the intermeet-
ing period. The actual rate tended to exceed this target in late March
when Desk operations were constrained by a shortage of readily avail-
able collateral. The shortage was alleviated in early April by the
Treasury's issuance of $6 billion of cash management bills, and most
recently funds have generally traded at around 6-3/4 per cent.
(3) Even though the Federal funds rate returned to around
sure through most of the intermeeting period, rising 15 to 20 basis
points. These pressures appeared to reflect the recent deterioration
of the U.S. balance of payments position, the accelerated increase in
the wholesale and retail price indexes, and concern about a possible
surge in growth of the monetary aggregates in April. In private short-
term markets, rate increases also have been associated with continued
sizable offerings of large CD's and a pickup in commercial paper
issuance by nonfinancial corporations. In longer-term markets, the
volume of bonds offered by corporations and State and local governments
also expanded markedly in March. Most recently, however, following
publication of increases in the monetary aggregates for early April
that were much lower than many had anticipated, Treasury bill rates
have retraced their earlier increases, and the 3-month bill rate is
now below the level at the time of the last FOMC meeting.
(4) Commercial bank credit expanded in March at a 9 per
cent annual rate--a bit slower than the rate earlier in the first
quarter--as a decline in investment holdings partly offset a further
sharp rise in loan portfolios. The growth in loans was widespread
among major categories, with business loan expansion particularly
strong. A significant part of the growth in banks' earnings assets
was financed by issuance of large-denomination time deposits.
(5) With deposit flows at nonbank thrift institutions remain-
ing relatively weak, conditions in the mortgage market have continued
to tighten in recent weeks. Yields on new conventional mortgages have
edged up further, and field reports indicate that the thrifts have become
less accommodative in extending new commitments and in making "spot"
loans. A significant proportion of S&L's surveyed at the end of March
reported that the present supply of mortgage funds was below normal
for this period of the year.
(6) The table on the next page shows percentage annual rates
of change in related monetary and financial flows over various time
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average Mar. '77 Sept. '77 Dec. '77 Feb. '77
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective Developments
(7) The table below presents for Committee consideration
alternative longer-run growth ranges for the monetary aggregates
over the QI '78 to QI '79 period, along with ranges currently in place.
Alternative B would continue the ranges for M-1 and M-2 adopted
by the Committee in February for the QIV '77 to QIV '78 period. The
longer-run range for M-3 has been reduced, however, largely because
higher market rates of interest are now projected for late 1978 and
early 1979 and because recent deposit inflows to thrift institutions
have continued relatively weak. Alternatives
respectively, somewhat more and somewhat less
Alt. A Alt. B
A and C represent,
Alt. C Current
(8) The demand for M-1 is expected to be quite strong over
to rise at a rate of almost 12 per cent, about one percentage
point more than had been projected a month ago. A little more than half
of the increase in the rate of expansion in nominal GNP for the QI '78-
QI '79 period reflects an upward revision in the projected rate of
inflation over the year. The balance reflects the weather- and coal-
strike induced reduction in the rate of growth of real GNP in QI '78--
projected to be largely made up in QII '78--which lowers the base
quarter for the new four-quarter policy period. To hold M-1 growth
over the coming year to a rate around the mid-point of the 4 to 6
per cent range of alternative B would, under the circumstances, require
a larger increase in interest rates than the staff had earlier
expected. As indicated in Appendix I, we would anticipate a Federal
funds rate averaging around 8¾ per cent by early next year if the mid-
points of the longer-run ranges of alternative B are to be attained.
Interest rates would be slightly lower and slightly higher under
alternatives A and C, respectively.
(9) All of the alternatives imply relatively rapid increases
in the income velocity of M-1, and also a rise in the income velocity
of M-2, as shown in Appendix II. Assuming M-1 growth at the 5¼ per
cent mid-point of the alternative B range, V-1 would be projected
to rise by about 7 per cent over the coming four quarters, more than
twice the average rate of the past two years. The projected rise in
interest rates would tend to increase the public's willingness to
economize on cash balances and thus would contribute to an accelera-
tion in velocity growth. However, the staff has assumed that there
also will be a further downward shift in the demand for money over the
period ahead, partly because higher market interest rates may once
again lead to new financial innovations that substitute for demand
deposits, and to more intensive marketing of earlier innovations
and cash management services, as financial institutions
attempt to retain funds. Whether such a further downward shift
in demand for M-1 will actually occur is quite uncertain, however.
If it does not, efforts to constrain growth in M-1 to the mid-point
of the ranges presented are likely to involve interest rate levels
higher than those projected, and consequent growth in real GNP
below the projected rate.
(10) Even if growth in M-1 and M-2 were at the mid-points
of their ranges over the year ahead, growth in these aggregates over
more extended periods ending in QI '79 would--because of the
relatively rapid rates of expansion of the aggregates in 1977--be
above the mid-points of the proposed ranges under each alternative.
For example, as shown in the table below, M-1 growth at around the
QI '79 period would lead to a 6.3 per cent annual rate of expansion
over the 24-month period starting in the first quarter of 1977, almost
quarters at around the 5 per cent mid-point of the proposed alternative
C range would still imply M-1 growth over the 24-month period
beginning in QI '77 at a rate well above the mid-point of the current
FOMC range.
Growth Rates in Monetary Aggregates Assuming Growth over
QI '78 to QI '79 Period at Mid-points of Ranges for
Each Alternative
(Annual rates, compounded quarterly)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
(11) Shorter-term specifications for the monetary aggregates
and the Federal funds rate believed to be consistent with the longer-
run alternatives are summarized below for Committee consideration.
(More detailed and longer-term data are shown in the tables on
pp. 9 and 10.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for April-May
(12) The expected sharp rebound in GNP in the current
quarter should be reflected in accelerated growth in M-l over the
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1 M-2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
April-May period. As contemplated under alternative B, a Federal funds
rate centered on the recently prevailing 6-3/4 per cent level is likely
to be associated with M-1 growth over the two-month period at an annual
rate in a 6 to 10 per cent range. In terms of quarterly averages, we
would expect expansion in M-1 from the first to the second quarter to
be at a rate of about 6 per cent. However, growth would be more
rapid over the course of the second quarter--with M-1 expansion at
about an 7½ per cent rate from March to June.
(13) Growth in M-2 over the April-May period is likely to
be in a 6½ to 10½ per cent annual rate range under alternative B.
Savings deposits at commercial banks are expected to show very small
growth at best, though larger-than-seasonal tax refunds to individuals
may temporarily strengthen flows into these deposits in coming weeks.
With market yields remaining above ceiling rates, small-denomination
time deposits at commercial banks are also likely to grow only moderately.
However, in view of continued strong loan demands, banks probably will
maintain their reliance on large-denomination time deposits. Since a
major portion of these deposits is included in M-2, the interest-bear-
ing component of this aggregate is expected to continue at near its
recent pace.
(14) Under alternative B, inflows to savings and loan associa-
tions and mutual savings banks over the April-May period can be expected
to remain at near the 6 to 7 per cent average monthly rate prevailing
since year end. Consequently, thrifts are likely to continue to reduce
their portfolio liquidity and to increase their borrowing from the
Federal Home Loan Banks and others. At the same time, the commitment
and other mortgage lending policies of thrift institutions are likely
to be tightened further.
(15) Even with the Federal funds rate remaining around
come under some upward pressure. Market expectations of a near-term
tightening of monetary policy are likely to be stimulated again if,
as seems likely, incoming data indicate a strengthening of economic
activity, continued substantial advances in prices, and an accelera-
tion of growth in the monetary aggregates. In addition, expected strong
demands for short-term funds by nonfinancial businesses should result in
further increases in commercial paper issuance and in continued heavy
offerings of large CD's by banks seeking funds to accommodate business
loan demands. Sponsored Federal agencies are also expected to continue
issuing a substantial volume of short-term debt over this period. On
the other hand, tendencies for bill rates to rise will be tempered by
the Treasury's repayment of $12 billion of cash management bills in the
latter half of April and the relatively low level of dealer bill inven-
tories. It is also likely that the Treasury will engage in net debt
repayment in the mid-May refunding.
(16) In longer-term markets, offerings of corporate, municipal,
and Federal agency issues are likely to remain sizable in the next few
weeks. On April 26, the Treasury will announce the terms on which it
will refund about $6 billion of publicly held issues maturing in mid-May.
It is expected that the Treasury will offer a sizable amount of inter-
mediate- and long-term securities in this operation. The recent
increases in bond yields and the adjustments in dealer positions, with
U.S. Government dealers now showing a sizable net short position in
coupon issues, suggest that much of the impact of this additional
supply may already have been discounted by the market. However,
mortgage yields appear likely to continue to drift higher in response to
the continued slow expansion of deposits at thrift institutions.
(17) Over the balance of the year and into early 1979, both
short- and long-term interest rates are likely to rise further as the
Federal Reserve takes actions to restrain money growth. Such rate
increases would be accompanied by a reduction in liquid asset holdings
of depository institutions, continued large commercial bank offerings
of large-denomination time deposits, and large additional borrowing
by Federal housing agencies undertaken to support the mortgage market.
As time goes on, the willingness and ability of depository institutions
to finance credit demands may be significantly limited by growing strains
on their balance sheets. While bond yields would also be under upward
pressure, rate increases would be cushioned by a reduction of State and
local advance refundings, a further shift of corporate financing from
capital markets to banks, and continued substantial demands for long-
term securities by insurance companies and pension funds.
(18) Under alternative C the Federal funds rate would
rise over the intermeeting period to the mid-point of a 7 to 7½ per
cent range. M-1 growth would likely be in a 5½ to 9½ per cent annual
rate range over April and May and M-2 growth in a 6 to 10 per cent
range. Under these circumstances, private short-term rates would
probably rise about percentage point, while Treasury bill rates
may increase somewhat less because of sizable bill paydowns. The
prime rate would also be likely to increase, particularly since
loan demands are expected to remain strong, and bond yields should
continue to move up somewhat. With the rise in market rates, member
bank borrowing from Federal Reserve Banks would expand sharply from
recently reduced levels, increasing pressures for a discount rate
advance. The rise in short-term rates under alternative C may provide
some support for the dollar in international exchange markets.
(19) The near-term increase in interest rates under
alternative C would be a step toward reducing the longer-run rate
of growth of the monetary aggregates, but further upward adjustments
in interest rates over the coming year would be required to limit M-1
growth to the mid-point of its 4 to 6 per cent longer-run range.
The funds rate would probably have to rise to 9 per cent by late
this year.
(20) Alternative A calls for a reduction in the Federal
funds rate over the intermeeting period to the mid-point of a 6 to
in view of the increased rate of inflation and the probability that
the data to be published in coming weeks will be indicating more
rapid M-1 growth. Downward pressure on short-term rates would tend
to be moderate since participants would expect a reversal in the
funds rate over the near term. Thus, the 3-month bill rate might
still remain somewhat above 6 per cent, and private short-term rates
would decline only marginally. Long-term rates probably also would
be little affected. On the other hand, the dollar would almost
certainly decline in foreign exchange markets.
(21) Alternative A is consistent with a policy designed to
encourage more rapid growth in the aggregates over the longer-run.
However, given expected nominal GNP growth over the policy period,
the near-term decline in the funds rate would soon have to be
reversed to restrain growth in M-1 to the mid-point of its longer
run range. By late spring, the funds rate would have to begin
rising again, reaching 8 per cent by late in the year.
Directive language
(22) Given below are alternatives for the operational
paragraphs of the directive. The first formulation, like the direc-
tive adopted at the last meeting, places main emphasis on near-term
rates of growth in monetary aggregates; it shows--in strike-through
form--the specifications adopted at the last meeting. The second
formulation places main emphasis on money market conditions. As
suggested below, the particular language needed in the opening lines
of the money market formulation would depend on the specific condi-
tions sought; the three alternatives shown--calling, respectively,
for somewhat easier, prevailing, and somewhat firmer money market
conditions--are intended to be associated with the specifications
discussed in the preceding section under alternatives A, B, and C.
"Monetary Aggregates" formulation
The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of growth
in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed to be reasonably consistent
with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the
preceding paragraph. Specifically, at present, it expects the
annual growth rates over the [DEL: March-April] APRIL-MAY period to be
within ranges of [DEL: 4 to 8] ____ TO ____ per cent for M-1 and [DEL: 5-1/2
to-9] ____ TO ____ per cent for M-2. In the judgment of the Com-
mittee such growth rates are likely to be associated with a
weekly-average Federal funds rate of about [DEL: 6-3/4] ____ per cent
(or at about the current level). If, giving approximately equal
weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates over the
the indicated ranges, the operational objective for the Federal
funds rate shall be modified in an orderly fashion within a
range of [DEL: 6-1/2 to 7] ____ TO ____ per cent. In the conduct of
day-to-day operations, account shall be taken of emerging financial
market conditions, including the conditions in foreign exchange
If it appears during the period before the next meeting
that the operating constraints specified above are proving to be
significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the
Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls for
supplementary instructions from the Committee.
"Money Market" formulation
At this time, the Committee seeks to maintain about the
prevailing money market conditions (or to achieve somewhat easier
or somewhat firmer money market conditions) during the period
immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates appear to
be growing at approximately the rates currently expected, which
are believed to be on a path reasonably consistent with the
longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the preceding
paragraph. Specifically, the Committee seeks to maintain the
weekly-average Federal funds rate at about the current level (or
to reduce or to increase the weekly-average Federal funds rate
somewhat from the current level), so long as M-1 and M-2 appear
to be growing over the April-May period at annual rates within
ranges of ____ to ____ per cent and ____ to ____ per cent,
respectively. If, giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and
M-2, it appears that growth rates over the 2-month period are
approaching or moving beyond the limits of the indicated ranges,
the operational objective for the weekly-average Federal funds
rate shall be modified in an orderly fashion within a range of
____ to ____ per cent. In the conduct of day-to-day opera-
tions, account shall be taken of emerging financial market condi-
tions, including the conditions in foreign exchange markets.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting
that the operating constraints specified above are proving to be
significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the
Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls for
supplementary instructions from the Committee.
