Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
July 14, 1978Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) July 14, 1978
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Growth in M-1 slowed to an annual rate of about 6
per cent in June, but appears to be accelerating again in July.
For June-July, M-1 is expected to expand at about a 7½ per cent
annual rate, just above the mid-point of the Committee's range,
and M-2 is projected to increase at about a 9 per cent rate, in the
upper half of its range. Growth in the interest-bearing component
of M-2 in June was bolstered by the rapid expansion of large-denomina-
tion time deposits and the introduction of the new six-month "money
market" certificate. Banks are estimated to have issued $2 billion of
the latter instruments during the month, resulting in a strengthen-
ing of the growth of small-denomination time deposits that about
offset a decline in savings deposits of individuals. At thrift
institutions, growth of the six-month certificate contributed to
a strengthening of total deposit inflows in June. By the end
of the month, an estimated $6 billion of the new certificates
were outstanding at thrifts.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over June-July Period
Ranges Latest Estimates
(2) Following the June meeting the Account Management,
in accordance with the Committee's instructions, adopted operating
policies to raise the Federal funds rate by a ¼ of a percentage
point to 7¾ per cent. This target has been maintained in subsequent
weeks as incoming data have suggested that growth in the monetary
aggregates in the June-July period would be well within the Committee's
ranges. The rise in the Federal funds rate contributed to a marked
increase in member bank borrowing at Federal Reserve Banks in late
June. However, the level of borrowing then declined following the
mid-year increase in the discount rate to 7-1/4 per cent. Reflecting
in part the decrease in member bank borrowing and a rise in reserves
required to support Government deposits after the mid-June tax date,
growth in nonborrowed reserves is expected to accelerate to around a
(3) Both long- and short-term interest rates generally
have risen 1/8 to 3/8 of a percentage point since the June FOMC
meeting, reflecting for the most part the somewhat tighter monetary
policy stance. During June, demands in credit markets from a number
of nonfinancial sectors appear to have moderated. Public bond
offerings by corporations picked up somewhat and commercial paper
issuance increased sharply, but borrowing by businesses from banks
slowed markedly from the extraordinarily rapid pace in May. In addi-
tion, a fall-off in advance refunding operations led to a decline in
long-term borrowing by State and local governments. As expected,
the Treasury redeemed $6 billion of short-dated cash management
bills in late June, but it has since raised $3.5 billion through
sales of 1-year bills, 2-year notes and 15-year bonds. Conditions
in primary mortgage markets appear to have stabilized somewhat in
recent weeks, perhaps reflecting improved funds availability at
thrift institutions. Both interest rates on commitments to make
new mortgages and the percentage of associations reporting funds
in short supply have changed little since mid-June.
(4) Bank credit growth slowed markedly in June, following
unusually rapid increases in the preceding two months. Not only
was the increase in business loans much smaller than in any previous
month this year, but the increase in other lending also moderated
somewhat. Given the reduced pace of loan growth, banks augmented
portfolios of investment securities and reduced outstanding negotiable
CDs, while only moderately increasing their use of nondeposit funds.
(5) The table on the next page shows percentage annual
rates of change in related monetary and financial flows over various
time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average June '77 Dec. '77 Mar. '78 May '78
Concepts of Money
M-1 (Currency plus demand
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(6) Alternative longer-run growth ranges for the monetary
aggregates over the QII '78 to QII '79 period are shown below for
Committee consideration. Alternative B continues the ranges for
M-1, M-2, and M-3 adopted by the Committee in April for the QI '78-
QI '79 period, but specifies a somewhat higher range for bank
credit. Alternatives A and C represent, respectively, more and
less expansive policies.
Current
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Ranges
(7) All alternatives assume a shift in the relationship
among the monetary and credit aggregates, as follows: (a) In
view of the strength in demand for M-1 in recent quarters, growth
of M-1 is expected to be near the upper end of the ranges shown--
i.e., 7¼, 6¼, and 5¼ per cent for alternatives A, B, and C,
respectively. (b) However, if the regulation authorizing automatic
transfers from savings to demand deposits becomes effective
November 1, M-1 growth would probably fall into the lower half of
the ranges shown as the public shifts demand balances to savings
accounts. (c) Growth in M-2 and M-3 in any event is expected
to be near the mid-points of the respective ranges. (d) Given
aggregate credit demands associated with the staff's GNP projection,
growth in bank credit is likely to be near the upper end of the
revised ranges shown for this aggregate.
(8) The demand for M-1 is expected to remain quite strong
over the new QII '78 to QII '79 policy period, when nominal GNP is
projected to rise about 11 per cent. Thus, over the next several
months a further substantial rise in short-term rates appears needed
to restrain M-1 growth even to the high end of the ranges shown.
As indicated in Appendix I, the staff anticipates that the Federal
funds rate would have to rise to the 8¾ to 9¾ per cent range by
fall under alternative B. Interest rates in the fourth quarter would
be about one percentage point lower under alternative A and three-
quarters of a percentage point higher under alternative C.
(9) Even with the assumption that M-1 grows near the
upper end of its ranges, the GNP projection implies relatively
rapid increases in the velocity of M-1. Under alternative B, V-1
is projected to rise by 4½ per cent over the QII '78-QII '79 period,1/
as compared with an increase of 3¼ per cent over the preceding four
quarters. Efforts by the public to economize on cash as interest
rates rise would contribute to an increase in velocity, but--given
the interest rates assumed--the 4 per cent rise that is projected
also presupposes a further modest downward shift in the demand
for money. Such a shift could develop as higher interest rates
induce more intensive marketing of earlier innovations and cash
management services. Over recent quarters, however, the demand
for money has been about as strong as would be expected from historical
relationships. If that tendency continues, efforts to constrain
M-1 to the upper end of the ranges presented will require higher
interest rates and/or lower GNP growth than projected.
(10) While growth in M-1 is anticipated to be in the
upper end of its ranges, growth in M-2 and M-3 over the QII '78 to
QII '79 period is expected to be near the mid-points of their
respective ranges. The initial success of both banks and thrifts
with the new six-month certificate suggests that these institutions
may be better able to maintain interest-bearing deposit inflows
than the staff previously assumed. However, as interest rates rise,
depository institutions may become less aggressive in their offerings
of the new certificate. In addition, the projected rise in rates
can be expected to slow growth of interest-bearing deposits subject
to a fixed rate ceiling. As in other recent Bluebooks, the projected
high level of interest rates has led the staff to assume another
increase in deposit rate ceilings this fall;1/ without such an
increase, M-2 growth would be near the low end of its longer-run
(11) In view of the persistent tendency for M-1 to
grow above its longer-run ranges over the past several quarters on
average, a considerable moderation of M-1 growth over the next year
would be required to compensate for such overshoots and bring
M-1 growth to within a 4 to 6¼ per cent range over periods longer
than one year ending in QII '79. As can be seen from the lower
panel of appendix table III-1, the 6¼ per cent M-1 growth contemplated
under alternative B implies annual rates of expansion of about 7 per
cent for periods beginning as far back as the fourth quarter of 1975.
However, constraining M-1 growth over QII '78 to QII '79 to a 5¼
per cent rate, as under alternative C, would produce M-1 growth
close to the 6½ per cent upper end of April longer-run range for
periods beginning with the second quarter of 1977. As shown in the
lower panels of appendix tables III-2 and III-3, under all alternatives
M-2 and M-3 would grow within their current 6½ to 9 and 7½ to 10 per
cent longer-run ranges for periods starting with the fourth quarter of
(12) If the regulation authorizing automatic transfers
from savings to demand deposits for commercial banks becomes
effective as scheduled on November 1, measured M-1 growth may be
reduced by 1 to 3 percentage points over the QII '78 to QII '79
period.1/ However, there is great uncertainty about such estimates
since we do not know the pricing policies that commercial banks will
adopt; these policies, of course, will affect the attractiveness
of the service to households and the willingness of individuals
to transfer demand balances to savings accounts. A lower growth of
M-1 resulting solely from such shifts to savings accounts would
have the same policy implications as a higher growth before automatic
transfers. Although M-2 might expand a bit more rapidly with
automatic transfers if the new service attracted savings deposits
from thrift institutions, staff believes such shifts would probably
be relatively modest. In any event, M-3 growth would be virtually
unchanged since that aggregate would be unaffected by shifts of
funds between commercial banks and thrift institutions. Appendix IV
discusses automatic transfers, and their possible affect on the
monetary aggregates, in more detail.
(13) Shorter-term specifications for the monetary
aggregates and the Federal funds rate believed to be generally
consistent with the longer-run alternatives are summarized below
for Committee consideration. Two short-run alternatives are
shown, one calling for no change in the funds rate over the inter-
meeting period--which might be associated with either long-run
alternatives A or B--and the other contemplating a ¼ point rise
in the rate. An easing alternative for the short-run is not presented
since all proposed longer-run ranges involve either stable or
rising rates over the next several months. (More detailed and longer-
term data are shown in the tables on pp. 10 and 11.)
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1 M-2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
QII '78-QIV '78
QIV '78-QII '79
QII '78-QII '79
Alt. A or B Alt. C
Ranges for July-August
Federal funds rate
(14) Alternative B contemplates a Federal funds rate
centered on the prevailing 7¾ per cent level between now and the
next FOMC meeting. Growth of M-1 in the July-August period is
expected to be in a 5 to 9 per cent annual rate range under this
alternative, largely in consequence of the step-up in M-1 growth
that appears in train for July. With growth at the mid-point of
that range, the level of M-1 will remain well above that implied
by the upper end of the FOMC's current longer-run range, as indicated
in Chart 1 on the following page. And for the third quarter as a
whole M-1 growth may be around a 7-1/4 to 7-1/2 per cent annual rate--
high relative to the longer-run range but slower than in the second
quarter, mainly reflecting the current deceleration in economic
activity and a lagged response to the appreciable increase in short-
term rates this spring.
(15) Expansion in M-2 under alternative B is likely to be
in a 7 to 11 per cent annual rate range over the July-August period.
Growth at the mid-point of this range would maintain M-2 in the
upper half of its longer-run range, as shown in Chart 2.
(16) The strength of M-2 relative to M-1 over July-August
reflects the expectation of both continued large inflows from the
new six-month money market certificate and rapid growth in large
denomination time deposits included in M-2. With strong business
loan growth anticipated to resume this summer, it is likely that banks
will return to the negotiable CD market and aggressively offer other
large denomination time deposits. In addition, while savings
deposits can be expected to decline, as they did in June, further
success of commercial banks in marketing the new six-month certificate
is likely to enable them to sustain net inflows of interest-bearing
deposits subject to regulatory ceilings at near recent rates.
(17) Inflows of deposits to thrift institutions this
summer are also likely to be maintained at near the increased June
pace, as these institutions continue aggressively to offer six-month
certificates at rates 25 basis points above what banks can pay.
Savings deposits are expected to contract as depositors shift to
the new instrument, but the ceiling rate advantage at thrifts is
likely to permit these institutions to continue to attract more new
money than commercial banks.
(18) If the Federal funds rate were maintained at the
currently prevailing 7% per cent level, as envisioned under alter-
native B, most other short-term rates would likely show little net
change over the intermeeting period. The recent rise in short-term
rates as a whole has brought them roughly into line with the
prevailing funds rate. Moreover, short-term credit demands are not
likely to add significantly to market rate pressures in the weeks
immediately ahead. While the short-term credit demands of financial
and nonfinancial businesses and of Federal agencies are likely to be
strong over this period, the Treasury is not expected to add
substantially to the net supply of bills.
(19) Interest rates on longer term securities are also
likely to be little changed under alternative B. Corporate
bond offerings are expected to increase in July, but the forward
calendar for August is seasonally light. In the municipal sector,
new bond issuance is anticipated to fall further over the summer,
as the normal seasonal lull is reinforced by a continued lack of
advance refunding operations, recently discouraged by changes in
IRS regulations and the previous rise in bond yields. Over the
intermeeting period, the Treasury is likely to obtain a sizable
amount of new cash in conjunction with a regular issue of two-year
technical position, however, with security dealers carrying large
net short positions in coupon issues. As bond yields remain little
changed, while thrift deposit flows are sustained at around current
levels, mortgage rates are also likely to stay fairly stable.
I/ The terms of this refunding are to be announced in late July.
The staff expects the Treasury to sell $6 to $6 billion of new
securities in this operation, rolling over $4k billion of
publicly-held debt issues maturing on August 15, and raising
about $14 to $2 billion of new money.
(20) Alternative C involves an increase in the Federal
funds rate to around the mid-point of a 7% to 8k per cent range by
mid-August. M-l growth would likely be in a 4 to 8 per cent
annual rate range over July-August and M-2 growth in a 6k to 10k
per cent range. Some additional upward pressure on short-term
interest rates in general likely would be associated with such an
upward adjustment in the Federal funds rate. With business loan
demands strong, the prime rate would likely rise further, and banks
and other lenders would be expected to continue to firm non-rate
terms of lending. The current level of borrowing from the Federal
Reserve discount window would probably increase back to the $14
billion area, intensifying pressures for another adjustment in the
discount rate. At the same time, the higher short-term rates would
tend to provide support for the dollar in international exchange
(21) Only a small part of an increase in money market
rates is likely to be transmitted to the bond market, since the
current level of long-term market yields already anticipates a
further tightening of monetary policy. However, further upward
rate pressures could be expected to occur in mortgage markets, as
rising short-term rates slow thrift deposit flows and increase the
cost of funds to thrift institutions.
(22) Under either alternative, both short- and long-term
interest rates are likely to be under considerable upward
pressure from late surmer into 1979 if longer-run growth in the monetary
aggregates is to be contained within the proposed ranges, given the
staff's GNP projection. High private credit demands and agency borrow-
ing to support housing, as well as rising interest rates, will be
accompanied by further erosion in liquidity positions and balance sheet
distortions associated with short-term borrowing by banks, thrift insti-
tutions, and businesses. Banks and thrifts can be expected, therefore,
to become less willing lenders, while nonfinancial businesses reassess
their expenditure programs.
Directive language
(23) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for
the directive. Alternative language consistent with the short-run
specifications discussed in the preceding section is shown for the
Committee's initial Federal funds rate objective. At a later point
in the operational paragraph, alternative language is also provided
that enables the Committee to place main emphasis on monetary aggre-
gates or on money market conditions. The specifications adopted at
the last meeting are shown in strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions that are broadly consistent
with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited
above, while giving due regard to developing conditions in
financial markets more generally. During the period until
the next regular meeting, System open market operations shall
be directed initially at attaining a weekly-average Federal
funds rate
(A) or (B) AT ABOUT the current level.
(C) slightly (OR SOMEWHAT) above the current level.
Subsequently, operations shall be directed at maintinaing the
weekly-average Federal funds rate within the range of 7 -ee-8
TO per cent. In deciding on the specific objective
for the Federal funds rate the Manager shall be guided mainly
by the relationship between the latest estimates of annual rates
of growth in the June-Javy JULY-AUGUST period of M-l and M-2
and the following ranges of tolerance: 5-te-l9 TO
per cent for M-l and 6-ee-19 TO per cent for M-2.
If, giving approximately equal weight to M-l and M-2, their
rates of growth appear to be
Monetary aggregates emphasis
significantly above or below the mid-points
Money market emphasis
CLOSE TO OR BEYOND THE UPPER OR LOWER LIMITS
of the indicated ranges, the objective for the funds rate
shall be raised or lowered in an orderly fashion within its
If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear to be
above the upper limit or below the lower limit of the indicated
ranges at a time when the objective for the funds rate has
already been moved to the corresponding limit of its range,
the Manager is promptly to notify the Chairman who will then
decide whether the situation calls for supplementary instruc-
tions from the Committee.
