Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
May 12, 1978Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 12, 1978
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Growth in M-1 accelerated to an annual rate of 19 per
cent in April, partly reflecting the sharp rebound in economic
activity that is in process. In addition, the month appears to
have been affected by transitory tax-related factors, including a
build-up in individual cash balances to make larger than usual
nonwithheld tax payments and some delay by the Treasury in processing
such payments. M-1 is expected to increase at about a 6-1/2 per cent
annual rate in May, given data thus far available in the month,
bringing growth over the April-May period to around a 13 per cent
annual rate, well above the upper end of the Committee's range. The
rapid expansion of M-1 also has boosted growth in M-2 over April and
May to about an8-3/4 per cent annual rate, near the upper end of
its two-month range. The pick-up in deposit growth in April enabled
banks to accelerate their acquisitions of earning assets to a 21
per cent annual rate. Deposit growth at nonbank thrift institutions
remained weak in April.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over April-May Period
(SAAR in per cent)
Ranges Latest Estimates
M-1 4 to 8½ 12.9
M-2 5½ to 9½ 8.8
Memo: Federal funds 6¾ to 7½ Avg. for statement
rate (per cent week ending
per annum) Apr. 19 6.78
26 7.00
May 3 7.27
10 7.32
(2) As incoming data on the aggregates continued to
strengthen following the April FOMC meeting, the Desk raised its
Federal funds rate target to around 7-1/4 per cent from the 6-3/4
per cent level which had prevailed since early January. At a tele-
phone conference meeting on May 5, it was reported that growth in
M-1 appeared to be well in excess of the Committee's range and growth
in M-2 at the top of its range. To provide time for more evidence
on the economy and on the extent to which the strength in the aggre-
gates would subside, the FOMC decided that the Desk should continue
aiming for a 7-1/4 per cent Federal funds rate. However, the Manager
was instructed to be more tolerant of deviations of the funds rate
above the desired level than below it, and in the most recent state-
ment week the Federal funds rate averaged 7.32 per cent.
(3) The increase in the Federal funds rate from the earlier
6-3/4 per cent level induced a sharp rise in member bank borrowing from
Federal Reserve Banks. In the statement week just ended, such borrow-
ing totalled $1.7 billion, up from a level of $239 million in the week
of April 19. The discount rate was raised 1/2 point to 7 per cent on
May 11, in order to bring it into better alignment with market rates,
and most recently member bank borrowing has declined substantially.
Still, increased member bank borrowing on average is estimated to supply
the bulk of the 11-1/4 per cent expansion in total reserves over the
April-May period.
(4) Along with the rise in the Federal funds rate, most
short- and longer-term market interest rates have risen by 20 to 45
basis points since the April Committee meeting, and the bank prime rate was
increased from 8 to 8-1/4 per cent. Demands of nonfinancial businesses
for short-term credit remained quite strong, as evidenced by substantial
increases in both commercial paper and bank business loans in April.
The Treasury, on the other hand, has paid down $12 billion of cash mange-
ment bills since the April tax date, contributing to a relative scarcity
of short-term bills. The reduction in the available supply of these
instruments has helped to limit the response of many short-term interest
rates to the firming of money market conditions. In its mid-May refund-
ing, the Treasury redeemed $1.9 billion of the $5.9 billion of publicly
held maturing issues and offered a total of $4 billion in a 10 year note
and a 22-1/4 year bond. Dealers distributed the bulk of their awards
of the bond and about half of their holdings of the new notes within a
day or two of the auction. Despite the rise in interest rates, stock
prices have moved higher on balance over the inter-meeting period.
(4) Conditions in mortgage markets have continued to tighten.
Rates on primary conventional mortgages have risen 15 basis points since
mid-April, bringing the increase in this rate over the first four months
of 1978 to about 1/2 percentage point. In addition, savings and loan
associations reduced their outstanding level of loan commitments again
in March, and concern about further upward movements in mortgage rates
has contributed to a marked rise in offerings at FNMA auctions of forward
purchase commitments.
(6) The table on the next page shows percentage annual rates
of change in related monetary and financial flows over various time
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
1976 & Apr. '78 Apr. '78 Apr. '78 Apr. '78
1977 over over over over
Average Apr. '77 Oct. '77 Jan. '78 Mar. '77
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
1/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
2/ Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on total
loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institutions
--which are derived from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures.
Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to
remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve require-
ments are changed.
Prospective developments
(7) The table below presents for Committee consideration
two alternative sets of specifications for the monetary aggregates
and the Federal funds rate for the forthcoming intermeeting period.
(More detailed and longer-term data for the aggregates are shown in
the tables on pp. 6 and 7.)
Alt. A Alt. B
Ranges for May-June
M-1 4½ to 8½ 4 to 8
M-2 5 to 9 4½ to 8½
Federal funds rate 7 to 7¾ 7½ to 8¼
(Intermeeting period)
(8) Growth in M-1 is expected to slow considerably over
the two-month May-June period from the extraordinary April rate, partly
because the temporary impact of tax-related factors should be unwinding.
Under alternative A--which encompasses a range for the Federal funds
rate centered on its recently prevailing level of around 7-3/8 per
cent--M-1 is expected to expand in a 4 to 8 per cent annual rate
range over the May-June period. Given this projection, the level
of M-1 in each month of the second quarter would be above
levels implied by the FOMC's longer-run range, as shown in
Chart 1 on the following page. Growth in M-1 in the second quarter
would be at a 9¼ per cent annual rate, reflecting for the most
part the sharp rebound in economic activity this quarter, when
nominal GNP is now anticipated to expand at a 17½ per cent annual
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1 M-2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
1978 April 345.5 345.5 827.9 827.9
May 347.4 347.3 832.2 832.1
June 349.2 348.9 837.9 837.2
1978 QI 339.5 339.5 816.8 816.8
QII 347.4 347.2 832.7 832.4
QIII 352.2 351.6 848.2 847.0
QIV 354.8 354.5 863.0 862.0
1979 QI 357.3 357.3 877.4 877.1
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
1978 April 1409.2 1409.2 905,0 905.0
May 1417.2 1416.7 913.4 913.4
June 1426.3 1425.0 920.6 920.3
1978 QI 1390.8 1390.8 888.2 888.2
QII 1417.6 1417.0 913.0 912.9
QIII 1444.3 1441.5 932.4 932.1
QIV 1470.0 1466.7 951.0 950.3
1979 QI 1495.1 1492.1 968.1 966.4
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
(9) Growth in M-2 over the May-June period is also likely
to be in a 5 to 9 per cent annual rate range under alternative A.
Unlike levels of M-l, the implied levels of M-2 would be generally
within the longer-run ranges adopted by the Committee for this
aggregate, as shown in Chart 2 on the following page.1/
(10) The recent and expected near-term increases in market
rates of interest will probably be associated with continued slow
growth in savings deposits. Banks are expected to benefit only
modestly from the June 1 introduction of the new 6-month and 8-year
certificates, because these instruments are likely to be particularly
attractive to the most interest-sensitive depositors who will probably
2/
take advantage of the higher rates offered by thrift institutions.2/
However, with loan demands expected to remain large, and demand deposits
decelerating from their rapid growth in April, banks are projected
to step up significantly their issuance of large-denomination
time deposits. Since a major portion of such instruments are included
in M-2, the interest-bearing component of this aggregate is expected
to pick up somewhat from its reduced March-April pace.
(11) Even if the funds rate does not rise significantly
from recent levels, other short-term rates could edge up further
1/ Charts 3 and 4 showing the relationship between the short-run
behavior of M-3 and bank credit and their longer-run ranges may
be found following page 16.
2/ On May 11, the Federal regulatory agencies announced authorization
of a new 8-year certificate at ceiling rates of 8 and 7¾ per cent
at thrifts and banks, respectively, and a 6-month, $10,000 minimum,
certificate whose ceiling rate floats with the auction rate on
6-month Treasury bills; the 6-month certificate ceiling is of
a percentage point more than the bill rate for thrifts and equal
to the bill rate for banks.
over the weeks ahead. Issuance of commercial paper and bank CD's is
likely to be substantial in coming weeks to accommodate the expected
large business demands for credit. Moreover, the Treasury is not
expected to retire bills, as it did following the April tax date, and
it is possible that the Treasury may issue a sizable short-dated cash
management bill in early June. Finally, if the dollar continues to
strengthen on exchange markets, foreign official accounts might become
significant net sellers of bills.
(12) Long-term rates are expected to show relatively little
change under the conditions of alternative A. Public offerings of
corporate bonds are projected to remain moderate over the coming
weeks, and State and local bond issuance should drop off markedly
in late May after the effective date of the new IRS ruling with
regard to sinking fund provisions of tax-exempt bond offerings. On
the other hand, the Treasury--after retiring about $2 billion of
coupon securities in the latest refunding--will probably raise about
$2 to $2 billion of new cash when it sells the regular four-year
cycle note in early June. In addition, the FHLB System will announce
terms for its mid-quarter refunding early next week, and is expected
to raise about $1 billion in this operation. Receptions for these
offerings could be quite good, however, since dealers have distri-
buted the bulk of their awards of the Treasury refunding issues
and have reestablished a short position in coupon issues.
(13) Alternative B calls for an increase in the Federal
funds rate to the mid-point of a 7½ to 8¼ per cent range between
now and mid-June. M-1 growth would likely be in a 4 to 8 per cent
annual rate range over May and June and M-2 growth in a 4-1/2 to 8-1/2
per cent range. Under this alternative, short-term rates generally
might rise 1/2 percentage point or a little more. With loan demands
expected to remain sizable, relatively prompt upward adjustments
in the prime loan rate may be anticipated. Moreover, a rise in
member bank borrowings would also increase pressure for another
discount rate adjustment. Bond yields too could be expected to
rise, though increases may be limited since current market yields
have probably anticipated some further monetary tightness. The
widening spread between interest rates in the United States and
the rest of the world would tend to provide support for the exchange
value of the dollar.
(14) The staff believes that over the QI '78 to QI '79
period interest rates will have to rise to levels significantly
higher than previously projected if M-1 growth is to be restrained
to the mid-point, or perhaps even the upper half, of its 4 to 6½
per cent longer-run range. M-1 is now expected to expand at about a
9¼ per cent annual rate in the second quarter--3¼ percentage points
more than projected last month. Consequently, in order to achieve
5¼ per cent M-1 growth over the four-quarter period, interest
must rise sufficiently to restrain M-1 growth to an annual rate below
4 per cent over the remaining three quarters--an interval in which
nominal GNP is projected to grow at an 11-3/4 per cent annual rate.
The implied rates of increase in velocity--shown in Appendix II--are
unusually large, more than twice the average of the past two years.
(15) The Federal funds rate level that the staff believes
will be needed to induce such velocity increases are shown in
Appendix I. Under alternative A the Federal funds rate might need
to rise by fall into a range of 9 to 10 per cent--about one percentage
point higher than projected last month.1/ These projections assume
some further downward shift in the demand for money--as a result, for
example, of more intensive marketing of previously introduced innovations
2/
and cash management services as interest rates rise.- It should be
and interest rates in the Board's econometric model has not generated
any evidence of a further downward shift over the past five quarters.
(16) Under either alternative A or B, growth over the
quarters ahead of interest-bearing deposits subject to rate ceilings
will slow more than projected last month. Not only are market
interest rates now expected to be higher, but the upward adjustment
in deposit rate ceilings announced by the regulatory agencies is less
1/ Under alternative B, restraint would be introduced earlier and,
as a result, the level of the funds rate required at the end of
the longer-run policy period would be somewhat less--possibly in
an 8¾ to 9¾ per cent range.
2/ However, the staff as yet has made no allowance for the impact on
measured M-1 of automatic transfers from savings accounts to demand
deposits, scheduled to be authorized at commercial banks on November
1. This service is expected to have a significant depressing
impact on the level of M-1, as balances are shifted from demand to
savings accounts, and consequently is likely to reduce, perhaps
sharply, the rate of growth of M-1 over the QI '78 to QI '79 period;
M-2, on the other hand, is likely to be only marginally affected.
Of course, after automatic transfers are implemented, smaller rates
of growth of measured M-1 will have the same economic and policy
significance as larger rates of growth previously. During the
transition period, however, changes in M-1 will be difficult to
interpret.
than the staff had previously projected.1 Consequently, the staff
believes that a further increase in deposit rate ceilings on longer-
term certificates will be needed to maintain flows of small-denomination
time deposits, and has assumed such an increase in the fourth quarter.
Even with an increase in ceiling rates, growth in M-3 over the longer-
run policy period may be around the lower end of its 7½ to 10 per cent
range. While growth in small-denomination time and savings deposits
at banks will also remain weak, M-2 expansion is expected to be near
the mid-point of the Committee's longer-run range, reflecting sizable
issuance of time deposits not subject to interest rate ceilings.
The slower growth of deposits subject to rate ceilings, and the
resultant increased reliance on managed liabilities and draw-downs
of portfolio liquidity by both banks and thrift institutions, will
be associated with mounting strains on their balance sheet positions.
As the year progresses, therefore, the ability and willingness of
these institutions to meet credit demands can be expected to decline
1/ The staff had assumed a 50 basis point increase on all time deposit
ceiling rates.
Directive language
(17) Given below are alternatives for the operational
paragraphs of the directive.1/ The first formulation, like the
directive adopted at the last meeting, places main emphasis on near-
term rates of growth in monetary aggregates; it shows--in strike-
through form--the specifications adopted at the last meeting. The
second formulation places main emphasis on money market conditions.
In both formulations, variants are shown for particular phrases that
are intended to be associated with the specifications discussed in
the preceding section under alternatives A and B.
"Monetary Aggregates" formulation
The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of growth
in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed to be reasonably consistent
with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in
the preceding paragraph. Specifically, at present, it expects
the annual growth rates over the [DEL: April-May] MAY-JUNE period to
be within ranges of [DEL: 4 to 8½] ____ TO ____ per cent for M-1 and
[DEL: 5½ to 9½] ____ TO ____ per cent for M-2. In the judgment of
the Committee such growth rates are likely to be associated
with a weekly-average Federal funds rate
(A) AT ABOUT THE CURRENT LEVEL.
(B) slightly (OR SOMEWHAT) above the current level.
1/ In a memorandum dated May 11 Chairman Miller proposed modified
language for these operational paragraphs and for the preceding
paragraphs dealing with the Committee's general policy stance
and longer-run ranges for the aggregates.
If, giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears
that growth rates over the 2-month period will deviate significantly
from the midpoints of the indicated ranges, the operational
objective for the Federal funds rate shall be modified in an
orderly fashion within a range of [DEL: 6¾ to 7½] ____ TO ____ per cent.
In the conduct of day-to-day operations, account shall be taken
of emerging financial market conditions, including the conditions
in foreign exchange markets.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting
that the operating constraints specified above are proving to
be significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify
the Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls
for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
"Money Market" Formulation
At this time, the Committee seeks (A) to maintain about the
prevailing money market conditions (or (B) to achieve slightly or
somewhat firmer money market conditions) during the period
immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates appear
to be growing at approximately the rates currently expected,
which are believed to be on a path reasonably consistent with
the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the
preceding paragraph. Specifically, the Committee seeks (A) to
maintain the weekly-average Federal funds rate at about the
current level (or (B) to increase the weekly-average Federal
funds rate slightly or somewhat from the current level), so
long as M-1 and M-2 appear to be growing over the May-June period
at annual rates within ranges of ____ to ____ per cent and ____
to ____ per cent, respectively. If, giving approximately equal
weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates over the 2-
month period are approaching or moving beyond the limits of the
indicated ranges, the operational objective for the weekly-
average Federal funds rate shall be modified in an orderly
fashion within a range of ____ to ____ per cent. In the conduct
of day-to-day operations, account shall be taken of emerging
financial market conditions, including the conditions in foreign
exchange markets.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting
that the operating constraints specified above are proving to
be significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify
the Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls for
supplementary instructions from the Committee.
