Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
December 15, 1978
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M-1 contracted in November at a 4.6 per cent annual
rate and appears to be growing at only about a 2 per cent annual
rate in December. Thus, over the two months, M-1 is projected to
decline at a 1¼ per cent annual rate. Demand for M-1 has been
tempered by the recent substantial increases in market interest
rates, as well as by the introduction of automatic transfer services
(ATS), but the recent weakness appears greater than can be explained
by these factors. Shifts to ATS accounts are estimated to be reducing
M-1 growth by about 3 percentage points at an annual rate over November
and December. M-2 growth is projected to slow to about a 5 per
cent rate over November and December, below the low end of the FOMC's
range. The interest-bearing component of M-2 grew slightly more
rapidly in November than in October, reflecting growth of money market
certificates and the large time deposits in this aggregate. Small
time deposits subject to fixed rate ceilings declined in November, as
did savings deposits despite the introduction of ATS. Given the
Comparison of FOMC Policy Ranges for
November-December
to Latest Staff Estimates
Ranges Latest Estimates
Federal funds rate Avg. for statement
(per cent per annum) 9¾ to 10 week ending
weakness in savings deposits, M-l+ is projected to decline at a 4 per
cent annual rate over November and December. Inflow of deposits to
thrift institutions in November slowed somewhat, even though sales
of money market certificates continued to be robust.
(2) Following the November FOMC meeting, the Account
Management raised its Federal funds rate target to the 9-7/8 per cent
weakness in the monetary aggregates developed, the FOMC voted on
December 8 to maintain the 9-7/8 per cent Federal funds target until
the next meeting, unless the monetary aggregates weakened significantly
further. Member bank borrowing has varied between $600 and $800 million
in recent weeks, a normal level for the prevailing spread between the
discount and Federal funds rate.
(3) The trade-weighted exchange value of the dollar has
declined by 1 per cent since the November FOMC meeting, but is currently
about 9 per cent above its October 31 low. The dollar's declines
against the German mark and Swiss franc have more than offset a small
rise against the Japanese yen.
(4) Despite further increases in the Federal funds rate,
private short-term interest rates have changed little, on balance,
from peak levels reached in the week preceding the November FOMC
meeting. However, CD rates, as indicated by the highest offering
quotes, are currently below their mid-November peaks, when banks
were issuing CD's in large volume, partly to finance credit exten-
sions to their own foreign branches and to foreign banks. The 3-
month Treasury bill has risen substantially since the period just
prior to the November meeting, and as a result the unusually wide
spread of private short-term rates over the bill rate has narrowed.
The market supply of these bills for private investors has been
enlarged by the Treasury's decision to shift part of its weekly
bill offerings from the 6-month to the 3-month area, while demand
for bills by foreign institutions has been lower as a result of their
reduced exchange market intervention. The bank prime rate has
increased 50 basis points since the last FOMC meeting in response
to earlier advances in market rates.
(5) Bond yields rose 10 to 30 basis points in the inter-
meeting period as a bearish tone developed in capital markets when
published data suggested that economic activity has continued at
a stronger than anticipated pace and inflationary pressures have
remained intense. Agency and municipal bond new issue volume rose
in November, while the corporate calendar remained moderate. With
its dollar balances augmented by earlier sales of obligations directly
to foreign official accounts, the Treasury raised no new money from
private investors in domestic markets in the intermeeting period.1/
(6) Loan demands at commercial banks appear to have
remained relatively strong in November. Business loans expanded at
about their October pace, while real estate and probably consumer
loans increased more rapidly. To finance loan expansion, banks
issued a substantial volume of large negotiable and nonnegotiable
CD's, and in addition, liquidated security holdings. The increase
in use of managed liabilities was particularly sharp earlier in the
month when private demands for dollar credits seem to have been
augmented by borrowing in anticipation of possible dollar depreciation.
(7) The demand for residential mortgage credit apparently
has remained quite strong, as indicated by a further rise in mortgage
commitments at S&L's to a record level in October and an estimated
vigorous expansion of mortgage credit in November at both banks and
thrift institutions. In the face of this continued strong demand,
and with deposit flows slowing, the average rates on new commitments
for conventional mortgages at S&L's have risen 15 basis points to 10.35
per cent since the FOMC meeting.
(8) The table on the next page shows percentage annual
rates of change in related monetary and financial flows over various
time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Months
Average Nov. '77 May '78 Aug. '78 Oct. '78
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(9) Shown below for Committee consideration are two alternative
specifications for the monetary aggregates and the Federal funds rate for
the December-January period. Alternative A calls for no near-term change
in the Federal funds rate, while alternative B increases policy restraint
marginally in coming weeks. (More details and longer-term data are
contained in the tables on pp. 8 and 9.)
Alt. A Alt. B
Ranges for Dec.-Jan.1/
M-1+ 1 to 5 ½ to 4½
Federal funds rate
(Intermeeting period) 9½ to 10¼ 9¾ to 10½
(10) Alternative A presumes a Federal funds rate between
now and the January meeting centered in the prevailing 9¾ to 10 per
cent range. The staff projects that M-1 will increase only some-
what in December, on a daily average basis, but the evident growth of
income and expenditures suggests that a substantial increase in M-1 is
likely in January. Consequently, growth in this aggregate over the
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
December-January period is projected to be in a 2½ to 7½ per cent
annual rate range. Transfers from demand to ATS accounts are expected
to depress M-1 growth over the two-month period by 2 to 4 percentage
points, a bit less than previously assumed.
(11) If December projections materialize, M-1 growth in
the current quarter will be only about 4 per cent, with ATS effects
reducing growth by about one percentage point. Thus, even adding
back the effects of ATS, M-1 growth will be the slowest for a quarter
in over two years.1/ The staff's econometric model suggests that,
given the estimated almost 13 per cent rate of increase in nominal
GNP in the fourth quarter, interest rates can explain only part of the
slowdown in M-1. It is too early to be certain if this shortfall is
transitory or represents the onset of another downward drift in
money demand associated with more aggressive adoption of cash
management techniques. The staff's projection for the near term
assumes that underlying money demand will lead to a strengthening of
M-1 growth, but that over the longer run policy period there will
be some continued downward drift in money demand.
(12) The supplementary aggregate M-1+ is expected to
expand in a 1 to 5 per cent range over December-January, noticeably
less than M-1, as weakness in non-ATS savings continues to limit
growth in this aggregate. While the staff is projecting that regular
accelerated to over a 20 per cent annual rate as the economy
rebounded from the adverse weather and coal strike during last
winter--the implied V-1 for the current quarter will increase at
its most rapid rate in almost three years. Appendix II displays
projected rates of growth of velocity.
passbook accounts at commercial banks will begin to rise in December,
following their unusually large recent contraction, the average level
of such accounts is expected to grow only modestly, if at all, over the
(13) Under alternative A, M-2 is projected to expand in a
more rapid pace than in recent weeks. This acceleration reflects
mainly the expected strengthening of M-1 and the anticipated end of
the recent decline in outstanding savings deposits. Growth in the
interest-bearing component of M-2 is expected to be at about a 9 to
expansion in large time deposits that are not subject to interest
rate ceilings.
(14) Projected credit demands suggest that banks will be
forced to continue to rely on managed liabilities to supplement their
lendable funds. Further issuance of large CD's, though at a reduced
rate, is in prospect, as is a resumption of growth in domestic non-
deposit liabilities and net Eurodollar borrowing. Banks thus will
experience mounting balance sheet pressures as borrowing ratios
continue to rise and as further run-offs of bank holdings of
Treasury securities cause liquidity ratios to decline further.
(15) At thrift institutions some further moderation in the
rate of deposit inflows from the pace of the late summer and early fall
is probable in light of higher market yields and the completion of the
stock adjustment of financial assets that accompanied the introduction
of the new 6-month certificates. Nevertheless, virtually all of the
growth of deposits at S&L's and MSB's is expected to continue to
come from sales of MMC's. Sample data for early December indicate
that S&L's are not only rolling over their maturing 6-month certificates,
but continuing to issue a substantial net volume of these instruments.
Aggressive marketing of MMC's is being induced by competitive pressures,
by a need for funds to meet mortgage loan commitments, and by FHLB
advances policies.1/
(16) If the Federal funds rate remains within the 9¾ to 10
per cent range over the intermeeting period, as envisioned under
alternative A, interest rates on short-term market instruments will
likely fluctuate within a narrow range. Private short-term rates
appear to have fully adjusted to the current funds rate level, and
no significant change in private short-term credit demands appears in
prospect for the weeks immediately ahead. The relative movement of
Treasury bill rates will, of course, be influenced by the level of
foreign exchange market intervention and the portfolio policies of
foreign official institutions.
(17) Yields on longer-term bonds are likely to remain
basically stable into the early weeks of January, barring unexpected
strength in the monetary aggregates or in current economic indicators.
The financing activity of corporations and municipalities is expected
to be seasonally light over the holiday period. In December, Treasury
financing activities will be confined to roll-overs of maturing 2-
and 4-year notes. Net borrowing by the Treasury in the domestic
market over the next several weeks is expected to be limited to a
$1¼ to $1¾ billion auction of 15-year bonds to be conducted around the
turn of the year; since participants are anticipating this offering,
they have presumably already discounted it.1/ With deposit flows
slowing somewhat, yields on commitments for new conventional mortgages
may continue to edge higher.
(18) Under alternative B, the Federal funds rate would
rise by mid-January to the midpoint of a 9¾ to 10½ per cent range.
M-1 growth would likely be in a 2 to 7 per cent annual rate range over
December-January, and M-1+ and M-2, respectively, in a ½ to 4½ and
rates of interest would further slow the growth of deposits subject
to fixed rate ceilings, induce more aggressive offerings of MMC's
and large denomination time deposits, and a tightening of bank lending
terms--with the prime loan rate moving up to 11¾ or 12 per cent.
Long-term yields would also probably move up, but the light financing
calendar and further evidence of the System's determination to con-
strain monetary growth would tend to limit such movement.
(19) If M-1, as expected, expands at a 4 per cent annual
rate in the fourth quarter, the longer-run growth range for this
aggregate implies an M-1 growth over the first three quarters of 1979
at a 2¾ per cent annual rate.1/ Assuming the staff's current GNP
projections and some downward shift in money demand, the staff believes
that such growth in M-1 is generally consistent with the Federal funds
rate ranges shown in Appendix I. Reflecting monetary restraint already
in train, the midpoint of alternative A would call for no further rise
in the funds rate over the longer-run policy period. The alternative
B pattern contemplates that an increase in the funds rate to a little
over 10 per cent in the intermeeting period would be maintained through
the first quarter of 1979. This additional restraint on monetary
expansion would imply that the funds rate could be lower than the
alternative A path by next summer, while still achieving the same
growth in the aggregates over the QIII '78 to QIII '79 period.
However, if the expected downward drift in money demand does not occur,
higher interest rates than indicated by either Federal funds path would
be required to achieve the desired growth in the aggregates.
Directive language
(20) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs
for the directive. The language added last month "giving due
regard ... to the program for supporting the foreign exchange value
of the dollar" has been retained along with the reference, added in
October, "to uncertainties associated with the introduction of ATS."
Alternative language consistent with the short-run specifications of
the alternatives discussed in the preceding section is shown for the
Committee's objective for the Federal funds rate early in the period.
At a later point, alternative language is also provided for placing main
emphasis either on monetary aggregates or, as was agreed at the
November meeting, on money market conditions. The specifications
adopted last month are shown in strike-through form.
In the short-run, the Committee seeks to achieve
bank reserve and money market conditions that are broadly con-
sistent with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates
cited above, while giving due regard to the program for
supporting the foreign exchange value of the dollar, to
developing conditions in domestic financial markets, and to
uncertainties associated with the introduction of ATS. Early
in the period before the next regular meeting, System open
market operations are to be directed at attaining a weekly
average Federal funds rate
(A) AT ABOUT THE CURRENT LEVEL.
(B) slightly above the current level.
Subsequently, operations shall be directed at maintaining the
weekly average Federal funds rate within the range of {DEL: 9¾-to-10]
____ TO ____ per cent. In deciding on the specific objective
for the Federal funds rate, the Manager is to be guided mainly
by a range of tolerance for the annual rate of growth over the
[DEL: November-December] DECEMBER-JANUARY period of [DEL: 6-to-9½] ____ TO
____ per cent in M-2, provided that the rate of growth in M-1
does not appear to exceed [DEL: 5] ____ per cent.
Money market emphasis
The objective for the funds rate is to be raised or
lowered within its range if the rate of growth of M-2 appears
to be close to or beyond the upper or lower limit of its range.
Weight is to be given to M-1 if it appears to be growing at
a rate close to or above its limit.
If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear to be
falling outside the limits of the indicated ranges at a time
when the objective for the funds rate has already been moved
to the corresponding limit of its range, the Manager will
promptly notify the Chairman, who wil then decide whether the
situation calls for supplementary instructions from the
Monetary aggregates emphasis
The objective for the funds rate is to be raised or
lowered in an orderly fashion within its range if the rate
of growth of M-2 appears to be significantly above or below
the midpoint of the indicated range. Weight is to be given
to M-1 if it appears to be growing at a rate close to or above
its limit.
If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear to be
falling outside the limits of the indicated ranges at a time
when the objective for the funds rate has already been moved
to the corresponding limit of its range, the Manager will
promptly notify the Chairman, who will then decide whether the
situation calls for supplementary instructions from the
