Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
February 24, 1978
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) February 24, 1978
CLASS I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent Developments
(1) M-1 increased at a 7-1/4 per cent annual rate in January,
but it appears to be declining at a 1/2 per cent rate in February. Thus,
growth over January and February combined is projected at around a 3-1/2
per cent annual rate, in the lower half of the FOMC's range. M-2 appears
to be expanding at a 6-1/2 per cent annual rate over the January-February
period, close to the mid-point of its range. Renewed expansion in savings
and small denomination time deposits at banks and a continued rise in
large denomination time deposits included in M-2 helped to maintain growth
in this aggregate in January.1/ At thrift institutions, on the other hand,
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over January-February Period
(SAAR in per cent)
Range Latest Estimates
deposit inflows slowed further in January and seem to be continuing
at a reduced pace in February. Over January and February, nonborrowed
reserves are expected to increase at a 17 per cent annual rate,
largely reflecting the surge in demand deposits around the turn of the
year and a rise in excess reserves possibly associated with difficulties
in reserve management due to severe weather.
(2) With incoming data indicating that the monetary aggregates
were growing at rates well within the Committee's ranges, the Account Manage-
ment has continued to seek a Federal funds rate of around 6¾ per cent
since the January FOMC meeting. Under these circumstances, short-term
interest rates generally have changed little on balance since mid-January
despite relatively strong short-term credit demands. The Treasury
has begun to raise new cash in its weekly auctions of 3- and 6-month
bills, and short-term borrowing by businesses continued sizable
in recent weeks. Bank loans to businesses accelerated substantially
in January and early February, more than offsetting a decline in commercial
paper issuance by nonfinancial corporations.
(4) In long-term credit markets, public bond offerings by
corporations over the intermeeting period were modest, and rates on
corporate bonds have changed little on balance since mid-January. At
the same time, municipal bond yields have fallen somewhat, as demands
for tax-exempt securities have continued to be quite strong. Mortgage
interest rates in both primary and secondary markets, on the other hand,
have edged upward further, reflecting pressures on fund availability
resulting from the slowing of deposit inflows to thrift institutions.
(5) Yields on Treasury coupon securities also have risen
slightly since mid-January. Both the Treasury and Federally-sponsored
agencies have been substantial net borrowers over this period. The
Federal Home Loan Bank System, for example, raised $1.4 billion of new
cash in conjunction with its February refinancing, to meet a growing
demand for advances from member institutions. The Treasury borrowed
about $6 billion of cash through regular issues of 2- and 4-year notes
since the last FOMC meeting, and obtained an additional $2 billion in
its regular mid-quarter refunding of $5 billion of maturing issues.1/
Noncompetitive tenders in the refunding auctions came to $2 billion,
about $1 billion above the total in the November refunding. In the
weeks following the auctions, the new issues have traded below their
average auction prices.
(6) The table on the following page shows (in terms of
percentage annual rates of change) related monetary and financial flows
over various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average Jan. '77 July '77 Oct. '77 Dec. '77
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(7) Shown below for Committee consideration are three
alternative longer-run growth ranges for the monetary aggregates
over the QIV '77-QIV '78 period, along with the ranges currently
in place.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Current
(8) Alternative B continues the ranges for M-1 and M-2
that were adopted by the Committee in October for the QIII '77-QIII '78
period. Alternatives A and C represent, respectively, somewhat more and
somewhat less expansive policy alternatives. Under all three
alternatives, the M-3 growth range is projected to be lower than
the current range for this aggregate. Since around year end, net
inflows of deposits to thrift institutions have persisted at a rate
considerably lower than previously anticipated, and, as a result, the
staff has reduced its projections of such inflows over the year ahead.
(9) Each of the alternatives presupposes an upward adjustment
in deposit ceiling rates at banks and thrift institutions of 50 basis
points on small-denomination time deposits; the adjustments in ceiling
rates are assumed to occur in April under alternative C, in May under
B, and in June under A. Without such adjustments, the increase in
market rates thought necessary to restrain M-1 growth to the mid-point
of the indicated ranges would lead to growth in M-2 and M-3 near
the lower ends of the ranges shown.1/
(10) The table below provides perspective on the relation-
ship among growth rates proposed for the QIV '77 to QIV '78 period
and the implied growth rates for more extended periods ending in
to a 5.6 per cent annual rate of expansion over the 15-month period
starting with QIII '77 and to a 6.3 per cent annual rate of growth
over the 18-month period beginning with QII '77--in both cases within
the current FOMC range but above the mid-point. The higher growth
rates over these longer periods reflect the sizable overshoot in
M-1 growth in the third quarter of last year and the more moderate
overshoot in the fourth quarter. M-1 growth at around the 5 per cent
mid-point of the proposed alternative C range would nearly compensate
for the slight fourth quarter overshoot but not for the larger third
quarter overshoot.
Period
QIV '77 to
QIII '77 to
QII '77 to
Memo: QIII
QIV '77 to
QIII '77 to
QII '77 to
Memo: QIII '
Growth Rates in Monetary Aggregates Assuming
Growth over QIV '77 - QIV '78 Period
at Mid-Point of Ranges for Alternatives
(Annual rate, compounded quarterly)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
(11) Shorter-run specifications for monetary aggregates
and the Federal funds rate believed consistent with the longer-run
alternatives are summarized below for Committee consideration.
(More detailed, and longer-term, data are shown in the tables on
pp. 8 and 9.)
Alt. A Alt. B
Ranges for Feb.-March
Federal funds rate
(Intermeeting period) 6 to 6½
Alt. C
to 5½
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1 M-2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
(12) A Federal funds rate centered on the recently prevailing
level of 6-3/4 per cent, as contemplated under alternative B, is likely
to be associated with M-1 growth over February-March in a 1 to 6 per cent
annual rate range. The February weakness in M-l, following several months
of strong growth, is thought by the staff to be transitory. Money growth
in March is expected to rebound to a little over a 7 per cent annual rate--
mainly because of the increase in transactions demands associated with the
projected strengthening of economic activity following the recent weather-
induced slowdown. The expected rebound in M-1 also reflects in some
degree projections indicating that the volume of tax refunds to individuals
will be large relative to other recent years.
(13) The February-March growth rate of M-1 shown under alterna-
tive B implies a first quarter expansion of about 4-3/4 per cent, annual
rate, well within the Committee's 4 to 6-1/2 per cent longer-run range.
However, the staff anticipates that further increases in market interest
rates will be required in order to constrain M-1 growth over the one-
year QIV '77 - QIV '78 period to the mid-point of that range. Even
though the staff has reduced its projection of economic growth this year,
nominal GNP is still expected to increase at an 11-1/4 per cent rate over
the QIV '77 - QIV '78 period, leading to relatively strong money demand.
In addition, the restraining impact on money demand from the relatively
sharp 1-3/4 percentage point increase in short-term interest rates that
took place between the spring and fall of last year will be exhausted
relatively soon; since October short-rates have risen only about another
in money demand relative to income, the Federal funds rate would probably
have to begin rising again in April and reach 8 per cent by fall in order
to constrain M-1 growth for the QIV '77-QIV '78 period to the mid-point
of the 4 to 6-1/2 per cent alternative B range.1/
(14) Growth in M-2 over the February-March period is likely
to be in a 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 per cent annual rate range under alternative B.
With market yields above the ceiling rates on savings deposits and all
maturities of small denomination time deposits at commercial banks,
inflows of such deposits are likely to remain modest in February-March.
However, growth in large denomination time deposits included in M-2 are
expected to continue to offset slow growth of deposits subject to Regu-
lation Q ceiling as banks aggressively seek funds to finance credit
(15) At thrift institutions the relatively attractive yields
available in the market for shorter-term investments have slowed total
deposit inflows so far in 1978, although ceiling rates on the longest-
term deposits are still somewhat above those on market instruments.
With no further increase in short-term interest rates, growth in deposits
at thrift institutions can be expected to remain modest in the near-term.
Consequently, S&L's are likely to limit their new commitment activity
and also--in financing takedowns of their record level of outstanding
commitments--to reduce their own liquidity and further increase borrowing
from FHL Banks. Although thrift deposit inflows are expected to rise
from their depressed first quarter pace if ceiling rates are raised in
the spring (as we are assuming), inflows will probably remain considerably
below the strong pace of expansion of 1977.
(16) With the Federal funds rate remaining near its present
generally are likely to fluctuate within a relatively narrow range over
the intermeeting period. A little upward rate pressure might develop in
short-term credit markets; the Treasury is expected to raise $10 billion
of new money in the bill market prior to the March and April tax dates,
and depository institutions are likely to continue liquidating shorter-
term Treasury issues to meet loan demands. However, intermediate- and
long-term market rates might decline a bit in the weeks immediately ahead.
Treasury demands in these maturity ranges are not likely to be unusually
large. In addition, the pace of new offerings by corporations and State
and local governments is expected to remain moderate, while the institu-
tional demand for bonds is likely to continue to be quite strong. Both
primary and secondary mortgage rates will probably continue to be under
upward pressure, given the slowing of deposit growth at the thrift
(17) Over the longer-run both short- and long-term interest
rates are likely to rise. Given the strength that is projected in
economic activity, rate pressures may become evident in spring and summer
as a result of expanding private credit demands and Federal Reserve efforts
to restrain money growth. Further increases in short- and intermediate-
term rates will be accompanied by reduced liquid asset holdings of
depository institutions, by increased commercial bank offerings of
large denomination time deposits, and by stepped up borrowing demands
of Federal housing agencies. The increases in short- and intermediate-
term rates will probably be transmitted to some extent to long-term
markets. However, as in 1977, such increases will be limited by the
continued high cash flows of insurance companies and pension funds.
(18) Under alternative C the Federal funds rate would rise
over the intermeeting period to the mid-point of a 7 to 7-1/2 per cent
range, and the February-March annual rate of growth of M-1 and M-2 would
likely be in 1/2 to 5-1/2 and 4 to 8 per cent annual rate ranges, respec-
tively. The 3-month Treasury bill rate would probably rise to about 7
per cent by mid-March, with commensurate adjustments in other short rates.
Member bank borrowings could be expected to rise sharply once again,
increasing pressures for a discount rate increase. At the same time,
the rise in short-term interest rates associated with this alternative
would tend to strengthen the dollar on international exchange markets.
(19) The tightening of money market conditions contemplated
under alternative C would further slow the net inflow of deposits sub-
ject to rate ceilings in the weeks immediately ahead and thus would
increase the need for an adjustment in deposit ceiling rates. Lending
policies of banks and thrift institutions would become more restrictive.
There would be increased pressure on Government support programs in the
mortgage area. The Home Loan Bank System would be expected to turn more
and more to the market to raise cash to support advances to savings and
loan associations, and mortgage bankers would increase takedowns of
existing FNMA commitments while also aggressively seeking new commit-
ments. In such an environment, the increase in short-term rates would
probably be rather promptly transmitted to the intermediate- and long-
term sectors of the market, where Government security dealers still have
a long position of moderate size in Treasury coupon issues.
(20) The near-term increase in interest rates under alterna-
tive C would work toward a reduction in growth of the aggregates over
the longer run. However, given the projected strength of money demand,
a further increase in interest rates would be required in order to limit
M-1 expansion to the mid-point of the 4 to 6 per cent alternative C range
over the QIV '77-QIV '78 period. The staff would expect the funds rate
under this alternative to average 7-3/4 per cent in the second quarter
and to rise to 8-1/4 per cent by fall.
(21) Alternative A involves a reduction in the Federal funds
rate over the intermeeting period to the 6-1/2 per cent mid-point of a
reversal of the early January rise in short-term interest rates. Long-
term rates, on the other hand, might not retrace all of their recent
increases if, as appears likely at the moment, market participants con-
cluded that the decline in short-term rates was likely to be temporary.
Meanwhile, the dollar would probably tend to soften in international
exchange markets.
(22) The approach of alternative A appears most consistent
with a monetary policy that encourages more rapid growth in the monetary
aggregates over the longer-run than under either alternatives B or C.
Nevertheless, given the strength projected for economic activity, the
near-term decline in the funds rate under A would probably soon have to
be reversed to restrain growth in the aggregates to rates consistent
with the mid-points of longer-run ranges for alternative A. The funds
rate would have to begin rising again in the second quarter and might
reach a high for the year of about 7-3/4 per cent by fall.
Directive language
(23) Given below are alternatives for the operational
paragraphs of the directive. The first formulation places main
emphasis on near-term rates of growth in monetary aggregates. The
second formulation, like the directive adopted at the last meeting,
places main emphasis on money market conditions; it shows--in strike-
through form--the specifications adopted at the last meeting. As
suggested below, the particular language needed in the opening lines
of the money market formulation would depend on the specific conditions
sought; the three alternatives shown--calling, respectively, for
somewhat easier, prevailing, and somewhat firmer money market condi-
tions--are intended to be associated with the specifications discussed
in the preceding section under alternatives A, B, and C.
"Monetary Aggregates" Formulation
The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of growth
in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed to be reasonably consistent
with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the
preceding paragraph. Specifically, at present, it expects the
annual growth rates over the February-March period to be within
the ranges of ____ to ____ per cent for M-1 and ____ to ____
per cent for M-2. In the judgment of the Committee such growth
rates are likely to be associated with a weekly-average Federal
funds rate of about ____ per cent. If, giving approximately
equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates over
the 2-month period will deviate significantly from the mid-points
of the indicated ranges, the operational objective for the
Federal funds rate shall be modified in an orderly fashion within
a range for ____ to ____ per cent. In the conduct of day-to-day
operations, account shall be taken of emerging financial market
conditions, including the unsettled conditions in foreign exchange
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the operating constraints specified above are proving to be
significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the
Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls for
supplementary instructions from the Committee.
"Money Market" Formulation
At this time, the Committee seeks to maintain about the
prevailing money market conditions (OR TO ACHIEVE SOMEWHAT EASIER
OR SOMEWHAT FIRMER MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS) during the period
immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates appear to
be growing at approximately the rates currently expected, which
are believed to be on a path reasonably consistent with the
longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the preceding
paragraph. Specifically, the Committee seeks to maintain the
weekly-average Federal funds rate at about [DEL: the current level]
____ per cent, so long as M-1 and M-2 appear to be growing over
the [DEL: January-February] FEBRUARY-MARCH period at annual rates within
ranges of [DEL: 2½ to 7½] ____ TO ____ per cent and [DEL: 5-to-9] ____ TO
____ per cent, respectively. If giving approximately equal
weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates over the
the indicated ranges, the operational objective for the weekly-
average Federal funds rate shall be modified in an orderly
the conduct of day-to-day operations, account shall be taken
of emerging financial market conditions, including the unsettled
conditions in foreign exchange markets.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the operating constraints specified above are proving to be
significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify
the Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls
for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
