Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
November 17, 1978
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC
November 17, 1978
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Following a sharp September increase, M-1 slowed to a
expanding at a 2¼ per cent rate in November. The slower growth of M-1
this month reflects the impact on the daily average November level of
what appears to be a transitory drop in demand deposits in late
October; in addition, the introduction of Automatic Transfer Service
(ATS) is also dampening M-l growth.1/ For October and November
combined, growth is projected at a 2¾ per cent annual rate, well below
the limit set by the FOMC. M-2 appears to be expanding at about
a 7½ per cent annual rate, the midpoint of its FOMC range. Growth
in small time deposits picked up in October, reflecting record
inflows of the 6-month certificates, but savings deposits declined
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over October-November Period
Ranges Latest Estimates
M-1 Upper limit of 6½ 2¾
Memo: Federal funds rate 8¾ to 9¼ Avg. for statement
balances at all commercial banks had risen to $765 million by Nov.
and growth of large-denomination time deposits included in this
measure, while accelerating at month-end, moderated on a daily
average basis. Total deposit growth at nonbank thrift institutions
also moderated a bit in October, despite increased issuance of the
new money market time deposit.
(2) Following the October FOMC meeting, the Account Manage-
ment raised its funds rate objective to the 9 per cent mid-point of
the 8¾ to 9¼ per cent range specified by the Committee. Funds generally
traded around the upper limit of this range, however, as the Desk first
encountered difficulty in providing reserves because of a shortage of
collateral and then in the last days of October was reluctant to take
aggressive action to reduce the rate in view of conditions in the
foreign exchange market. To strengthen the dollar in foreign exchange
markets and counter inflationary pressures, on November 1 the discount
rate was raised one percentage point to 9½ per cent,1/ reserve require-
ments on large denomination time deposits were increased 2 percentage
points, and up to $30 billion of foreign currencies were mobilized for
intervention in foreign exchange markets. The FOMC also raised its
funds rate range to 9½ to 9¾ per cent. In light of the volatile
conditions in foreign exchange markets, the Desk limited its reserve
supplying actions in the days immediately following the announcement,
and funds traded at rates somewhat above the upper end of the new
range. In recent days, though, Federal funds have traded at rates within
the Committee's new range--mainly within the upper part of the range.
(3) The trade-weighted exchange value of the dollar and the
value of the dollar against key currencies have risen substantially
since the November 1 announcement and, as can be seen in the table below,
the value of the dollar has recovered to its August-September levels
(with the exception of the mark). Operations in foreign exchange
markets on behalf of the Treasury and System accounts since the
November 1 announcement have resulted in net sales of $2.4 billion
of German marks, $350 million of Swiss francs, and $200 million of
Japanese yen.
Recent Changes in Dollar Exchange Rates
(per cent change)
Aug.-Sept. Present
average to Oct. 31 level
Oct. 31 to present (Nov. 17)
Major currencies:
(4) Private short-term interest rates generally rose
following the October FOMC meeting and then increased further in
response to the System's tightening moves in early November, recording
gains of 1 percentage point or more over the intermeeting period. Rates
have been under less upward pressure in the Treasury bill market, with
the 3-month Treasury bill rate about unchanged on balance over the
period and longer-term bills up 35 to 55 basis points. The
difference in movement between Treasury and private rates appears mainly
to reflect the impact of international financial flows. Foreign official
institutions have made substantial purchases of bills over this
period.1/ At the same time, it seems likely that private capital
outflows have added to upward pressures on private short-term rates.
For example, it appears that a substantial part of the large CD
issuance by U.S. banks has been undertaken to finance both loans
to foreign banks and advances to their own foreign branches.
Recent Changes in Interest Rates
Change Recent
Oct. 17 to Oct. 31 to level
present present (Nov. 16)
(5) The November 1 announcement had a constructive
impact on bond markets. Treasury bond yields dropped rather sub-
stantially immediately after the announcement. They have fluctuated
around these lower levels in subsequent market trading, although the
Treasury has in recent weeks raised $2.7 billion in new cash through
less than Treasury yields, while corporate bond rates have stabilized.
(6) Although bond yields have declined or shown little
change since the beginning of the month, mortgage yields have risen.
By mid-November the average yield on new mortgage loan commitments at
savings and loan associations had moved to over 10 per cent, despite
constraints imposed by usury ceilings in some States. The increase in
yields reflects both the recent slowing of thrift deposit inflows and
the continued strong demands for credit. Savings and loan associations
increased outstanding mortgage commitments again in September, and
growth in their mortgage holdings is estimated to have increased
somewhat in October.
(7) The table on the next page shows percentage annual
rates of change in related monetary and financial flows over various
time periods.
all issues are now trading at substantial premia.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Months
Average Oct. '77 Apr. '78 July '78 Sept. '78
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(8) Two alternative specifications for the monetary
aggregates and the Federal funds rate for the November-December period
are shown below for Committee consideration. Both are believed con-
sistent with the longer-run growth ranges adopted by the Committee
last month for the QIII '78 to QIII '79 policy period. Alternative A
calls for no near-term change in the Federal funds rate, while
Alternative B increases policy restraint in coming weeks. (More detailed
and longer-term data are contained in the tables on pp. 8 and 9).
Alt. A Alt. B
Ranges for Nov.-Dec.
(9) Alternative A contemplates a Federal funds rate
between now and the next meeting centered in the prevailing 9½ to 9¾
per cent range. Growth in M-1 over the November-December period is
expected to be in a 1 to 6 per cent annual rate range--assuming that
transfers to savings deposits because of ATS will reduce M-1 growth
over these two months by 3 to 5 percentage points. Some acceleration
in M-1 growth is anticipated in December. The relatively slow growth
of October-November in part represented the public's adjustment to
the very rapid expansion in money that occurred in September. In
December, we expect the relatively strong underlying demand for money
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly average:
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
to reassert itself. Over the fourth quarter as a whole, M-1 growth
is expected to be 6¼ per cent on the assumption that ATS effects
reduce growth by 1 percentage point for the period.
(10) The specifications in the table on page 7 also show
the supplementary aggregate M-1+, should the Committee wish to provide
additional quantitative guidance to the Desk during a period when
measured M-1 growth will be reduced to an uncertain extent by ATS.
Over the two-month policy period, this supplementary aggregate is
expected to increase in a 2 to 6 per cent annual rate range--the
midpoint of which is below the 6 per cent average annual rate of
growth of this aggregate since mid-year.
(11) Expansion of M-2 under alternative A is likely to be
in a 6½ to 10½ per cent annual rate range over the November-December
period. The interest-bearing component of this aggregate will be
buoyed by shifts from demand to ATS savings accounts, as well as
by some expected shifts of funds from thrift accounts and other
nonbank sources as the public attempts to meet minimum balance require-
ments on the new transactions accounts. The total of other interest-
bearing deposits in M-2 is expected to moderate slightly from the third
quarter pace, despite the recent higher level of market rates of
interest. Issuance of 6-month money market time deposits (MMTDs)
and large-denomination certificates is expected to offset a further
contraction of nontransferable savings accounts and fixed ceiling
rate time deposits. Banks are likely to continue offering MMTDs
and large-denomination time deposits aggressively in order to finance
their lending. MMTDs are particularly attractive to large banks
since their effective cost is currently below that on large-
denomination CD's by about 1 percentage point.
(12) The staff has reduced somewhat its projection of
thrift flows for the current quarter in view of their recent slowing
as well as the higher than previously assumed level of market rates.
There may be some continuing tendency for thrifts to reduce promotion
of MMTDs or to cease offering ceiling rates on such certificates, but
by and large the institutions are expected to be under competitive
pressure to continue offering ceiling rates, particularly after
December 1 when outstanding MMTDs begin to mature. Furthermore, the
FHLBB has made it known to S&Ls that advances will not be liberally
available to institutions that do not make reasonable efforts to roll
over maturing 6-month certificates.
(13) If the Federal funds rate remains around the 9½ to 9¾
per cent level over the intermeeting period, as envisioned under
alternative A, short-term market rates may show mixed changes.
Private short-term credit demands are expected to remain relatively
strong in coming weeks. Nonetheless, the relatively wide spread between
rates on private short-term instruments and the Federal funds rate
may tend to narrow as it becomes clear that the System is not tightening
its policy stance further. The Treasury is expected to offer a
sizable volume of cash management bills in early December and to
continue to put more emphasis on 3-month bills in its weekly bill
offering. Thus, rates on shorter-term Treasury bills may tend to
move up somewhat from current relatively low levels, unless foreign
central bank acquisitions of these instruments once again become
sizable. With regard to longer-term markets, the expected issuance
of foreign-currency denominated securities will likely reduce the
volume of debt issued in the U.S. market over the next few months.
With a modest calendar of corporate and tax-exempt issues also in
prospect, bond yields are unlikely to rise from current levels and
may even decline. Mortgage rates, on the other hand, can be expected
to move higher as demands for loans continue strong at a time when
the thrift inflows are expected to slow.
(14) Under alternative B, the Federal funds rate would
rise by mid-December to the midpoint of a 9¾ to 10½ per cent range.
M-1 growth would likely be in a ½ to 5½ per cent annual rate range
over November-December, and M-1+ and M-2, respectively in 1½ to 5½
and 6 to 10 per cent ranges. The further increases in short-term
rates would slow M-2 and M-3 growth only modestly, as more aggressive
offerings of 6-month certificates and large-denomination time
deposits could be expected partly to offset weakness in other deposits.
(15) A further increase in the funds rate against a
backdrop of recent slow growth in the aggregates would add support to
the view that the Federal Reserve is committed to an aggressive
policy to counter inflation and support the dollar. In reaction,
short-term interest rates would likely adjust promptly to the
higher funds rate. However, the impact on bond yields is less clear.
Although capital and money market yields generally tend to move
together, they might not in this case if the inflation anticipations
of market participants are lowered by this action. The dollar would
also be expected to improve somewhat further in exchange markets.
(16) Appendix I shows the expected Federal funds rate
ranges over the QIII '78 to QIII '79 policy period. In view of the
monetary restraint already in train, the midpoint of the alternative
A path would call for no further increase in the funds rate over this
period. The alternative B pattern contemplates that the increase
in the funds rate in the intermeeting period would be maintained
through the first quarter of 1979. This additional restraint on
monetary expansion implies that the funds rate could be lower than
the alternative A path by next summer while still achieving the
same growth in the aggregates over the QIII '78 to QIII '79 period.
Directive language
(18) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs
for the directive. The language added last month "giving due
regard . . . to uncertainties associated with the introduction of
ATS" has been retained. The form of the first paragraph below
is similar to the directive adopted at the last meeting, while
additional alternative language is provided for placing main
emphasis either on monetary aggregates or on money market conditions
should the Committee wish to return to a formulation similar to that
used for some time before the October meeting. Should the Committee
wish to employ M-1+ as a guide for operations, appropriate language
is shown in brackets. The specifications adopted at the September
meeting are shown in strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions that are broadly consistent
with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited above,
while giving due regard to developing conditions in domestic
and international financial markets/more generally and to
uncertainties associated with the introduction of ATS. Early
in the period before the next regular meeting, System open
market operations are to be directed at attaining a weekly
average Federal funds rate
(A) AT ABOUT THE CURRENT LEVEL.
(B) slightly above the current level.
Subsequently, operations shall be directed at maintaining the
weekly average Federal funds rate within the range of [DEL: 9¼ to
objective for the Federal funds rate, the Manager is to be
guided mainly by a range of tolerance for the annual rate of
growth [DEL: in M-2] over the [DEL: October-November] NOVEMBER-DECEMBER
period of [____ TO ____ PER CENT IN M-1+ AND] [DEL: 5½ to 9½]
____ TO ____ per cent IN M-2, provided that the rate in M-1
does not appear to exceed [DEL: 6½] ____ per cent.
Money market emphasis
THE OBJECTIVE FOR THE FUNDS RATE IS TO BE RAISED OR
LOWERED IN AN ORDERLY FASHION WITHIN ITS RANGE IF THE RATES
OF GROWTH OF [M-1+ AND] M-2 APPEARS TO BE CLOSE TO OR BEYOND
THE UPPER OR LOWER LIMIT OF ITS RANGE. WEIGHT IS TO BE GIVEN
TO M-1 IF IT APPEARS TO BE GROWING AT A RATE CLOSE TO OR
ABOVE ITS LIMIT.
Monetary aggregates emphasis
THE OBJECTIVE FOR THE FUNDS RATE IS TO BE RAISED OR
LOWERED IN AN ORDERLY FASION WITHIN ITS RANGE IF THE RATE OF
GROWTH OF [M-1+ AND] M-2 APPEARS TO BE SIGNIFICANTLY ABOVE
OR BELOW THE MIDPOINT OF THE INDICATED RANGE. WEIGHT IS TO
BE GIVEN TO M-1 IF IT APPEARS TO BE GROWING AT A RATE CLOSE TO
OR ABOVE ITS LIMIT.
IF THE RATES OF GROWTH IN THE AGGREGATES APPEAR TO BE
FALLING OUTSIDE THE LIMITS OF THE INDICATED RANGES AT A TIME
WHEN THE OBJECTIVE FOR THE FUNDS RATE HAS ALREADY BEEN MOVED
TO THE CORRESPONDING LIMIT OF ITS RANGE, THE MANAGER WILL
PROMPTLY NOTIFY THE CHAIRMAN, WHO WILL THEN DECIDE WHETHER
THE SITUATION CALLS FOR SUPPLEMENTARY INSTRUCTIONS FROM THE
