Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
August 11, 1978
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) August 11, 1978
CLASS I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M-1 increased at a 5.1 per cent annual rate in July and
appears to be expanding over the July-August period at an annual rate of
about 6 per cent, the mid-point of the Committee's range. M-2
expansion during July and August is projected to average almost 9 per
cent at an annual rate, in the upper half of the Committee's range.
Large-denomination time deposits included in M-2 have increased sharply
in recent weeks, while growth in small-denomination time deposits
slowed and savings deposits declined somewhat. At nonbank thrift
institutions, deposit inflows strengthened further in July. Although
sales of the new money market certificates picked up in July at both
banks and thrifts, only the latter appear to be gaining substantial net
new money through the instrument.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over July-August Period
Ranges Latest Estimates
(2) Since the July FOMC meeting Federal funds have traded
within a 7 to 8 per cent range, while projected growth in the mone-
tary aggregates over the July-August period has also remained well
within the Committee's ranges. Although the funds rate was slightly
higher during the inter-meeting period than in preceding weeks, short-
and long-term market interest rates declined by as much as 20 and
developed in response to a shift in expectations, apparently induced
by recent moderate growth in the monetary aggregates, failure of the
Federal funds rate to move even higher, and signs of slowing in
economic expansion. The rally was encouraged by efforts of Treasury
security dealers and other active trading accounts to cover short
positions in coupon issues and to build up larger long positions in
bills. In addition, demand for Treasury bills increased as a result
of substantial foreign central bank investment of dollars obtained in
currency exchange support operations. Most recently, a portion of
the general rate decline has been reversed.
(3) Corporate bond offerings to the public have been
relatively light in recent weeks, but issuance of municipal bonds
has been exceptionally heavy, partly reflecting a spurt in advance
refunding issues in advance of a September 1 change in Treasury
regulations. The Treasury also raised about $5 billion of new money
during the inter-meeting period. In its quarterly refunding operation,
the Treasury sold $7.7 billion of new debt instruments--including
$700 million issued to foreign official accounts on a non-competitive
basis--to roll over $4.4 billion of maturing debt. Aggressive bidding
by investors and a sizable volume of private non-competitive tenders
left the dealer community with only about 35 per cent of the total awards
to the domestic public. Dealers have thus far distributed about two-
thirds of their awards.
(4) The improved deposit flows to thrift institutions and
reduction in market interest rates have reduced the pressure on mortgage
rates. While mortgage indebtedness apparently has continued to expand
at about the stronger second-quarter pace, average rates on new home
loan commitments at S&L's have edged up only slightly in recent weeks.
Moreover, fewer institutions have been reporting that lendable funds
are in substantially short supply.
(5) Growth in commercial bank credit rebounded in July,
reflecting a very strong advance in total loans and a substantial rise
in total investments. Real estate and consumer loans continued to
rise at relatively strong rates. Growth in business loans also picked
up from June's reduced pace, but remained below that recorded on
average over the first half of the year. To help finance bank credit
expansion, banks issued sizable amounts of negotiable CD's and other
large time deposits.
(6) The table on the next page shows percentage annual
rates of changes in related monetary and financial flows over various
time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average July '77 Jan. '78 Apr. '78 June '78
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(7) Tabulated below for Committee consideration are two
alternative short-run specifications for the Federal funds rate and
the monetary aggregates. (More detailed and longer-term data are con-
tained in the tables on pp. 6 and 7.)
Alt. A Alt. B
Ranges for Aug.-Sept.
(8) Alternative A contemplates continuation of a Federal
funds rate around the mid-point of the existing 7¾ to 8 per cent range.
Under the circumstances, M-1 growth over the August-September period
is expected to accelerate into a 5½ to 9½ per cent, annual rate,
range--bringing the level of M-1 by September a shade above that
implied by the upper bound of the Committee's newly adopted longer-
run range, as may be seen from chart 1 on the following page.
M-1 growth in June and July may have been held down by an unusually
rapid run-up in U.S. Government deposits, and such deposits are
projected to decline in September. Moreover, transactions demands
for cash are likely to be fairly strong in the third quarter as a
whole, when nominal GNP is projected to rise at about an 11 per cent
annual rate. The projected M-1 increase for August and September would
lead to an expansion in the third quarter at about a 6¼ per cent
annual rate, and would imply a rise in velocity of 4¼ per cent at an
annual rate (see Appendix II).
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1 M-2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average:
(9) M-2 in the August-September period under alternative A
is expected to grow in a 7 to 11 per cent annual rate range. The
interest-bearing component of M-2 may expand at about a 10 per cent
annual rate over the period. This represents a slight slowing from
the July rate of growth, but is more rapid than in the first half of
the year. With inflows of deposits subject to ceiling rates remaining
sluggish, banks are expected to sell substantial amounts of large
time deposits--both non-negotiable and negotiable--to finance continued
relatively strong credit demands.
(10) Inflows of interest-bearing deposits to thrift institu-
tions are projected to slow over the weeks ahead from the rapid July
pace. The impact of the initial shifting of funds from outstanding
financial assets to the 6-month money market certificate, which has
been aggressively marketed by thrift institutions, may soon run its
course. Even so, as with the interest-bearing component of M-2,
thrift deposits are expected to grow somewhat more rapidly than in the
first half of the year.
(11) Under alternative A, the recent upward readjustment
of market rates, following the unexpectedly sharp decline of recent
weeks, may continue, with rates returning closer to their mid-July
levels. Basically, however, demands on credit markets are not expected
to strengthen significantly over the period. Corporate bond offerings
are likely to remain near their recent reduced pace, municipal volume
should drop off, and Treasury credit demands are not expected to pick
up until later in the fall. In short-term markets, the 3-month
Treasury bill rate is still quite low relative to the Federal funds
rate--a spread of about one percentage point--and the bill rate should
rise more than other short rates unless there is a substantial volume
of foreign central bank purchases.
(12) If the funds rate were to move up to the mid-point of
the 7¾ to 8½ per cent alternative B range, the upward adjustment
in market rates would likely be prompt and marked. The 3-month bill
rate should move toward 7¼ per cent, and pressures on the CD and
commercial paper rates should generate a further rise in the prime
loan rate. The rise of interest rates on Treasury coupon issues
would probably reverse all of the recent decline in such yields,
and perhaps go somewhat further. And corporate bond yields may
also rise fairly substantially given the prevailing narrow rate spread
between Treasury and corporate issues.
(13) Growth in M-1 and M-2 under alternative B may be
in ranges of 5 to 9 and 6½ to 10½ per cent, respectively. It is
expected that continued issuance of the 6-month money market certificate
by banks and thrift institutions will tend to moderate adverse impacts
of rising interest rates on inflows of small-denomination time and
savings deposits; the beneficial effect is likely to be most marked
at thrift institutions, if recent experience is any guide. Neverthe-
less, the rising marginal cost of time and savings deposits, if not
an actual slowing of deposit inflows, is likely to exert additional
upward pressure on primary mortgage interest rates.
(14) The staff still expects that interest rates between
now and mid-1979 will have to rise beyond those contemplated
under the short-run specifications for alternative B--given projec-
tions for GNP growth--if M-1 growth over the one-year QII '78 to
QII '79 period is to be around the upper limit1/ of the 4 to 6 per
cent range adopted for that aggregate. Federal funds rate projections
through the second quarter of next year are shown in appendix I.
Directive language
(15) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for
the directive. The language of alternative A is consistent with the
specifications of alternative A discussed in the preceding section. Like
the directive adopted at the last meeting, it places main emphasis on
money market conditions and calls for operations directed at maintain-
ing the weekly-average Federal funds rate within the range of 7-3/4 to
(16) The language of alternative B is consistent with the
specifications of the tightening alternative discussed in the preced-
ing section; it calls for operations directed initially at attaining
a weekly-average Federal funds rate slightly or somewhat above the
current level. This formulation also provides variants that enable
the Committee to place main emphasis either on money market conditions
or on monetary aggregates.
In the short run, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve
and money market conditions that are broadly consistent with the
longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited above, while
giving due regard to developing conditions in financial markets
more generally. During the period until the next regular meet-
ing, System open market operations shall be directed
Alternative A
at maintaining the weekly-average Federal funds rate within the
range of 7-3/4 to 8 per cent. In deciding on the specific objec-
tive for the Federal funds rate the Manager shall be guided mainly
by the relationship between the latest estimates of annual rates
of growth in the [DEL: July-August] AUGUST-SEPTEMBER period of M-1 and
M-2 and the following ranges of tolerance: [DEL: 4 to 8] ____ TO
____ per cent for M-1 and [DEL:6 to 10] ____ TO ____ per cent for
M-2. If, giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, their
rates of growth appear to be close to or beyond the upper or lower
limits of the indicated ranges, the objective for the funds rate
shall be raised or lowered in an orderly fashion within its range.
If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear to be above
the upper limit or below the lower limit of the indicated ranges
at a time when the objective for the funds rate has already been
moved to the corresponding limit of its range, the Manager is
promptly to notify the Chairman who will then decide whether the
situation calls for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
Alternative B
INITIALLY at [DEL: maintaining the] ATTAINING A weekly-average Federal
funds rate [DEL: within the range of 7-3/4 to 8 per cent] SLIGHTLY (OR
SOMEWHAT) ABOVE THE CURRENT LEVEL. SUBSEQUENTLY, OPERATIONS SHALL
BE DIRECTED AT MAINTAINING THE WEEKLY-AVERAGE FEDERAL FUNDS RATE
WITHIN THE RANGE OF ____ TO ____ PER CENT. In deciding on
the specific objective for the Federal funds rate the Manager shall
be guided mainly by the relationship between the latest estimates
of annual rates of growth in the [DEL: July-August] AUGUST-SEPTEMBER period
of M-1 and M-2 and the following ranges of tolerance: [DEL: 4-to-8] ____
TO ____ per cent for M-1 and [DEL: 6-to-10] ____ TO ____ per cent for
M-2. If, giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, their
rates of growth appear to be
Monetary aggregates emphasis
SIGNIFICANTLY ABOVE OR BELOW THE MIDPOINTS
Money market emphasis
close to or beyond the upper or lower limits
of the indicated ranges, the objective for the funds rate shall
be raised or lowered in an orderly fashion within its range.
If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear to be above
the upper limit or below the lower limit of the indicated ranges
at a time when the objective for the funds rate has already been
moved to the corresponding limit of its range, the Manager is
promptly to notify the Chairman who will then decide whether the
situation calls for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
