Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
September 15, 1978
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC September 15, 1978
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Growth in M-1 picked up to about a 7¾ per cent annual
rate in August and appears to be accelerating further in September.
For August and September, M-1 is projected to expand at about a 9 per
cent annual rate, one percentage point above the upper end of the FOMC's
short-run range. M-2 is projected to increase at about an 11¼ per cent
annual rate over August and September, more than one percentage point
above the upper end of the Committee's range.1/ M-2 growth has been
bolstered by a continued sharp rise in the large denomination time
deposits included in this measure. Savings deposits at banks also
increased markedly in August following two months of decline.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over August-September Period
Ranges Latest Estimates
M-1 4 to 8 9.0
M-2 6 to 10 11.3
Memo: Federal funds rate Avg. for statement
(per cent per annum) 7.75 to 8.50 week ending
1/ These figures do not incorporate revisions based on recently available
March 1978 Call Report benchmark data for nonmember banks and technical
adjustments related to a recently discovered cash items bias. The
revised aggregates will be published on September 21. As shown in
Appendix Table III, the benchmark revisions increase growth rates for
M-1 by 0.5 percentage point for the year-to-date and reduce the growth
rate for M-2 over the same period by 0.3 of a point. All tables on
subsequent pages of this report (with the exception of Appendix V and
the first table following the appendices) are based on the revised
series.
Growth in total deposits at thrift institutions was sustained in August
and early September at about July's rapid pace, although survey results--
available for S&L's--indicate that sales of the 6-month certificate in
August dropped to roughly half the rate of June and July.
(2) Following the August FOMC meeting, incoming data
suggested that growth in the key aggregates over August and September
would likely be around the upper ends of the ranges specified by the
Committee. Accordingly, by late August the Account Management had raised
the funds rate objective to the 8¼ per cent area, the upper end of the
range specified by the FOMC at its August meeting. On September 8, with
M-1 and M-2 both projected to grow at rates significantly above the
upper ends of their respective ranges, the FOMC, in a telephone meeting,
voted to raise the higher end of the funds rate range to 8 ½ per cent
and instructed the Desk to aim promptly for a Federal funds rate of
8-3/8 per cent. On August 18, for international as well as domestic
reasons, the discount rate was raised 1/2 of a percentage point to 7-3/4
per cent. However, until the most recent week, member bank borrowing
remained relatively large, reflecting the further rise in the Federal
funds and other money market rates. On September 15, major banks initiated
an increase in the prime rate from 9-1/4 to 9-1/2 per cent.
(3) Yields on short-dated market instruments generally have
advanced around ½ to ¾ percentage point since the August FOMC meeting.
Bond market yields, on the other hand, have continued to move down
somewhat, apparently in part because participants still hold the view
that, with economic activity slowing, interest rates are near their
peak levels for the current expansion period.
(4) As can be seen in the table below, since reaching their
highest levels of the current expansion in the week before the July
FOMC meeting, long-term corporate yields have declined about ½ percentage
point. This decline reflects not only the shift in interest rate
expectations that occurred in July, but also the relatively light
corporate financing calendar. Declines in yields on municipal bonds
have been more moderate, as a heavy volume of refunding activity
pushed the total volume of offerings in this sector to a record level
in August. While the proceeds from these refundings were channeled
into nonmarketable Treasury debt, the Treasury also has sold a sub-
stantial volume of marketable debt in the period. In contrast to bond
yields, short-term interest rates have advanced on balance since mid-
July along with the rise in the Federal funds rate; upward pressures on
bill rates were reinforced by foreign central banks sales of about
$1.7 billion of these instruments since the August FOMC meeting.
Interest Rates on Selected Dates
(in per cent)
Change Week
Week Ending Of July 12
July 12 Current to Current
Short-term 1/ 2/
Federal Funds Rate 7.72- 8.33- +.61
Treasury Bill, 3-month 7.15 7.77 +.62
Commercial Paper, 90-119 day 7.84 8.43 +.59
New Issue CD's, 90-day (Highest
quoted) 8.04 8.50 +.46
Long-term
U.S. Treasury, 20-year 8.72 8.37 p -.35
Corporate AAA, Recently Offered 9.22 8.72 p -.50
Municipal, Bond Buyer 6.32 6.02 -.30
1/ Average for statement week ending July 12.
2/ Average for statement week ending September 13.
(5) Real estate and consumer loans at banks are estimated
to have posted further large gains in August. Growth in business
loans also picked up but remained well below rates established in the
first half of the year. In addition to funds obtained from growth in
M-2 type deposits, banks financed the expansion in their loan port-
folios by increasing their nondeposit liabilities and reducing their
security holdings. Given improved deposits flows, outstanding mortgage
commitments at S&L's did not fall further, following a number of months
of decline, and their mortgage lending probably picked up in August.
Yields on new conventional mortgages have edged a bit lower in recent
(6) The table on the next page shows percentage annual
rates of change in related monetary and financial flows over various
time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Months
1976 & Aug. '78 Aug. '78 Aug. '78 Aug. '71
1977 over over over over
Average Aug. '77 Feb. '78 May '78 July '7
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
1/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
2/ Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on total loa
and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institutions--which
are derived from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures. Growth rat
for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect
discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(7) The table below presents for Committee consideration
two alternative specifications for the Federal funds rate and the
monetary aggregates for the September-October period. (More detailed
and longer-term data are contained in the tables on pp. 7 and 8).
Alt. A Alt. B
Ranges for Sept.-Oct.
M-1 6½ to 10½ 6 to 10
M-2 8 to 12 7½ to 11½
Federal funds rate
(Intermeeting period) 8 to 8¾ 8¼ to 9
(8) Alternative A contemplates a Federal funds rate between
now and the next meeting centered on the prevailing 8-3/8 per cent
level. Growth in M-1 over the September-October period is expected
to be in a 6½ to 10½ per cent annual rate range, largely in reflection
of the stronger growth of this aggregate that appears in train for
September. If M-1 expands at the mid-point of the expected range,
its October level will be above that implied by the upper
end of the FOMC's current longer-run range, as indicated in the upper
panel of Chart 1 on the following page.
(9) For the third quarter, the annual rate of M-1 growth
is expected to be around 7-1/4 per cent. This represents a considerable
slowing from the rate of the second quarter, and reflects the decelera-
tion of economic activity from the extraordinary spring pace and the
lagged response to rising short-term interest rates.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1 M-2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
1978 August 356.8 356.8 853.5 853.5
September 360.0 359.9 861.9 861.6
October 361.9 361.6 867.7 867.0
1978 QII 350.6 350.6 835.4 835.4
QIII 357.0 357.0 853.9 853.8
QIV 363.5 363.2 872.9 872.2
1979 QI 368.0 367.7 888.6 887.8
QII 372.5 372.5 904.4 904.0
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
6.2 6.2QII '78-QII '79 8.3 8.2
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
1978 August 1454.9 1454.9 939.1 939.1
September 1470.5 1470.2 949.0 949.0
October 1483.1 1482.3 958.3 957.9
1978 QII 1420.4 1420.4 916.5 916.5
QIII 1455.4 1455.3 940.5 940.5
QIV 1494.1 1493.2 968.5 967.5
1979 QI 1525.0 1523.9 996.0 993.5
QII 1554.9 1554.0 1023.6 1020.1
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average:
(10) Expansion in M-2 under alternative A is likely to be in
an 8 to 12 per cent annual rate range over the September-October period,
raising this aggregate by October to the level implied by the top of
its current longer-run range, as shown in the top panel of Chart 2.
The interest-bearing component of M-2 is expected to slow markedly from
its recent pace as the year progresses. However, given the strength of
time and savings deposits thus far in September, growth over the September-
October period in the time deposit component of M-2 may be at around an
11 per cent annual rate--considerably above the average pace of the
first half of the year. Savings deposit growth is not likely to be sus-
tained at the August pace, but issuance of 6-month certificates should
support growth of small time deposits and banks are expected to con-
tinue to sell sizable amounts of large-denomination time deposits to
meet loan demands.
(11) The staff continues to expect inflows of deposits to
thrift institutions to slow from their extraordinarily rapid recent rate,
which has been affected by continued shifts from existing financial
assets to the new money market certificates. Nevertheless, because
deposit growth at S&L's and MSB's has been larger than expected in recent
weeks, our projection of total thrift deposit flows has been raised from
the last month. Indeed, with growth in the other monetary aggregates
also strong, it is likely, as shown in the upper panel of Chart 3, that
M-3 in October will be somewhat above the level implied by the upper end
of the FOMC's current longer-run range.
(12) If the Federal funds rate remains around 8-3/8 per cent
over the intermeeting period, as envisioned under alternative A, short-
term market interest rates would be expected to remain near current
levels. The recent increases in short-term rates appear to have kept
them in alignment with the funds rate. Although short-term credit
demands of both financial and nonfinancial businesses may pick up in
September and October, following a weakening in August, they are likely
to remain more moderate than over the first half of the year. Demands
for short-term funds from sponsored agencies should moderate somewhat
in the weeks ahead from their strong summer pace,in view of the recent
strength in thrift deposit flows, and the Treasury will probably not
tap the bill market for new money until the latter part of the fourth
(13) Longer-term yields also may change little under alterna-
tive A, and could even edge down a little further, unless incoming data
come to suggest a more rapid rate of inflation or stronger expansion in
real activity than the market is currently expecting. Municipal bond
issuance has dropped off substantially in September and will likely con-
tinue at a reduced pace in October. Corporate bond offerings are likely
to pick up only seasonally from the recent relatively light pace. The
Treasury is expected to rise only about $3.0 billion of new money in
late September in auctions of 2-year and 5-year notes, and will then
not be back in the market until late October. Moreover, institutional
investors apparently still have a considerable volume of liquid funds
available for investment, and dealer positions are light. The recent
rapid growth of thrift deposits suggests that mortgage market rates
will likely fluctuate around current levels in coming weeks.
(14) Alternative B calls for an increase in the Federal
funds rate by mid-October to around the midpoint of an 8-1/4 to 9 per
cent range. M-1 growth would likely be in a 6 to 10 per cent annual
rate range over September-October and M-2 growth in a 7-1/2 to 11-1/2
per cent range. The further increase in short-term rates would be
expected to slow the inflows of interest-bearing deposits subject to
regulatory ceilings at banks and thrifts, but recent evidence suggests
that the new 6-month certificates will probably blunt some of the
impact of rising rates on deposit growth, especially at thrifts.
(15) The modest increase in the funds rate contemplated
under alternative B is, of course, likely to have some upward impact
on short-term market rates of interest. However, such rates may rise
by less than the funds rate--and long-term rates by quite small amounts--
if market participants act on the assumption that the peak in interest
rates is even closer at hand. A further increase in the funds rate
would reinforce market expectations of another adjustment in the dis-
count rate. Barring such an adjustment, member bank borrowing would
be likely to increase noticeably.
(16) Under either alternative A or B, short-term interest
rates are expected to come under further upward pressure before year-
end. With nominal GNP projected to rise at an annual rate of more than
11 per cent over the balance of the longer-run policy period, the Federal
funds rate might have to rise to 9 to 9-1/4 per cent during the fourth
quarter if growth in M-1 is to be constrained to around the upper limit
1/2/of its range over the current longer-run policy period. The rise in
market interest rates and the anticipated completion of the stock adjust-
ment to the new 6-month certificates is expected to slow the pace of
inflows into interest-bearing deposits subject to regulatory ceilings,
and growth in both M-2 and M-3 over the QII '78 to QII '79 policy period
is projected to be in the upper half of their longer-run ranges.
1/ The staff's projections for the Federal funds rate through mid-1979
are shown in appendix I and for velocity growth rates in appendix II.
2/ Growth in measured M-1 is expected to slow in the fourth and subsequent
quarters if the Board regulation with regard to automatic transfers from
savings to demand deposits becomes effective November 1. No allowance has
been made for such a slowing in the estimates presented in this blue book.
Banks are just beginning to publish their pricing schedules for the automa-
tic transfer service. Even after most are published, competitive pressures
will undoubtedly tend to change them and in any event it will be very difficult
to project the probable public response and the extent to which M-1 will
become distorted. These uncertainties about the size of the resulting dis-
tortion in M-1 suggest the desirability of supplementing M-1 and M-2 with
another measure that would be less affected than M-1 and would still be a
reasonable indicator of transactions demands for money. Such a measure--
termed M-1+ and defined as M-1 plus savings deposits at commercial banks
and transactions balances at thrift institutions--is presented in appendix V.
Directive language
(17) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for
the directive. Alternative language consistent with the short-run
specifications of the alternatives discussed in the preceding section
is shown for the Committee's objective for the Federal funds rate early
in the period. At a later point, alternative language is also provided
for placing main emphasis either on monetary aggregates or on money
market conditions. The specifications adopted at the August meeting
as modified at the telephone meeting on September 8 are shown in strike-
through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions that are broadly consistent
with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited above,
while giving due regard to developing conditions in domestic
and international financial markets more generally. Early in
the period until the next regular meeting, System open market
operations shall be directed at attaining a weekly-average
Federal funds rate
(A) AT ABOUT THE CURRENT LEVEL
(B) slightly (OR SOMEWHAT) above the current level.
Subsequently, operations shall be directed at maintaining the
weekly-average Federal funds rate within the range of [DEL: 7-3/4 to
8-1/2] ____ TO ____ per cent. In deciding on the specific
objective for the Federal funds rate the Manager shall be guided
mainly by the relationship between the latest estimates of
annual rates of growth in the [DEL: August-September] SEPTEMBER-
OCTOBER period of M-1 and M-2 and the following ranges of
tolerance: [DEL: 4-to-8] ____ TO ____ per cent for M-1 and
[DEL: 6-to-10] ____ TO ____ per cent for M-2. If, giving
approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, their rates of
growth appear to be
Monetary aggregates emphasis
significantly above or below the midpoints
Money market emphasis
close to or beyond the upper or lower limits
of the indicated ranges, the objective for the funds rate shall
be raised or lowered in an orderly fashion within its range.
If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear to be above
the upper limit or below the lower limit of the indicated ranges
at a time when the objective for the funds rate has already been
moved to the corresponding limit of its range, the Manager is
promptly to notify the Chairman who will then decide whether the
situation calls for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
