Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
June 16, 1978
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC June 16, 1978
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Growth in M-1 slowed to an annual rate of 6.3 per
cent in May, reflecting in part the unwinding of tax-related factors
that had contributed to a sharp acceleration of this aggregate in
April. However, data available by mid-June suggested that M-1 growth
may accelerate to an 8 per cent annual rate in June, bringing growth
over the May-June period to an estimated 7½ per cent rate, just
below the upper limit of the Committee's 3 to 8 per cent short-run
1/
operating range. Growth of M-2 in the May-June period is projected
at a 7 per cent annual rate, as compared with the 4 to 9 per cent
range adopted by the FOMC. Flows into savings deposits at banks slowed
in May, but this decline was offset by a sharp rise in large-denomina-
tion time deposits included in M-2. Although deposit inflows at thrift
institutions accelerated somewhat in May, they remained substantially
below the pace of last year.
1/ These figures do not incorporate the benchmark revisions based on
recently available December 1977 Call Report data for nonmember
banks; the revised aggregates will be published on June 22. As
shown in Appendix Table III, the benchmark revision increases the
growth rates for M-1 and M-2 by an average of about three-tenths
of a percentage point in the fourth quarter of 1977 and the first
two quarters of 1978. All tables on subsequent pages of this
report (with the exception of the first table following the
appendices) are based on the revised series.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over May-June Period
Ranges Latest Estimates
M-1 3 to 8 7.5
M-2 4 to 9 7.5
Memo: Federal funds Avg. for statement
rate (per cent week ending
per annum) 7¼ to 7¾ May 17 7.34
(2) In accordance with the Committee's instructions, the
Account Manager sought a slight firming in the Federal funds rate to
7 per cent in the days immediately following the May meeting. The
target rate for Federal funds has been maintained at this level in
subsequent weeks as incoming data, until recently, suggested that
growth in both M-1 and M-2 would be well below the upper limits of
the Committee's ranges. While M-1 strengthened most recently, the
Committee concurred in the Chairman's recommendation to hold the funds
rate at 7 per cent in view of the proximity of the forthcoming FOMC
meeting. The rapid growth in deposits in April and early May and the
decline in average member bank borrowing since the discount rate was
raised in mid-May have increased member bank demand for nonborrowed
reserves, which are expected to rise at a 9½ per cent annual rate over
May and June.
(3) Short-term interest rates generally have increased from
15 to 60 basis points since the last meeting. The largest increases
were on CD's and commercial paper, reflecting strong short-term
business credit demands. In May, bank loans to businesses
rose at a 33 per cent annual rate. Although bond issuance by
corporations remained close to the moderate pace of earlier months
this year, long-term yields rose 5 to 20 basis points over the same
period, apparently in response to the rise in short-term rates and
renewed concern about the prospects for inflation. After paying
down debt earlier in the second quarter, the Treasury returned to the
credit markets following the May FOMC meeting to raise new cash through
the sale of $2.6 billion of 4-year notes and $6.0 billion of short-term
cash management bills timed to mature after the June tax date. In
addition, the Federally-sponsored housing agencies have stepped up
their demands on credit markets; both the FHLB and FNMA raised sub-
stantial amounts of new cash in conjunction with refundings of out-
standing debt in late May and early June. Bond issuance by State and
local governments, on the other hand, has fallen off substantially
since mid-May; nearly all this decline has been accounted for by a
reduction of advance refunding operations, which were curtailed after
the May 16 effective date of the new IRS ruling.
(4) The increase in business loan growth led to an
acceleration of total bank lending in May. However, banks kept
their holdings of investment securities about unchanged, following
a surge in April, and, consequently, growth in total bank credit slowed
somewhat in May. But, with the slowing of both the growth of demand
deposits and interest-bearing deposits subject to regulatory ceilings,
banks sharply increased their issuance of large CD's.
(5) Conditions in mortgage markets have continued to tighten,
with two-thirds of savings and loans reporting funds in short supply.
The average rates on primary conventional mortgages have risen one-
eighth of a percentage point to 9.70 per cent since mid-May and
ceilings on FHA/VA mortgages were raised to 9 per cent. In almost
half of the states, usury ceilings have been constraining origination
of conventional mortgages, prompting more stringent non-rate terms,
or giving rise to larger discounts where not prohibited by law.
(6) The table on the next page shows percentage annual
rates of change in related monetary and financial flows over various
time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
1976 & May '78 May '78 May '78 May '78
1977 over over over over
Average May '77 Nov. '77 Feb. '77 Apr. '77
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
1/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
2/ Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on total
loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institutions
--which are derived from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures.
Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to
remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve require-
ments are changed.
Prospective developments
(7) The table below presents for Committee consideration
two alternative sets of specifications for the monetary aggregates
and the Federal funds rate for the forthcoming intermeeting period.1/
(More detailed and longer-term data for the aggregates are shown in
the tables on pp. 7 and 8.)
Alt. A Alt. B
Ranges for June-July
M-1 7 to 11 6½ to 10½
M-2 7 to 11 6 to 10
Federal funds rate
(intermeeting period) 7¼ to 7¾ 7 to 8
(8) Growth in M-1 is expected to accelerate over
the June-July period in reflection of the relatively strong under-
lying demand for money associated with the prospective increase in
nominal economic activity. Alternative A specifies a range for the
Federal funds rate around its recently prevailing level of 7½ per cent
and is expected to be associated with M-1 growth in a 7 to 11 per cent
annual rate range over the forthcoming two-month period. The staff
projection implies that growth in M-1 over the second quarter will
be at a 9½ per cent annual rate, and that in July this aggregate
1/ The ranges are based on the newly benchmarked series for the
monetary aggregates. (See Appendix III.)
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1 M-2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
1978 May 348.2 348.2 834.7 834.7
June 350.9 350.8 841.0 840.7
July 353.4 353.1 847.0 846.3
1978 QI 340.3 340.3 818.2 818.2
QII 348.5 348.4 835.1 835.0
QIII 354.0 353.7 851.1 850.3
QIV 355.8 355.7 864.2 863.5
1979 QI 358.1 358.1 878.1 877.6
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
1978 May 1419.3 1419.3 914.5 914.5
June 1429.9 1429.4 922.1 922.1
July 1440.2 1438.9 929.4 929.1
1978 QI 1392.3 1392.3 891.7 891.7
QII 1420.0 1419.9 915.0 915.0
QIII 1448.5 1446.6 939.0 938.6
QIV 1473.3 1470.4 960.1 959.2
1979 QI 1498.1 1494.8 980.5 979.1
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
10.0 9.8QI '78-QI '79 7.6 7.4
will remain well above the level implied by the upper end of the FOMC's
longer-run range, as shown in Chart 1 on the following page.1/
(9) Expansion in M-2 under Alternative A is also likely to
be in a 7 to 11 per cent annual rate range over the June-July period.
Growth at the mid-point of this range would maintain M-2 near the
upper end of the longer-run range adopted by the Committee for this
aggregate, as shown in Chart 2.
(10) The increase in M-2 growth in June-July reflects not
only the strengthening of M-1 expansion, but also some pick-up in
expansion of the interest-bearing component, due entirely to the
growth of large denomination time deposits. Such deposits, as well
as negotiable CD's not included in M-2, are expected to be issued
aggressively so that banks may accommodate continued substantial
growth in credit demands. Both the expected level of market rates
of interest and shifts from savings accounts to the newly authorized
6-month money market certificate are likely to contribute to a
contraction in savings accounts at both banks and thrift institutions.
Commercial banks are expected to garner less new money from the new
instrument than thrifts, and bank inflows of time deposits subject
to rate ceilings are projected to moderate from their surprisingly
well maintained pace of the last two or three months.
1/ The QI '78 base level for the FOMC's current longer-run ranges,
shown in the chart, has been raised to reflect the benchmark
revision in the series. Thus, the longer-run ranges now imply
higher levels for the aggregates over the QI '78 to QI '79 period.
To attain the QI '79 level of M-1 implicit in the mid-point of the
long-run growth range set prior to benchmark revision would require
that growth in M-1 from the revised QI '78 base be about 5 per
cent rather than 5¼ per cent.
(11) Reflecting the 25 basis point ceiling rate advantage
enjoyed by them on the 6-month money market certificate, thrifts
are expected to be able to use this instrument more effectively
than banks. Both press and Redbook reports suggest that thrifts have
aggressively promoted the new 6-month money market certificate, and
sample data for early June indicate a moderate acceleration in
aggregate deposit growth at such institutions from the pace of recent
months. On balance, the staff is projecting that--under Alternative
A--the recent regulatory changes will permit thrifts to maintain
deposit flows this summer at near recent rates.
(12) If the Federal funds rate were maintained around the
currently prevailing levels of 7½ per cent, as envisioned under
Alternative A, most other short-term rates would likely also show
little net change over the very near term. Following their most
recent increases, both commercial paper and CD rates now are aligned
with the Federal funds rate in roughly the same relationship that
has prevailed throughout the current expansion. Although the 3-month
Treasury bill rate has risen in recent weeks, it still remains low
relative to other short-term rates. However, its spread of 75 to 100
basis points below other rates is not likely to be closed signifi-
cantly in the next few weeks. Available supplies will be depleted by
Treasury redemptions of cash-management bills and by System purchases
to offset the effects of the build-up in Treasury cash balances
following the June tax date. With staff projections
suggesting continued strength in the money stock, short-term rates
could, nevertheless, begin to move higher during the intermeeting
period if and as market participants come to anticipate further
tightening of monetary policy.
(13) Bond yields, too, could rise somewhat further if
continued strength in the monetary aggregates adversely affects
market expectations. But the volume of new security offerings
is not in itself expected to exert additional upward pressure on rates
over the weeks ahead. The volume of corporate bond offerings is
expected to be quite moderate, and State and local bond issuance is
expected to remain close to the reduced pace of recent weeks.
Federal sector demands on long-term markets, while substantial, are
unlikely to expand further from the pace of late May and early June.
The Treasury is expected to maintain its semi-annual pattern of 15-
year bond offerings with the sale of about $1½ billion of such
securities in late June, and FNMA also will be announcing an additional
issue of bonds at that time. In the mortgage market, with credit
demands remaining large, further increases in mortgage rates (and
another near-term increase in FHA/VA mortgage rate ceilings) can be
expected, even with the maintenance of thrift institution deposit
inflows at around recent levels.
(14) Alternative B calls for an increase in the Federal
funds rate to around the mid-point of a 7½ to 8 per cent range
between now and mid-July. M-1 growth would likely be in a 6½ to
10½ per cent annual rate range over June and July and M-2 growth
in a 6½ to 10½ per cent range. The additional firming of ¼ percentage
point in the funds rate under this alternative would likely be
associated with upward adjustments in short-term market rates of
the same magnitude, or perhaps a bit more since business short- and
intermediate-term credit demands are expected to remain sizable. In
addition to a probable further increase in the prime rate from the
recently established 8¾ per cent level, banks and other lenders can be
expected to continue to firm up non-rate loan terms and conditions.
Borrowing from the Federal Reserve discount window would become
even more attractive to member banks, and the resultant rise in such
borrowings would increase pressure for another adjustment in the
discount rate.
(15) Bond yields could be expected to rise by less than
money market rates, since the current level of long-term rates
already appears to discount some further tightening of monetary
policy. Moreover, pressures on the bond market would be eased by any
temporary postponement of some scheduled bond issues, and a further
shifting of financing to banks. However, upward pressures on primary
and secondary mortgage rates are likely to intensify, as rising
short rates slow thrift flows.
(16) The staff believes that further substantial increases
in interest rates will be required this summer and fall to restrain
M-1 growth to the mid-point, or possibly even to the upper end, of
the Committee's current 4 to 6½ per cent longer-run range. If
M-1 expands at a 9½ per cent rate in QII, as currently estimated,
its growth would have to slow to a 3½ per cent annual rate over
the following three quarters in order to achieve the 5¼ per cent mid-
point of the Committee's QI '78 to QI '79 range. During those three
quarters nominal GNP is expected to grow at about an 11 per cent
annual rate, implying--as shown in Appendix II--rates of growth in
velocity considerably larger than over the last two years.
(17) Projections of the Federal funds rate over the four-
quarter policy period are shown in Appendix I. Under Alternative A,
the Federal funds rate might need to rise to 9 to 10 per cent by fall
to restrain growth in the aggregates to within the longer-run ranges.
Under Alternative B, restraint would be introduced earlier and, as a
result, the level of the funds rate required in late 1978 and early
1979 would be somewhat less. As noted in recent Bluebooks, these pro-
jections assume a resumption of a downward shift in money demand.1/
(18) With the projected increase in market rates of interest,
the staff continues to believe that another adjustment in deposit
interest rate ceilings will be needed to keep M-3 growth within its
2/
7½ to 10 per cent range over the QI '78 to QI '79 period. Even
with such an adjustment, our projections of financial flows call for
continued erosion of the liquidity positions of all depository
institutions, which will be required to draw down liquid assets and
1/ No allowance has been made in this projection for the effect on
measured M-1 of automatic transfers from savings to demand deposits,
scheduled to be authorized at commercial banks on November 1.
2/ Staff projections assume a 25 basis point increase in longer-term
time deposit ceilings this fall.
increase their reliance on managed liabilities to meet credit demands.
Consequently, as the year progresses, the banks and thrifts may be
expected to become much less willing lenders.
Directive language
(19) Given below are alternatives for the operational
paragraphs of the directive.1/ The first formulation, like the
directive adopted at the last meeting, places main emphasis on near-
term rates of growth in monetary aggregates; it shows--in strike-
through form--the specifications adopted at the last meeting. The
second formulation places main emphasis on money market conditions.
In both formulations, variants are shown for particular phrases that
are intended to be associated with the specifications discussed in
the preceding section under alternatives A and B.
"Monetary Aggregates" formulation
The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of growth
in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed to be reasonably consistent
with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the
preceding paragraph. Specifically, at present, the ranges of
tolerance for the annual growth rates over the JUNE-JULY [DEL: May-June]
period will be [DEL: 3 to 8] ____ TO ____ per cent for M-1 and
[DEL: 4 to 9] ____ TO ____ per cent for M-2. In the judgment of the
Committee such growth rates are likely to be associated with a
weekly-average Federal funds rate
(A) AT ABOUT THE CURRENT LEVEL.
(B) slightly (OR SOMEWHAT) above the current level.
1/ In a memorandum dated June 7, the staff proposed modified
language for these operational paragraphs and for the preceding
paragraphs dealing with the Committee's general policy stance
and longer-run ranges for the aggregates.
If, giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it
appears that growth rates over the 2-month period will deviate
significantly from the mid-points of the indicated ranges, the
operational objective for the Federal funds rate shall be
modified in an orderly fashion within a range of [DEL: 7¼ to 7¾]
____ TO ____ per cent. In the conduct of day-to-day operations,
account shall be taken of emerging financial market conditions.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the operating constraints specified above are proving to be
significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify
the Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls
for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
"Money Market" Formulation
At this time, the Committee seeks (A) to maintain about the
prevailing money market conditions (or (B) to achieve slightly
or somewhat firmer money market conditions) during the period
immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates appear to
be growing at approximately the rates currently expected,1/
which are believed to be on a path reasonably consistent with
the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the
preceding paragraph. Specifically, the Committee seeks (A) to
maintain the weekly-average Federal funds rate at about the
current level (or (B) to increase the weekly-average Federal
1/ If the Committee adopts this formulation, it may wish to replace
the clause "at approximately the rates currently expected" with
"at rates within the ranges of tolerance cited below."
funds rate slightly or somewhat from the current level), so long
as M-1 and M-2 appear to be growing over the June-July period
at annual rates within ranges of tolerance of ____ to ____ per
cent and ____ to ____ per cent, respectively. If, giving
approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that
growth rates over the 2-month period are approaching or moving
beyond the limits of the indicated ranges, the operational
objective for the weekly-average Federal funds rate shall be
modified in an orderly fashion within a range of ____ to ____
per cent. In the conduct of day-to-day operations, account
shall be taken of emerging financial market conditions.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting
that the-operating constraints specified above are proving to
be significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify
the Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls
for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
