Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
March 16, 1979
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) March 16, 1979
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M-1 declined further in February, at a 3¾ per cent annual
rate. Data for early March suggest a resumption of M-1 growth,
but for the February-March period growth is still projected at only a 1 per
cent annual rate, 2 percentage points below the low end of the range set by
the FOMC. Shifts of transactions balances to Automatic Transfer Service (ATS)
savings accounts and NOW accounts in New Yorkare estimated to be reducing
M-1 growth by about 2¼ percentage points during February and March, about
one percentage point less than the effect in each of the first three
months after the introduction of these accounts. After allowing for
this impact, M-1 continues to be much weaker than would be expected on
the basis of the continued rapid expansion of nominal GNP and the usual
lagged effect of higher interest rates. The persistence of this weakness
since last fall and collateral evidence of very sharp increases inclose
substitutes for money, such as money market mutual funds and repurchase
agreements, suggest that a downward adjustment in the public's demand
for money relative to income may be under way--similar to the adjustment
that took place in 1975-76 following the high interest rate levels reached
in 1974.
Comparison of FOMC Policy Ranges for
February-March
to Latest Staff Estimates
Ranges Latest Estimates
Federal funds rate (per Avg. for statement
cent per annum) 10 or a bit higher week ending
(2) M-2 increased at a 2 per cent annual rate in February--
following its January decline--and is projected to grow at a 3¾ per
cent annual rate over February and March, also below the lower end of its
range. Despite the continued growth of ATS accounts, savings deposits
dropped sharply further in February. Money Market Certificates (MMCs),
on the other hand, continued to expand at a rapid pace, and growth in
the large time deposits included in M-2 strengthened. Deposits at savings
and loan associations and mutual savings banks expanded in February at
about a 9 per cent annual rate, roughly the same pace as recorded in each
of the preceding three months, as large sales of MMCs continued to offset
outflows from other account categories.
(3) Following a weak advance in December, commercial bank
credit in January-February expanded at about a 12½ per cent
annual rate, with business loan growth unusually strong. Banks financed
the expansion of earning assets during the two months in part by issuing
nearly $8 billion of large-denomination time deposits--only some of which
are included in M-2. Moreover, funds obtained from nondeposit sources
expanded about $8 billion--mainly Federal funds and RP's with nonbank
customers. Another estimated $5 billion of bank credit was financed from
foreign branch repayments of advances previously extended by domestic
head offices. Foreign branches obtained a portion of the funds for these
repayments from increased Eurodollar deposits of U.S. residents and perhaps
others as confidence in the stability of the dollar on exchange markets
increased and the relatively high Eurodollar interest rates became
attractive to investors active in international money markets.
(4) The Trading Desk has continued to maintain a Federal
funds rate of 10 per cent or a bit higher since the February FOMC meeting.
On March 2, as incoming data suggested that growth in both M-1 and M-2
over February-March would likely be at rates below the Committee's ranges,
the FOMC held a telephone meeting to determine whether supplementary
instructions were required. In light of contradictory evidence on under-
lying trends in the economy following the economy's strong performance
in the fourth quarter of 1978, the FOMC decided that the funds rate
objective should remain unchanged.
(5) Nonborrowed reserves are expected to decline at about an
in February is projected to be only partly offset by modest growth in
March. This contraction reflects mainly the decline of demand deposits
from mid-January through late February. As in January, member bank
borrowing at the discount window averaged about $1 billion in February,
and is expected to continue at close to this level in March. Thus, the
growth in total reserves over February and March is expected to be
similar to that for nonborrowed reserves. Given the decline in total
reserves over February-March, the monetary base is expected to expand
(6) Short-term interest rates have generally risen about 5 to
February FOMC meeting. With economic activity continuing to expand
and the rise in prices accelerating, some market participants appear
to have concluded that the probability of a further tightening in
monetary policy over the near-term has increased, despite the weak
performance of the aggregates. Nonetheless, most short-term rates
remain below levels reached around the turn of the year. Rates on
shorter-dated Treasury bills provide the main exception to this pattern,
as they have moved up to their highest level of the current expansion,
partly in response to sizable bill sales by foreign official institutions
and Treasury issuance of cash management bills. Treasury and corporate
bond yields also reached new highs for the current expansion during the
intermeeting period. Rates on primary mortgages have remained essentially
unchanged since year end.
(7) The dollar has been quite firm in the exchange markets
since the last FOMC meeting.
the U.S. has sold large amount of dollars to
acquire marks and Swiss francs to repay swap debt. In addition, the Desk
has added modestly to foreign currency balances, particularly yen. From
February 6 to March 16 the System purchased about $1 billion equivalent of
foreign currencies and the Treasury about $750 million equivalent.
(8) The table on the next page shows percentage annual rates
of change in related monetary and financial flows over various time
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Months
Average Feb. '78 Aug. '78 Nov. '78 Jan. '79
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(9) Shown below for Committee consideration are three alternative
specifications for the monetary aggregates and the Federal funds rate for
the March-April period. Alternative B calls for no near-term change in
the Federal funds rate, while alternatives A and C, respectively, would ease
and increase restraint in coming weeks. (More detailed and longer-term
data are contained in the tables on pp. 8 and 9.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for March-April
(10) The table on page 10 shows the growth rates for the
aggregates that would be required to reach levels in April and June
implied by the longer-run ranges adopted by the FOMC in February. To
reach levels in April that are on the midpoint paths of the longer-run QIV '78
to QIV '79 ranges, M-1 would have to expand at about a 12 per cent annual rate
from February and M-2 at a 14 per cent annual rate, as shown in the middle
column of the table. Growth for M-1 would have to be about 3¾ percentage points
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
QIV '78-QII '79
QII '79-QIV '79
QIV '78-QIV '79
/ The staff has assumed that over the longer-run policy period from QIV
growth will be reduced by a little qnder 3 percentage points by ATS.
'78 to QIV '79 M-1
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Growth Rates from February Levels Required to Achieve
Levels Implied by Adopted FOMC Longer-run Range
Low End Midpoint High End
of Range of Range of Range
Achieve level by:
j/ QIV '79 is the end-point of the longer-run range.
slower or faster to reach by April the lower or upper ends, respectively,
of the longer-run ranges. M-1 would have to expand at a 7-1/2 per cent
annual rate and M-2 at over a 10 per cent annual rate to achieve mid-
points paths by June.
(11) The staff now expects that M-1 will decline at about
a 2 per cent annual rate in the first quarter, despite projected growth of
nominal GNP at an annual rate of more than 12 per cent. Thus, a sub-
stantial increase in V-1, at about a 14 per cent annual rate,
is implied for the current quarter, as shown in Appendix II. About
deposits to ATS and NOW accounts, and another few percentage points by the
usual lagged effects of higher interest rates on money demand. But there
is also a large unexplained residual, and, as noted in paragraph (1), it
appears to the staff that this residual may to a great extent reflect a
downward shift in money demand relative to income.
(12) The strength and duration of such a shift in money demand
is most difficult to estimate while it is in process. The downward shift
that began in late 1974 seems to have lasted for a little over two years,
and may have reduced M-1 growth by as much as 5 percentage points at an
annual rate in the early part of the period and 3 percentage points later
(based on experience with the money demand equation in the Board's quarterly
econometric model). With the public having economized on cash balances
to such a great extent only a few years ago, we are projecting that the
present shift may not be as large nor last as long. Thus, we have--again--
projected a resumption of M-1 growth for the policy period immediately
(13) Under alternative B, with the funds rate remaining un-
changed from the currently prevailing level of 10 per cent or a little
higher, given the staff's GNP projection, we expect M-1 to increase
over the March-April period in a range centered on a 4 to 9 per cent
annual rate range. With growth at the midpoint of this range, the level
of M-l in April would be below the low end of the path implied by the
Committee's current longer-run range. Growth at the 9 per cent upper end
of the alternative B short-run range, would bring M-1 to a level in
April just above the low end of the Committee's longer-run range, as
shown in the chart on the next page.
(14) Under alternative B, M-2 is expected to expand in a 3 to
recent rate of growth. Most of the acceleration reflects the projected
strengthening of M-1, but the interest-bearing component of M-2 is
expected to rise a little faster than it has, on average, over the past
few months. Commercial banks can be expected to benefit to some extent
from the elimination of the rate ceiling differential on MMCs, effective
mid-March, and the unusually rapid outflow of savings deposits of recent
months is expected to diminish. However, as shown in the chart on the
following page, even growth in M-2 at the upper end of the alternative B
range would leave the level of this aggregate in April below the lower end
of the path implied by the Committee's longer-run range.
(15) It is estimated that the mid-March regulatory changes that
reduced the effective interest rates on MMCs offered by thrifts by about
percentage points, at an annual rate. Thrifts are thus likely to have to
reduce their liquidity and borrow more from the FHLBanks and other sources
to finance mortgage lending. They may also limit their new commitment
activity further over the near-term as they reevaluate their prospective
deposit inflows. Such a slowing of thrift deposit flows suggests that
the level of M-3 in April will remain below the lower limit of the path
traced by its longer-run growth rate range.
Growth Ranges and Actual M-1, M-2, M-3, and Bank Credit
M-1 Billions of d
Alt. B. Range ---
. .- 4'/%
--- - **- a- 1 Y2%- i I . 9% - --.... - --- -
D J F M A M J J
1979
A S 0 N 0
ollars
385
Q4 '78-Q4 '79
Q4 '78-Q4 '79
, 102%
'-" Q4 '78--4 '79
.. % ,~ % ^ -[ 1 I I I I --
-~~~~~~~~ a-a- >' ! %-''"""'""
(16) If, as projected, the monetary aggregates strengthen in
March-April, market expectations of a near-term tightening of monetary
policy may themselves lead to some upward pressures on short-term interest
rates. In addition, the Treasury market may have to absorb further bill
sales by foreign accounts, and the Treasury may have to offer a sizable
amount of cash management bills to cover cash drains prior to the mid-
April tax date. Rate pressures could be intensified if banks increase
the pace of their CD offerings, which they might well do if bank
credit demands remain strong, availability of corporate RP money declines
as the April tax date approaches, or the return flow of funds from their
branches abroad diminishes. Any tendency for short-term rates to rise,
however, would be blunted by stability of the funds rate at near current
levels, as contemplated under alternative B. The dollar may well continue
to trade around current levels in the exchange markets over the next few
weeks, accompanied by continuation of some central bank net sales of
(17) Under alternative B, bond yields can be expected to fluctuate
in a fairly narrow range. The volume of oncoming supplies in the municipal
market is likely to rise from the recent pace, but the corporate new
issue calendar remains quite modest. Moreover, the Treasury is entering
a period of seasonally light coupon financing activity. It is expected
to raise about $2 billion of new money in early April through sale of a
to borrow only about $1 billion of additional new money in the coupon
market until June. While there appears to be little reason to expect any
significant rise in bond market rates under alternative B, the projected
slowing of deposit flows at thrift institutions suggests that primary
mortgage yields may edge higher in coming weeks.
(18) Under alternative C, the Federal funds rate would rise
to the midpoint of a 10-1/4 to 11 per cent range. Growth in M-1 and
M-2 would likely be in annual rate ranges of 3-1/2 to 8-1/2 per cent
and 3 to 7 per cent, respectively. A tightening action at this time,
while widely discussed by financial market participants in recent weeks,
does not appear to have been fully discounted, and thus market interest
rates would be expected to move up rather significantly in both long-
and short-term markets, with the increases greatest in the short-term
(19) A firming policy action at this time could lead to a
further strengthening of the dollar. This would probably be reflected
mainly in larger central bank net sales of dollars and would also pro-
vide greater opportunities to reduce outstanding Federal Reserve swap
debt. Such developments would, in domestic markets, tend to raise
shorter-dated Treasury bill rates further relative to other short-term
interest rates and, if foreign official institutions continued to liquidate
their holdings of nonmarketable Treasury issues, increase Treasury borrow-
ing in domestic markets.
(20) Alternative A involves a decline in the funds rate over the
intermeeting period to the midpoint of a 9-1/4 to 10 per cent range.
Market rates would likely respond initially to this action by declining
from current levels. Thereafter, however, if the monetary aggregates
continue to rise as projected, and incoming data confirm the staff's
economic forecast, the decline of interest rates might begin to be
reversed. A decline in the funds rate would probably induce some downward
pressure on the international exchange value of the dollar.
(21) Over the QIV '78-QIV '79 period as a whole, the staff
still expects little net change in the Federal funds rate, given M-1
growth a shade above the middle of the Committee's 1½ to 4½ per cent
under alternative B and would, of course, more surely rise under
alternative C. But interest rates might tend to decline somewhat
in the latter half of the year, especially under alternative C, as the
rate of growth in nominal GNP decelerates further. Under alternative A,
however, we would expect interest rates to rise later in the year to
offset the stimulative effect on the aggregates of the easing in market
conditions assumed for the weeks ahead if M-1 growth over the year is to
be near the middle of the 1½ to 4½ per cent range. The projected
interest rate paths are shown in appendix I. All paths assume a down-
ward shift in money demand (in addition to ATS effects) on the order of
growth by a little less than 3 percentage points.
Directive language
(22) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs
for the directive in the customary form. Alternative language consistent
with the short-run specifications of the alternatives discussed in the
preceding section is shown for the Committee's objective for the Federal
funds rate early in the period. At a later point, alternative language
is also provided for placing main emphasis either on monetary aggregates
or on money market conditions. The language and specifications adopted
last month are shown in strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve
and money market conditions that are broadly consistent with the
longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited above, while
giving due regard to the program for supporting the foreign
exchange value of the dollar and to developing conditions in
domestic financial markets. Early in the period before the next
regular meeting, System open market operations are to be directed
at [DEL: maintaining the] ATTAINING A weekly average Federal funds rate
(A) SLIGHTLY BELOW THE CURRENT LEVEL.
(B) at about the current level.
(C) SLIGHTLY ABOVE THE CURRENT LEVEL.
[DEL: provided that over the February-March period the annual rates of
growth of M-1 and M-2, given approxiimately equal weight, appear
to be within ranges of 3 to 7 per cent and 5 to 9 per cent,
respectively. If growth of M-1 and M-2 for the 2 month period
appears to be outside the indicated limits, the Manager will
promptlly notify the Chairman, who will then consult with the
Commmittee to determine whether the situation calls for
supplementary instructions.]
SUBSEQUENTLY, OPERATIONS SHALL BE DIRECTED AT-MAINTAINING THE
WEEKLY AVERAGE FEDERAL FUNDS RATE WITHIN THE RANGE OF TO
PER CENT. IN DECIDING ON THE SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE FOR THE
FEDERAL FUNDS RATE THE MANAGER SHALL BE GUIDED MAINLY BY THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE LATEST ESTIMATES OF ANNUAL RATES OF
GROWTH IN THE MARCH-APRIL PERIOD OF M-1 AND M-2 AND THE FOLLOWING
RANGES OF TOLERANCE: TO PER CENT FOR M-1 AND TO
PER CENT FOR M-2. IF, WITH APPROXIMATELY EQUAL WEIGHT
GIVEN TO M-1 AND M-2, THEIR RATES OF GROWTH APPEAR TO BE
Monetary aggregates emphasis
SIGNIFICANTLY ABOVE OR BELOW THE MIDPOINTS
Money market emphasis
CLOSE TO OR BEYOND THE UPPER OR LOWER LIMITS OF THE
INDICATED RANGES, THE OBJECTIVE FOR THE FUNDS RATE IS TO BE
RAISED OR LOWERED IN AN ORDERLY FASHION WITHIN ITS RANGE.
IF THE RATES OF GROWTH IN THE AGGREGATES APPEAR TO BE
FALLING ABOVE THE UPPER LIMIT OR BELOW THE LOWER LIMIT OF THE
INDICATED RANGES AT A TIME WHEN THE OBJECTIVE FOR THE FUNDS RATE
HAS ALREADY BEEN MOVED TO THE CORRESPONDING LIMIT OF ITS
RANGE, THE MANAGER WILL PROMPTLY NOTIFY THE CHAIRMAN, WHO WILL
THEN DECIDE WHETHER THE SITUATION CALLS FOR SUPPLEMENTARY
INSTRUCTIONS FROM THE COMMITTEE.
