Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
November 16, 1979
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemBy the staff
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC November 16, 1979
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Growth rates for the monetary aggregates during the fourth
quarter of 1979 consistent with the decision by the FOMC at its meeting
on October 6 are shown in the first and second columns of the table
below. Such growth rates, if attained, would keep expansion in the
aggregates over the year from QIV '78 to QIV '79 within the Committee's
desired longer-run ranges, as shown in columns three and four of the table.
The fourth quarter growth rates, in combination with growth over the first
nine months of the year (shown in column five), would imply rates of expansion
for M-1 and M-3 in the upper halves of their longer-run growth ranges, and for
M-2 at the top of its range.
QIV '79 Target
Growth Rates QIV '78 to
Consistent with FOMC QIV '79 Period Addendum:
Decision on Oct. 6, 1979 Implied Growth Rates
Sept. Quarterly Growth Target from QIV '78
to Dec. Averages Rates Ranges to QIII '79
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
measured M-1 growth by about 1½ percentage points over the longer-run
policy period rather than the 3 percentage points originally estimated
in February.
(2) The growth rates from September to December in the family
of reserve aggregates needed to attain the Committee's monetary aggregate
objectives were estimated by the staff immediately following the FOMC's
October 6 meeting and took account of the Committee's decision to "bias"
the paths, especially for nonborrowed reserves, toward an immediate tightening
of the money market. These estimates assumed: (a) an increase in M-1,
seasonally adjusted,at a steady rate month-by-month (a pattern of money
supply that was roughly consistent with our projected pattern of money
demand); (b) continuation of the recent patterns of deposit mix; (c) excess
reserves averaging $200 million; and (d) for purposes of deriving the non-
borrowed path, an increase in the initially contemplated average level of member
bank borrowings to $1.5 billion from the September average of $1.3 billion.
Of course, the actual level of borrowing and money market conditions would
depend on the demand for reserves relative to the nonborrowed reserves
supplied through the open market desk.
(3) As shown in the table below, growth rates in the monetary
aggregates, and in the family of reserve measures, since September have
generally decelerated from the pace of the preceding three months.1/ Non-
borrowed reserves increased by about a 2¼ percent annual rate from
September to the first half of November, slower than the pace given by the
fourth quarter path. On the other hand, total reserves expanded at about an
recognized, particularly exaggerates swings in the reserve series where
relatively modest changes in borrowings, excess reserves, or deposit mix
can lead to large percentage changes in nonborrowed or total reserves
because the level of the series is relatively small.
time, growth in M-2 has been about equal to path, while growth in M-1 has
1/
been running low. Expansion in the broader aggregates has been almost
wholly dependent on growth in money market certificates and large CD's,
as the outstanding amount of savings deposits at banks and thrift insti-
tutions declined sharply in the wake of the run-up of interest rates.
(The charts on the next two pages place the recent growth in the monetary
aggregates and bank credit in longer-run perspective.)
Actual Targeted Recent Periods
June Sept. Sept. Sept. to
to to to First Half
Sept. Dec. Oct. of Nov.
Monetary Aggregates
Reserve Measures
(4) The Committee at its October 6 meeting had contemplated
a federal funds rate initially around 13 to 13-1/2 percent, within an 11-1/2
to 15-1/2 percent range, and member bank borrowings around $1-1/2 billion--
levels reached (as shown in the table below) in the week ended October 17, the
first full statement week after the Committee's decision. However, over the
first half of October, all aggregate reserve measures were running well
above path, partly in consequence of stronger demands for reserves than
expected and partly because the Desk adjusted its operations to take account
of the unsettled conditions in financial markets. During the second half of
the month, Desk operations were directed more firmly at holding nonborrowed
reserve growth to path levels, or somewhat below, in view of the continued
strength of total reserves. Operations were accompanied by a sharp rise in
the federal funds rate and in member bank borrowings. By the last week of
October, the average federal funds rate had increased to about 15½ percent
and member bank borrowings to around $3 billion. Both the funds rate and
member bank borrowing dropped back in the first half of November, to around
Member
Average Federal Bank Borrowings
Funds Rate (Millions of dollars)
(5) Short-term market interest rates have risen sharply on balance
since the System's October 6 announcement. Treasury bill rates--which have
displayed a good deal of volatility in response to shifting pressures in the
federal funds market and to unexpected changes in bill supplies--have increased
on balance by about 1 to 1-3/8 percentage points. Rates on private short-term
instruments have generally posted larger gains--in the 1-3/8 to 1¾ percentage
point range.
(6) Long-term yields, too, have moved higher since early October.
Yields on Treasury bonds show net gains of about one percentage point; those
on corporate and municipal bonds registered increases of about 1¼ percentage
points and 5/8 percentage points, respectively. The sharp rise in rates,together
with the generally turbulent market conditions and the cautious attitudes
of underwriters, resulted in the postponement or cancellation by both corporate
and municipal borrowers of a comparatively large number of debt offerings,
especially by lower-rated borrowers. In its mid-quarter financing the
Treasury decided to offer a standard package of issues--a 3½-year note,
a 10-year note and a 30-year bond--to raise $1.4 billion of new money
and refinance $4.6 billion of maturing debt. Record yields (for given
maturities) were set on all three issues.
(7) Expansion of both loans and investments at commercial banks
slowed substantially in October. Security loans declined sharply, as
security holdings by dealers fell in reaction to uncertain market conditions,
declining security prices, and sharply rising borrowing costs. Growth in
business loans (net of holdings of acceptances) moderated somewhat from the
recent rapid pace, while real estate lending remained strong. With
demand and savings deposits declining, banks financed loan growth for the
most part by issuing.money market certificates and large CD's, offering
repurchase agreements, and liquidating bankers acceptances.
(8) Conditions in mortgage markets tightened markedly in response
not only to the general rise in interest rates, but also to pressures on
deposit inflows at thrifts and to problems caused by interest rate ceilings.
S&Ls were reported to have sharply curtailed their mortgage commitment
activity after October 6. The average interest rate on new commitments
at S&Ls rose around 1 percentage points to 12.85 percent, a rate
exceeding usury ceilings in 20 states. Secondary market rates also rose
rapidly, and the volume of offerings at FNMA auctions surged.
(9) The foreign exchange value of the dollar rebounded on
average following the October 6 measures, with the weighted average value
of the dollar having risen by nearly 3 percent through November 13, just
prior to announcements concerning the disposition of official Iranian
assets. Improvement over this period was most substantial against the
yen, which declined by about 9 percent against the dollar. The dollar rose
only 2 percent against the DM.
. Most recently, in the wake of the Iranian situation, the value
of the dollar has retraced some of its earlier gains.
(10) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for selected monetary and financial flows
over various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average Oct. '78 Apr. '79 July '79 Sept. '79
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Managed Liabilities of Banks
(Monthly average change in
billions)
repurchase
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on total loans
and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institutions--which are
derived from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures. Growth rates for
reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of
discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(11) At its last meeting, the Committee decided on a target
rate of growth in M-1 from September to December on the order of 4 percent,
associated with growth in M-2 of about 7½ percent. The Committee also
indicated that somewhat slower rates of growth were acceptable. Of the
alternatives shown below for Committee consideration, alternative B involves
a November-December growth rate for M-1 that achieves a 4½ percent rate of
expansion from September to December, but with an accompanying M-2 growth
above the Committee's earlier target. Alternative C is based on a lower
M-1 growth rate, and includes an M-2 growth closer to, though still above,
the Committee's earlier objective. Alternative A involves more rapid growth
in the aggregates. Because only six weeks are left before the end of the
year, monetary growth rates for the year 1979 may not be substantially
affected by alternative policy courses, although these policies would
have an immediate influence on credit conditions and on the trajectory
of monetary growth entering the new year. (The tables on pp. 9 and 10
show more detailed figures, including growth rates for the year).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Annual growth rates for
November-December 1/
M-1 6 5½ 4½
M-2 9½ 9 8¼
M-3 8 7½ 7
Federal funds rate range between
now and next FOMC meeting
(mid-December) 10½ to 15½ 11½ to 15½ 11½ to 16
Implied quarterly growth rates
(measured from Sept. to Dec.)
M-1 5 4½ 3¾
M-2 9¼ 8¾ 8¼
M-3 8 7½ 7¼
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average:
QIV '78-QIV '79
FOMC Target Growth
Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B
over the longer-run policy period from QIV
by about 1-1/2 percentage points by ATS.
'78 to QIV '79
Alt. C
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average:
QIV '78-QIV '79
FOMC Target Growth
(12) Alternative B involves acceleration in money growth rates
over the balance of the year from their recent pace, with M-1 expanding
at a 5 percent annual rate on average in November and December and M-2
at a 9 percent rate. Since the latest data suggest that M-1 in mid-
November is quite low relative to path, a considerable spurt of M-1 growth
in the last half of November and in December is needed to achieve the
objective in this alternative. This would probably be reflected mainly
in a rapid December growth rate.
(13) The staff would expect that expansion in the aggregates
as specified under alternative B could be attained by growth (at annual
rates) in the family of reserve measures over November and December as
follows: monetary base, 7 percent; total reserves,7 percent; and non-
borrowed reserves, 15 percent. For purposes of constructing the nonborrowed
reserve path, given the current discount rate, member bank borrowings
were assumed to average $1 billion, the same initial assumption as
adopted by the Committee in early October.
(14) The increase in M-1 targeted over the balance of the quarter
is consistent with the expected transactions demand for money over the
fourth quarter as a whole, given the GNP projections. The federal funds
rate under this alternative probably would be around the 13 percent level
early in the period and it might go a bit lower as the period progresses.
If bearish economic news tends to cumulate, interest rates generally might
drop rather substantially and in practice there may also be some sympathetic
further downward pressure on the funds rate. But any drop in market rates
in general, and concomitant decline in the federal funds rate, would tend
to be more sustained and deeper if economic activity and/or demand for
money in the fourth quarter were substantially weaker than the staff
has projected. On the other hand, of course, a stronger pace of
economic activity and/or inflation than is being projected would probably
be associated with strengthening money demand, stronger bank credit demands,
and renewed upward pressures on the funds rate.
(15) Bank credit growth is likely to remain near its recent
reduced pace over the weeks ahead, with business loan growth at a more
moderate pace as inventory growth slows further, with consumer loan
growth remaining at a reduced pace in view of already high debt burdens
and the extended decline in real personal income, and with real estate
loan growth beginning to slack off as housing demand weakens. Bank
acquisitions of securities could pick up, however, especially if the
market becomes even more convinced that the peak in interest rates for
this cycle has been reached.
(16) Pressures on thrift institutions are unlikely to ease over
the next few weeks under alternative B. However, if the funds rate drops
a little, and corporate bond yields do decline, mortgage rates could edge
off. A stabilized market atmosphere would make thrift institutions less
hesitant to commit funds to the mortgage market. It is not likely,
though, that mortgage market conditions will improve markedly unless
short-term market rates drop significantly and/or adjustments favorable
to thrift institutions are made in deposit ceiling rates.
(17) The specifications of alternative C involve slower growth
in the monetary aggregates than alternative B, as indicated in the table
in paragraph (11). Such growth rates would be consistent with expansion
in the monetary base and total reserves over November-December at annual
rates of 7 and 6 percent, respectively. Given the expected demand for
money, this alternative is likely to be associated with either no change
or some rise in market rates. On the assumption that adoption of this
alternative would mean that the Committee desires greater assurance that
growth rates for the aggregates will not be excessive, the upper limit of
the proposed funds rate range has been raised slightly from that of
alternative B. Consistent with such an approach, the nonborrowed reserve
path for this alternative has been constructed on the assumption that
borrowings average a shade under $2 billion, implying growth in nonborrowed
reserves of around 8¾ percent over November and December--considerably
less than the alternative B pace. The funds rate initially would probably
be around 13 percent, or a bit higher, given the present discount rate. If
the discount rate were raised, in light of a continuing relatively wide gap
between the discount and federal funds rates, additional nonborrowed reserves
would have to be provided unless the Committee wished to tolerate further
upward pressures on market rates--a decision that might depend in part
on the behavior at the time of monetary aggregates, total reserves, and
the monetary base.
(18) Adoption of alternative C would probably lead to some
rebound in market interest rates, as expectations that interest rates had
already peaked were disappointed. Pressures on thrift institutions would
be somewhat more intense than under alternative B, mortgage rates would
probably rise a little further, and the bank prime rate would also be under
further upward pressure. Any increase of interest rates might be quite modest
in magnitude and short-lived, however, if business news were adverse.
Nevertheless, the higher rate levels than under alternative B would tend
to hold down money demanded in early 1980, implying a decline of
interest rates early in the new year if the Committee wishes to provide
the reserves needed to keep M-1 in the first quarter of next year on the
midpoint of its longer-run growth path--assumed for these purposes to be
a 6 percent rate of growth.1/
(19) Provision of reserves needed to attain the specifications
for the monetary aggregates presented under alternative A would appear
to involve an easing in money market conditions. The growth in the
monetary base and total reserves over November and December implied by
that alternative--at 7¾ and 7½ percent, annual rates, respectively--are
only slightly more rapid than under alternative B. However, growth in
nonborrowed reserves, at over a 20 percent annual rate, would be con-
siderably more rapid. Such growth is consistent with an initial decline
in the funds rate to around 12 percent and a drop in member bank borrowing
to around $1 billion or so, given the prevailing 12 percent discount rate.
The funds rate range proposed for this alternative is 10½ to 15½ percent,
involving a reduction in the lower limit as compared with alternative B.
(20) The approach to open market operations of alternative A
would exert considerably downward pressure on market interest rates generally
as more and more participants came to believe rates had peaked. This decline
of interest rates would ease cost pressures on banks and thrift institutions,
but would not, given present ceiling rates, substantially increase deposit
flows to thrifts, relative to alternative B, even if the funds rate began to
approach its 10½ percent alternative A lower limit.
(21) The monetary aggregates targeted over the last two months
of the year under alternative A would not lead to growth in the monetary
aggregates for the year 1979 very much different from that of alternative B,
but the lower interest rates associated with this alternative might tend to
moderate the expected recession in economic activity and tend to increase
the quantity of money demanded in early 1980. A reasonable implication
of this alternative, therefore, might be a policy in early 1980 that supplied
somewhat more reserves and money than consistent with the assumed 6 percent
midpoint of the Committee's longer-term target for 1980. Such a policy
early next year would, in turn, imply the need for more constraint on
money growth as the year progressed.
(22) With regard to effects of monetary policy choices on exchange
markets, some decline of interest rates here might lead to downward pressures
on the exchange value of the dollar, but such pressures probably would not
be significant unless the decline in interest rates were substantial and
accompanied by an acceleration of inflation or of the monetary aggregates.
A rise of interest rates here may help the dollar on exchange markets, but
any tendency for the dollar to rise would be limited to the extent that
other countries raised interest rates or moderated, through exchange market
intervention, declines in the value of their own currencies. Of course,
exchange market developments over the near-term may be most affected by
further economic and political developments in the Middle East.
Directive language
(23) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for
the directive consistent with the form of the directive adopted at
the meeting on October 6. It calls for restraining expansion of
reserve aggregates to a pace consistent with the desired rates of growth
in M-1, M-2, and M-3 in the fourth quarter of 1979, provided that the
federal funds rate on a weekly average basis remains within a specified
range. The range for the funds rate adopted on October 6 is shown in
strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks to restrain expansion
of reserve aggregates to a pace consistent with deceleration in
growth of M-1, M-2, and M-3 in the fourth quarter of 1979 to rates
that would hold growth of these monetary aggregates over the whole
period from the fourth quarter of 1978 to the fourth quarter of
in the period before the next regular meeting the weekly average
federal funds rate remains within a range of [DEL: 11½ to 15½] ____ TO
____ percent. [DEL: The Committee will consider the need for
sypplementary-instructions if it appears that operations to
restrain expansion of reserve aggregates would maintain the
federal funds rate near the upper limit of its range.]
IF IT APPEARS DURING THE PERIOD BEFORE THE NEXT MEETING THAT
THE CONSTRAINT ON THE FEDERAL FUNDS RATE IS INCONSISTENT WITH THE
OBJECTIVE FOR THE EXPANSION OF RESERVES, THE MANAGER FOR DOMESTIC
OPERATIONS IS PROMPTLY TO NOTIFY THE CHAIRMAN WHO WILL THEN DECIDE
WHETHER THE SITUATION CALLS FOR SUPPLEMENTARY INSTRUCTIONS FROM
THE COMMITTEE.
