Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
July 6, 1979
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) July 6, 1979
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M-1 growth slowed to a ¾ percent annual rate in May but
picked up sharply in June, and for the two-month policy period is estimated
at about a 7 percent annual rate, well above the 0 to 5 percent range
selected by the FOMC. M-2 is estimated to have grown at a 9 percent
annual rate over May and June, also above its 4 to 8 percent range
specified by the Committee. Bank sales of money market certificates (MMCs)
have strengthened considerably since the March regulatory changes eliminated
the differential in ceiling rates favoring thrift institutions so long as
the 6-month bill rate was 9 percent or above. In addition, outflows from
other small time deposits have nearly stopped in recent weeks, and a gain
was recorded in savings deposits in June for the first time since last
September. As banks have captured a larger share of the MMC market, growth
of such deposits at S&Ls has eroded, but flows into other small-denomination
accounts at thrifts have improved recently. On balance, deposit growth at
thrift institutions has accelerated in the last two months from the
Comparison of FOMC Policy Ranges for
May-June
to Latest Staff Estimates
Ranges Latest Estimates
Federal funds rate Avg. for statement
unusually slow pace of April, reaching a 7 percent annual rate in June
on a monthly average basis.
(2) Banks have continued to account for a relatively large
share of overall credit flows. Total loans and investments expanded at
a 12 percent annual rate, on average, in May and June, funded mainly by
demand deposits and money market certificates. Commercial banks paid down
about $12 billion of outstanding large denomination time deposits in
May and June, which was about offset by increases in Eurodollar takings
from foreign branches and in domestic nondeposit borrowing.
(3) After the May FOMC meeting, the Federal funds rate continued
to be held at around 10¼ percent. By mid-June, projections for the growth
rates of both M-1 and M-2 indicated that both would be above their
respective short-run ranges. On June 15 a majority of the FOMC concurred
in the Chairman's recommendation that the objective for the funds rate
remain about 10¼ percent in view of the many indications of a weakening
in economic activity and the uncertainties in the financial and economic
outlook. Accordingly, the Desk has continued to aim for this funds rate
level in the past three weeks. In the latest statement week, however,
the funds rate averaged 10.42 percent, even while banks' excess reserves
rose to $621 million, in reflection of pressures and uncertainties associated
with the mid-year statement date and the July 4 holiday.
(4) Reserves required against private demand deposits increased
at a 10¼ percent annual rate over the May-June period, reflecting the
accelerated growth of such deposits. Nonetheless, total reserves contracted
at about a 2¾ percent annual rate, as reserves held against total time and
savings deposits declined sharply in association with the run-offs of
large time deposits over the last two months. The monetary base expanded
at about a 4 percent annual rate over the May-June period, close to
the pace set in the earlier months of the year and about half the growth
rate of last year. Currency held by the nonbank public, which rose at a
to account for all of the growth of the monetary base.
(5) Despite the stability of the Federal funds rate, market
interest rates declined substantially following the May FOMC meeting. The
pervasive declines in interest rates apparently reflected growing acceptance
of the view that the economy had weakened and that interest rates had peaked.
However, in the last few days interest rates have backed up somewhat. On
balance, over the intermeeting period, Treasury bill rates have fallen 40 to
prime rate was reduced 25 basis points to 11-1/2 percent. The particularly sharp
decline in bill rates appears to have been associated with the Treasury's
paydown of cash management bills in late June and the resumption of purchases
of bills by foreign central banks. In bond markets, corporate and Treasury
yields declined some 40 basis points. Despite these declines, mortgage
yields have risen steadily, and the average rate on new commitments at
S&Ls is now above 11 percent.
(6) The dollar's exchange value has declined 3¼ percent on a
weighted average basis, and somewhat more against the mark and the Swiss
franc, since the last meeting of the Committee. All of these declines
occurred in the last half of June. They were triggered by the surge in
U.S. monetary aggregates in an environment of declining U.S. short-term
interest rates at a time when money market conditions in many major
industrial countries were firming.
(7) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for related monetary and financial flows over
various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average June '78 Dec. '78 Mar. '79 May '75
Concepts of Money
M-2 (H-i plus time deposits at
comr.ercial banks other than
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institutions--which are
derived from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures. Growth rates for
reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of dis-
continuities from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments: long-run
(8) The Humphrey-Hawkins Act requires the Federal Reserve to
report to Congress in July any revision in its growth ranges for the
aggregates for the current calendar year. In addition, the Act requires
as part of the July report "a statement of ... objectives and plans with
respect to the ranges of growth ... of the monetary and credit aggregates
for the calendar year following the year in which the report is submitted."
Thus, at its July meeting the FOMC will need to reassess the ranges pre-
viously set for the QIV '78 to QIV '79 policy period and establish initial
ranges for the QIV '79 to QIV '80 period.
(9) As background for the Committee's deliberations, it may be
of the current policy period are within their longer-run ranges adopted in
February, as shown in the table below. Bank credit, however, has grown at
a rate above the upper end of its range, as credit demands on banks and
banks' use of nondeposit funds have been stronger than expected.
Actual Annual Rate of Current Longer-run Ranges
Growth QIV '78 to QII '79 for QIV '78 to QIV '79 Period
(10) Shown below for Committee consideration are three
alternative longer-run ranges applicable to the current QIV '78 to
QIV '79 policy period.1/
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
(11) The ranges for the money supply aggregates under
alternative B are the same as those adopted by the Committee in February,
except that the M-1 range has been revised upward to reflect a changed
projection of ATS account growth (including New York state NOW accounts).
At the time of the February meeting, shifts from demand deposits to ATS
accounts were expected to reduce measured M-1 growth by about 3 percentage
points over the year. Thus, the 3 percent midpoint of the FOMC's current
in measured M-1 growth caused by ATS is now expected to be about half
as large as estimated in February. The midpoint of the 3 to 6 percent
proposed alternative B range plus the revised, lower ATS effect also is equal
to an M-1 growth adjusted for ATS effects of about 6 percent.
(12) Alternatives A and C, respectively, represent somewhat
easier and tighter policies with regard to the aggregates. Alternative A
is indexed by measured M-1 growth centered around 5 percent (6-1/2 per-
cent after adjustment for ATS effects) and alternative C by measured
growth of around 4 percent (5-1/2 percent after ATS effects). These
growth rates can be viewed as representing orderly movement toward rates
of increase in M-1 (adjusted for ATS effects) of 7 and 5 percent respectively
in 1980, with the slightly different growth rates for 1979 reflecting
the relatively short period remaining this year in which to influence
the growth of the aggregate. For alternatives A and B, the M-2 ranges
are the same because the lower interest rates under alternative A more
promptly open the ceiling rate differential on MMCs favoring thrift
institutions, thereby diverting funds from commercial bank time deposits
to thrift deposits. In all alternatives, growth ranges for bank credit
are above the current range, because of the relatively rapid growth in
such credit thus far this year.
(13) The table below presents three alternative longer-run
ranges for next year (the policy period from QIV '79 to QIV '80). These
ranges represent a continuation into 1980 of the policies toward the
Alt. A' Alt. B' Alt. C'
Bank Credit 7½ to 10½ 6½ to 9½ 5½ to 8½
aggregates as indexed by M-1, represented by the proposed paths for 1979,
after adjustment for ATS effects. Thus, alternative B' essentially repre-
sents continuation of growth in M-1 at about 6 percent: the midpoint of
the alternative B' range is 5 per cent, and we have assumed that ATS
effects retard M-1 growth by only about 1 percent. Of course, the
projection of ATS effects into next year is highly uncertain, depending
as it does on as yet unknown Congressional or further judicial responses
to the recent court decision terminating ATS and similar accounts beginning
1/
January 1 of next year. Alternatives A' and C' are indexed by measured
M-1 growth of 6 percent and 4 percent, respectively, or 7 and 5 percent
after adjusting for assumed ATS effects. These growth rates for 1980
basically extend the A and C paths for 1979, as explained in the preceding
(14) The Federal funds rate patterns through 1980 associated
with the proposed longer-run monetary ranges, given the related GNP pro-
jections, are shown in appendix I. For simplicity, these patterns assume
that the growth path for the aggregates adopted for 1979 will continue
into 1980. Thus, they assume that alternative B for 1979 is followed by
B/B'--an unchanged policy with respect to the aggregates--the Federal
funds rate is expected to decline somewhat by early 1980 (to a level
of around 9-1/2 percent), assuming economic activity weakens about as
projected. As growth in nominal GNP accelerates in 1980, this decline
is projected to be reversed in order to constrain growth in the
aggregates to around the midpoints of the B' range. It should be noted
that the upward pressure on interest rates re-emerges even though we
have assumed a rather substantial downward shift in money demand
relative to income in 1980.
Prospective developments: short-run
(15) Three alternative short-run specifications for the
monetary aggregates and the Federal funds rate are presented below for
Committee consideration. (More detailed and longer-run data are shown
in the tables on pages 11 and 12.)
Alt. I Alt. II Alt. III
Ranges for July-August
aggregates that can be constructed from those presented, as well as
an unchanged alternative.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M- 1
Alt. A t Alt. B A C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
QIV '78-QIV '79
growth will be reduced by about 1 percentage points by ATS.
QIV '78 to QIV '79 M-l
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
(16) Alternative II contemplates no change in the current 9-3/4
to 10-1/2 percent Federal funds rate range, nor in the Desk's current
M-1 in the July-August period is expected to increase in a 2-1/2 to 6-1/2
percent annual rate range--slower than the average rate of expansion in
recent months, reflecting the projected further slowdown in expansion
of nominal GNP. In the third quarter M-1 is expected to expand about
in line with nominal GNP and V-1, therefore, to show little net change
1/
for the second consecutive quarter.
(17) As illustrated by the top panel of the chart on page 14,
growth in measured M-1 at the 4-1/2 percent midpoint of its projected
July-August alternative II range would leave M-1 in the upper half of
its current longer-run range. The lower panel of the chart compares
the projected July-August expansion with the proposed alternative B
longer-run range. In that comparison, by August M-1 would be in the
lower half of the longer-run range. The dotted line in the chart also
shows annual growth rates needed from the actual June level to reach
targeted midpoint levels by the fourth quarter of 1979 under the
current longer-run range and proposed alternative B; these growth rates
2/
are 2 percent and 5-1/2 percent, respectively.
Growth Ranges and Actual M-1
CURRENT LONGER-RUN RANGE
Alt. I Short-Run Range -
Billions of dollars
385
Q4 '78-04 '79 - 380
- -.- -
I i
ALTERNATIVE B. LONGER-RUN RANGE
Att. I Short-Run Range -
Q4 '78-Q4 '79
- 375
- 370
- 365
- 360
- 355
- 365
, I I
O N
I I I I i i
D J F M A M J
I I I
i i b I I I I
E r III I I I I
iI I I I I I I
(18) The staff expects M-2 to expand in a 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 per-
cent annual rate range in July-August under alternative II. As shown in
the upper panel of the chart on page 16, M-2 in June was at a level
slightly below the midpoint of its longer-run range. Growth at the
midpoint of the alternative II range would bring M-2 to about the mid-
point of its current (and also proposed alternative B) longer-run
growth range by August.
(19) Virtually all of the expected slowing in M-2 in July-
August, relative to May-June, reflects the more modest growth of M-1.
Growth of the interest-bearing component of M-2 is expected to remain
strong, accounted for mainly by continued sizable bank issuance of
MMCs. Inflows of funds to banks through MMCs are expected to remain
large, since the staff is projecting that the 6-month bill rate under
alternative II will remain near or above 9 percent and thus that no
significant differential will emerge in ceiling rates on these instru-
ments favoring thrift institutions. As in other recent months, large-
denomination time deposits are not expected to contribute to growth
in M-2 as banks continue to supplement their demand and small denomination
time deposits growth with Eurodollars and RPs.
Growth Ranges and Actual M-2 and M-3
Current and Alternative B. Longer-Run Range Q4 '78-Q4 '79
Alt. II Short-Run Range -
I I I I I I I i I
Current and Alternative B. Longer-Run Range
Alt' I Short-Run Range----
i I I
Q4 '78-Q4 '79
Billions of dollars
950
, 8%
- 940
..6.9% - 930
- 920
S5%
- 900
- 890
- 870
I 860
- 1620
. 6.2%
- 1600
- 1560
- 1520
I 1480I i £ I
D J F M A M J
I t I
A S 0 N D
I I
0 N
~I I I I I .~ --
(20) Deposit growth at thrifts in coming months is expected
to remain near the second quarter pace, but--with banks continuing to
capture an enlarged share of net MMC sales--well below the pace set in the
second half of 1978 and early 1979 prior to the change in MMC regulations.
As a result, as shown in the lower panel of the chart on page 16, M-3
growth is likely to stay near the low end of its longer-run range. S&Ls
can be expected to continue to draw down their liquid assets and to tap
nondeposit funds in substantial quantity in order to meet their mortgage
commitments in the face of restrained deposit flows.
(21) If the funds rate remains around 10¼ percent as contemplated
under alternative II, short-term rates might back up somewhat as fewer
market participants come to expect that interest rates will soon decline.
If short-term rates rise, this may work to strengthen the dollar on foreign
exchange markets since it will tend to improve interest rate spreads
between U.S. and foreign markets. Yields in bond markets might also rise,
especially in the municipal market where a relatively large slate of
offerings is in prospect. In corporate bond markets, on the other hand,
issuance is expected to be relatively light and the Treasury is likely
to raise only $2 to $3 billion of new money in a routine mid-quarter
(22) Alternative III contemplated a ½ percentage point rise
in the Federal funds over the next few weeks to the midpoint of a 10 to
II percent range. Such an approach to policy appears most consistent
with a reduction in the longer-run growth range for the aggregates, as
proposed in alternative C/C'. In the present environment, a tightening
of the funds rate objective would be expected to have rather significant
and widespread effects. The value of the dollar would strengthen in
foreign exchange markets more certainly than under alternative II, and
domestic short-term interest rates would rise considerably. The initial
reaction in bond markets would probably mirror that of short-term debt
markets. But in view of the evidence of the weakening in the economy,
market participants would be likely to see a tightening at this time as a
temporary measure. Thus, any tendency for bond yields to rise would be
limited as long-term investors sought to lock in attractive long-term yields
near their cyclical highs.
(23) Alternative I involves a percentage point decrease in the
Federal funds rate to the center of a 9 to 10 percent range. Such a move
appears most consistent with the higher longer-run growth rates for the
monetary aggregates associated with alternative A/A'. It would not
necessarily be inconsistent with longer-run alternative B, under which
interest rates are expected to begin declining later in the summer or in
early fall. A modest reduction in the Federal funds rate over the near
term, especially if it occurs along with new data suggesting further weak-
ness in economic activity, is likely to be accompanied by a fairly
substantial drop in market rates--as market participants come to expect
even more monetary ease ahead. In this environment, the dollar would
probably weaken substantially further on exchange markets, and the spread
of Treasury bill rates below private rates would widen as foreign official
institutions acquired Treasury securities in the wake of intervention
activity. The drop in Treasury bill rates will reintroduce a full 25
basis points differential on MMC ceiling rates in favor of thrift
institutions, leading to weaker M-2 growth in the short run under
alternative I than under alternative II.
Directive language
(24) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for
the directive in the customary form, with alternative language related
to the short-run specifications presented in the preceding section.
Alternative language is also provided for placing main emphasis either on
monetary aggregates or on money market conditions. The specifications
adopted last month are shown in strike-through form.
In the short-run, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve
and money market conditions that are broadly consistent with the
longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited above, while
giving due regard to the program for supporting the foreign exchange
value of the dollar and to developing conditions in domestic
financial markets. Early in the period before the next regular
meeting, System open market operations are to be directed at
maintaining the (or ATTAINING A) weekly average federal funds
ra e
(I) SLIGHTLY BELOW THE CURRENT LEVEL.
(II) at about the current level.
(III) SLIGHTLY ABOVE THE CURRENT LEVEL.
Subsequently, operations shall be directed at maintaining the
weekly average federal funds rate within the range of [DEL: 9¾ to 10½]
____ TO ____ percent. In deciding on the specific objective for
the federal funds rate the Manager shall be guided mainly by the
relationship between the latest estimates of annual rates of growth
in the [DEL: May-June] JULY-AUGUST period of M-1 and M-2 and the following
ranges of tolerance: [DEL: 0 to 5] ____ TO ____ percent for M-1 and [DEL: 4 to 8½]
____ TO ____ percent for M-2. If, with approximately equal weight
given to M-1 and M-2, their rates of growth appear to be
Monetary aggregates emphasis
SIGNIFICANTLY ABOVE OR BELOW THE MIDPOINTS
Money market emphasis
close to or beyond the upper or lower limits
of the indicated ranges, the objective for the funds rate is to be
raised or lowered in an orderly fashion within its range.
If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear to be above
the upper limit or below the lower limit of the indicated ranges
at a time when the objective for the funds rate has already been
moved to the corresponding limit of its range, the Manager will
promptly notify the Chairman, who will then decide whether the
situation calls for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
