Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
September 14, 1979
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemBy the staff
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) September 14, 1979
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Over the August-September period growth of M-1 is projected
to be above the upper end of the Committee's 4 to 8 percent range, while
M-2 growth is expected to be close to the upper bound of its 7 to 11 percent
FOMC range. M-1 growth slowed to a 6¾ percent annual rate in August, but
available data suggest a more rapid expansion in September. Savings
deposits at banks increased in August for the third consecutive
month, though not as rapidly as in July, and the rate of expansion
appears to be slowing further in September. Small time deposits posted
another strong gain last month; large time deposits included in
M-2 advanced at about the same pace in August as in July, after the out-
standing level had declined sharply over the second quarter. Deposit inflows
to thrift institutions are estimated to have picked up a bit in August on a
month-end basis.
Comparison of FOMC Policy Ranges for
August-September
to Latest Staff Estimates
Ranges Latest Estimates
Federal funds rate
(percent per annum) 10¾ to 11½ 1/- Avg. for statement
(2) Bank credit expansion slowed to about a 10 percent annual
rate in August, as holdings of Treasury securities were reduced and growth
in total loans dropped off somewhat. Growth in business loans was down
from July but in line with that for the second quarter, while expansion
in real estate loans picked up for the third consecutive month. To help
finance their credit expansion, banks sold $2¼ billion of large time
deposits and raised about $4 billion from domestic nondeposit sources.
They also raised about $3 billion net through their foreign affiliates,
a significant part of which likely reflected recycling of U.S. resident
deposits in offshore banks.
(3) Following the August 14 FOMC meeting, the Account Manager
began aiming for a Federal funds rate of 11 percent, up from the 10-5/8 to
point to 10 percent. In the latter part of August, with projections for
the monetary aggregates suggesting that M-1 growth would be above the
upper end of its range and M-2 growth just below the upper bound of its
range, the Account Manager began to seek an 11¼ percent funds rate, the
top of the range specified by the Committee. On August 30, as projections
for the aggregates strengthened, the FOMC moved the upper end of the inter-
meeting range to 11 percent with the understanding that the Account Manager
would not raise the objective for the weekly average funds rate to the new
upper limit immediately but would be guided by the subsequent behavior of the
monetary aggregates and by developments in foreign exchange markets. The
Desk has since been aiming for a funds rate in the 11-3/8 percent area.
(4) Over the August-September period, total member bank reserves
are expected to grow at about an 8¾ percent annual rate. September will be
the third straight month in which total reserves have expanded, after having
declined over the first half of the year. The monetary base--reflecting
the rapid growth of currency--is projected to expand at about a 13 percent
annual rate over the two-month policy period. Member bank borrowing has
Committee meeting.
(5) In response to the System's tightening actions, short-term
the intermeeting period, and long-term bond yields have moved up 25 to 45
basis points. The relatively sharp response of market interest rates
appeared to reflect anticipations of further tightening by the System
in the face of continued rapid inflation and monetary growth. Strong
credit demands by businesses contributed to pressures in short-term markets
with nonfinancial firms issuing a near record volume of commercial paper as
well as borrowing heavily at banks. Over the intermeeting period, the
Treasury sold $2 billion of cash management bills and added $200 million to
each weekly bill auction; it also offered $2.5 billion 4-year 8-month notes.
Conventional mortgage rates have also risen in recent weeks, reflecting
the continued slow growth of deposits at thrift institutions and rising
costs of funds.
(6) The dollar's weighted average exchange value has changed little
since the August FOMC meeting, with a rise against the yen and sterling
about offsetting declines against other major currencies.
(7) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for selected monetary and financial flows over
various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institutions--which are derived
from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures. Growth rates for reserve
measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities
from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(8) Three alternative specifications for the monetary aggregates
and the Federal funds rate for the September-October period are shown below
for Committee consideration. The Federal funds rate specifications of
alternative B are centered on the currently prevailing 11¼ to 11½ percent
range. Money market conditions would be respectively eased or tightened
under alternatives A and C. (More detailed and longer-term data are
contained in the tables on pages 7 and 8.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for Sept.-Oct.
Federal funds rate
(Intermeeting period) 10½ to 11¼ 11 to l1¾ 11½ to 12¼
(9) Under alternative B, M-1 would be expected to expand in a 5 to
be slower in October than in September.and continued relatively moderate
growth is projected over the balance of the year. The expected deceleration
reflects the lagged effects of the tightening of money market conditions this
summer and the reduction in transactions demand for money associated with the
projected slowing of nominal GNP growth in the months ahead.
(10) Under alternative B, M-1 in October would be considerably
above the level implied by the upper end of the Committee's stated 1½ to 4½
percent growth range for the QIV '78 to QIV '79 period, as shown in the upper
panel of the chart on page 10. However, as is indicated in the lower
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
QIV '78-QIV '79
'78 to QIV '79 M-1 growth
_ _1
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
QIV '78-QII '79
QII '79-QIV '79
panel of the chart, when the Committee's longer-run range is adjusted to
reflect the downward revision in the staff's estimate of ATS/NOW effects on
M-1, the projected October level of M-1 under alternative B is within, though
same would be true for alternatives A and C.
(11) M-1 growth is expected to remain within its adjusted longer-run
range over the balance of the year. Expansion of M-1 in the fourth quarter is
projected to be at about a 6 percent annual rate, even assuming some slight
decline in interest rates later in the year. Growth in M-1 over the one
year QIV '78-QIV '79 period would then be about 5¼ percent, in the upper half
(12) M-2 growth also is projected to decelerate under alternative
B, expanding at a 7 to 11 percent annual rate during the September-October
period. Most of the slowdown reflects the moderation of M-1 growth, but,
in light of the current higher level of market interest rates, the rate of
expansion of savings and small time deposits subject to fixed rate ceilings
is expected to moderate. However, commercial banks should continue to
capture a relatively large proportion of flows into 6-month MMCs. With
loan demands likely to moderate only slightly in the near term, banks
are also expected to continue to issue large time deposits and borrow from
M-1 growth by 3 percentage points. In July, when the range was re-
adopted, it was estimated that ATS effects for the year would be about
half as large. At present, we estimate that such ATS effects will
reduce measured M-1 growth by a little less than 1½ percentage points.
On this basis, an adjusted range of 3 to 6 percent, or even a little
higher, would be comparable with 1½ to 4¼ percent.
growth in this aggregate in 1979 would be at the upper end of its
adjusted longer-run range.
Growth Ranges and Actual M-1
LONGER-RUN RANGE REFLECTING 3 PERCENTAGE
POINT IMPACT FROM ATS ASSUMED IN FEB. '79
Alt. B Short-Run Range --
.ONGER-RUN RANGE REFLECTING 1 PERCENTAGE POINT IMPACT FROM ATS A
Alt. B Short-Run Range--
I I i I i i
O N D 3 F M A M J
I I
Billions of dollars
385
Q4 '78-Q4 '79
- 375
- 370
- 365
- 360
. 6%
__3%
""" - 370
Growth Ranges and Actual M-2 and M-3
Current Longer-Run Range ---
Alt. B Short-Run Range -
Q4 '78-Q4 '79
- -
I I I I 1 II I I
Billions of dollars
950
L 860
Q4 '78-Q4 '79Current Longer-Run Range -----
Ait. B Short-Run Range
I i i
O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D
abroad. S&L and MSB deposit inflows are projected to continue sluggish,
despite their likely further use of large time deposits.
(13) As shown in the upper panel of the chart on page 11, growth
in M-2 under alternative B would place that aggregate in October around the
period. And for the one-year period, staff projections indicate that M-2
will grow at a rate about equal to the upper limit. Largely reflecting
the slow deposit growth at thrifts because of the absence of the MMC inter-
institutional ceiling rate differential at current and projected rates of
interest, M-3 growth is expected to remain within its longer-run range, though
in the upper half.
(14) There may still be some expectation in the market that the
Federal funds rate will rise over the near term. Thus, if funds continue
to trade around the prevailing 11-3/8 percent--the midpoint of the alternative B
range--both short- and long-term market rates could decline. However, any
such movement is likely to be limited since aggregate credit demands are
expected to remain strong in the weeks ahead, before edging off later in
the year as economic activity weakens. Business credit demands are likely
to continue to be substantial in the very near term, mainly in short-term
markets. In addition, the amount of cash raised by the Treasury in the
market over the next month is expected to remain near recent levels, with
the sale of $1 to $2 billion of 15-year bonds and $200 million add-ons to
weekly bill auctions. In the near term, new issues of municipal bonds are
likely to continue sizable, given the large volume of mortgage revenue bonds
still in the pipeline. With the Federal funds rate unchanged and no
significant decline expected in other money market rates, adoption of
Alternative B should in itself have no substantial impact on the value of
the dollar in exchange markets.
(15) Alternative A calls for a decline in the Federal funds rate
to the midpoint of a 10 to 11 percent range, and would be associated with
ranges for M-1 and M-2 of 5 to 9 and 8 to 12 percent, respectively. In
the current environment, an easing in policy would take the market by surprise,
and the initial reaction to such a development would likely be a rather
sharp drop in both short- and long-term interest rates, particularly if
market participants were to interpret the easing as the cyclical turning
point in interest rates. In foreign exchange markets, the dollar would
very probably come under strong downward pressure. The rally in bond markets
might be constrained by a buildup of the corporate bond calendar, as firms
accelerated offerings, and by continuing investor concern about the outlook
for inflation. The anticipated decline in interest rates under alternative A
is likely to be associated with only a slight easing of mortgage markets,
especially since short-term interest rates would not be expected to decline
sufficiently to restore the differential on MMC's favoring thrift institutions.
(16) Alternative C involves an increase in the Federal funds rate
to the midpoint of an 11½ to 12¼ percent range and would tend to exert
more restraint on the monetary aggregates over the months ahead than
alternative B. While some tightening in the System's funds rate objective
may still be built into the current level of rates, a rise in the funds rate
of the dimensions contemplated by alternative C would be expected to trigger
further increasesin market rates. Such interest rate adjustments would
likely be associated with a modest strengthening of the dollar in foreign
exchange markets. Domestically, a further rise in the funds rate might
prompt thrift institutions to make vigorous efforts to reduce outstanding
mortgage commitments, which are now high relative to cash flows. Pressures
on banks would be increased not only as their cost of funds rose but also
as businesses shifted even more borrowing to short-term maturities in
anticipation that a cyclical peak in rates was being approached.
Directive language
(17) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for the
directive in the customary form, with alternative language related to
the short-run specifications presented in the preceding section. Alternative
language is also provided for placing main emphasis either on monetary
aggregates or on money market conditions. The specifications adopted last
month are shown in strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions that are broadly consistent
with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited above,
while giving due regard to developing conditions in foreign
exchange and domestic financial markets. Early in the period
before the next regular meeting, System open market operations
are to be directed at attaining a (OR MAINTAINING THE) weekly
average Federal funds rate
(A) SLIGHTLY BELOW THE CURRENT LEVEL.
(B) AT ABOUT THE CURRENT LEVEL.
(C) slightly above the current level.
Subsequently, operations shall be directed at maintaining the
weekly average Federal funds rate within the range of [DEL: 10¾ to
for the Federal funds rate the Manager shall be guided mainly by
the relationship between the latest estimates of annual rates of
growth in the [DEL: August-September] SEPTEMBER-OCTOBER period of M-
and M-2 and the following ranges of tolerance: [DEL: 4-to-8] ____ TO
____ percent for M-1 and [DEL: 7 to 11] ____ TO ____ percent for M-2.
from 11¼ percent to 11½ percent.
If rates of growth of M-1 and M-2, given approximately equal
weight, appear to be
Monetary aggregates emphasis
SIGNIFICANTLY ABOVE OR BELOW THE MIDPOINTS
Money market emphasis
close to or beyond the upper or lower limits
of the indicated ranges, the objective for the funds rate is
to be raised or lowered in an orderly fashion within its range.
If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear to be beyond
the upper or lower limits of the indicated ranges at a time when
the objective for the funds rate has already been moved to the
corresponding limit of its range, the Manager shall promptly
notify the Chairman, who will then decide whether the situation
calls for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
