Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
January 4, 1980Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC January 4, 1980
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M-1 in November and December expanded at annual rates of
to December, this aggregate grew at.a 3 percent annual rate, below
the objective of just over 4 percent that was consistent with the Committee's
decision at the November FOMC meeting.2/ (Actual and targeted growth rates
for the fourth quarter and the year 1979 are shown in the table below.)
The 7 percent rate of expansion of M-2 for the three-month policy period was
also below its targeted growth rate of 8-1/2 percent, with growth in the
interest-bearing component of this aggregate slowing as the quarter progressed.
September to December 1978:Q4 to 1979:Q4
Targeted Actual Targeted Actual
Monetary Aggregates
Total Reserves 13½ 13.9 -- 2.8
Nonborrowed Reserves 10¾ 13.1 -- 0.8
Monetary Base 9¼ 8.3 -- 7.6
M-1 growth by about 1½ percentage points over the longer-run policy period
rather than the 3 percentage points originally estimated in February.
4/ Targeted reserve aggregate paths reflect adjustments made subsequent to the
November FOMC meeting for apparent sustained changes in deposit mix and
higher than anticipated levels of excess reserves.
Inflows to MMC's and large denomination time deposits accounted for all of
the growth. M-3 registered a 6-1/4 percent rate of growth during the last
three months of the year as thrift institutions--particularly credit unions
and mutual savings banks--were less successful than banks in attracting
deposits in the current environment of high interest rates. As shown in
Charts 1 and 2, the deceleration of growth in the monetary aggregates over
recent months kept the growth of M-1 and M-3 within the Committee's
desired longer-run ranges for the year ending with the fourth quarter of
range and--even with the sharp fourth quarter deceleration--bank credit
exceeded its longer-run growth range.
(2) Over the fourth quarter, growth in total reserves was
close to the target path developed by the staff to be consistent with
the Committee's desired growth for the key monetary aggregates, while
growth in nonborrowed reserves was above path, as may be seen from the
bottom panel of the table on the preceding page. Growth in the monetary
base was below target as the public's desire to increase holdings of
currency--the principal component of the base--turned out to be below
even the relatively slow growth that the staff had anticipated. The
total reserves supplied could have been sufficient to offset
the impact on M-1 of weak currency growth since more reserves than
expected were being released in December by shortfalls relative to
expectations in non-money liabilities of banks. However, banks in December
held an unusually and unexpectedly high level of excess reserves, thereby
absorbing the reserves that might otherwise have been used to support money.
Chart 1 CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
M-1 Billions of dollars
385
--- Current Longer-Run Range
- Q 4 '78- Q 4 '79 - 375
,^ / ^-.- 3%
- 370
- -r
-- ' -- 365
- 360
- 355
SI I I I I I I I 350
O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D
M2 Billions of dollars
S- 940
- 930
Q4 '78-Q4 '79
Y .. 5% - 920
- 910
- 900
, -- 890
-- 880
- 870
SI I I I I I I 860
O N 0 J
(3) In addition, the relation between reserve and money growth
over any particular time span can diverge because of lagged reserve account-
ing. Demand deposits were weak relative to path in December, thereby affect-
ing the demand for total reserves in late December and early January (and
tending to reduce the rate of growth in total reserves on average from
December to January). Given the recent weakness in reserve demand, the
level of borrowings declined from the $1.7 billion level initially set at
the FOMC meeting. Most recently, the Desk had expected a level of borrow-
ings in the $1.1 to $1.3 billion range, reflecting both weakness in required
reserves and an upward adjustment of some $150 million in the nonborrowed
reserve path for the three weeks ending January 9 in view of the projected
weakness in total reserves.
(4) The drop in member bank borrowing since the Committee meet-
ing has not been associated with any decline in the federal funds rate, as
may be seen in the table below. In part, the unusually strong demand by
banks for excess reserves in recent weeks may have held up the funds rate.
But in addition, in December banks may have shied away from use of the
discount window, thereby exerting somewhat pressure on the funds market,
following relatively active use of the window in late October and November.
Average
Federal Member bank Excess
funds rate borrowing reserves
(percent) ($ millions) ($ millions)
(5) On balance, since the November FOMC meeting, most short-
term market rates--apart from the funds rate--declined about 20 to 50 basis
points, and yields on Treasury bonds have fallen about 10 basis points.
Yields on high grade corporate and municipal banks, in contrast, have been
essentially unchanged. Mortgage rates have edged higher since the last
Committee meeting, and commitments and lending declined sharply at S&Ls in
November. The Treasury borrowed heavily during the intermeeting period,
raising $3.5 billion of new cash at its regular bill auctions, $5.3 bil-
lion in cash management bills, and another $4.8 billion of new cash in
hand, was relatively light.
(6) The dollar's exchange value has dropped by almost 3 percent
on a weighted-average basis since the last FOMC meeting, reflecting market
reaction to political developments in the Middle East and to a relative
increase in foreign interest rates.
. U.S. authorities purchased, net,
$300 million equivalent of marks toward repayment of Federal Reserve swap
indebtedness through year-end, but in early January U.S. authorities
sold about $220 million equivalent of foreign currencies, mainly DM.
Exchange markets have been thin and volatile--day-to-day fluctuations in
rates and the size of bid-asked spreads have been unusually wide. Gold
resumed its feverish rise, most recently being quoted at $590 per ounce,
up $200 from the last Committee meeting.
(7) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of changes, in percent, for selected monetary and financial flows
over various time periods. This is followed by a table that shows rates
of growth by the redefined monetary aggregates over the same time periods,
in comparison to current definitions.
Past
Six
Past
Three
Months
Past
Month
Dec. '79 Dec. '79 Dec. '79
. . over over over
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Managed Liabilities of Banks
(Monthly average change in
billions)
_/ December to December
2/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
3/ Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
4/ Primarily Federal funds purchases and securities sold under agreements to repurchase.
5/ Through November 1979.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on total loans
and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institutions--which are
derived from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures. Growth rates for
reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of
discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Past
Six
Past
Three
Months
Past
Month
Current Concepts of Money
M-I (Currency plus demand
deposits 2/)
M-2 (M-1 plus time deposits at
commercial banks other than
large CD's)
M-3 (M-2 plus deposits at thrift
institutions)
M-4 (M-2 plus CD's)
M-5 (M-4 plus CD's)
Redefined Concepts of Money
M-1A (Currency plus demand
deposits 2/)
M-1B (M-1A plus other checkable
deposits)
M-2 (M-IB plus small time and
savings deposits, money
market mutual fund shares
and overnight RP's and Euro-
dollars)
M-3 (M-2 plus large time deposits
and term RP's)
December to December
Other than interbank and U.S.
Other than interbank and U.S.
Government.
Government and foreign banks and official institutions.
Alternative longer-run targets and strategy
(8) This section of the bluebook presents material to provide
a basis for preliminary Committee discussion of longer-run target ranges
for the aggregates for 1980, and perhaps beyond--preparatory to making
a decision on these matters at the February meeting. The table below
shows two alternative sets of ranges for 1980 (QIV '79 to QIV '80) as a
starting point for discussion. The ranges shown in the upper panel are
in terms of monetary aggregates as currently defined, while preliminary
estimates of consistent target ranges based on new definitions of the
aggregates are presented in the lower panel. These new definitions will
be ready for publication in February, and the Committee would presumably
make its decision at the February meeting in terms of the newly defined
measures. (The monetary targets for the current and new series are
reconciled in appendix B.)
Addendum:
Growth rate
Alt. I Alt. II Current in 1979
Current definitions
New definitions
M-1A 4½ to 7½ 3 to 6 -- 5.0
(9 ) Alternative I represents a continuation of current policy
with respect to growth of M-1 after adjustment is made for shifts out of
existing demand deposits into ATS accounts. In recent months, it has
been assumed that such shifts would reduce M-1 growth for 1979 as a whole
by about 1-1/2 percentage points, with the bulk of the shift having
occurred in the first half of the year. The staff's judgment at present
is that the initial stock adjustment to the introduction of the new pay-
ments service has been virtually completed and therefore that growth in
ATS accounts in the future will not reflect significant shifts out of
1/
existing demand deposit accounts. Thus, the 4-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent
M-1 growth under alternative I for 1980 would be equivalent--after
allowance for estimated ATS effects--to the 3 to 6 percent target for
of the time and savings deposit components of M-2, would be 6 to 9 per-
cent. If the present 5 to 8 percent range for M-2 were retained, growth
would probably again be near the upper end of the range.
(10) Alternative II presents a set of monetary growth ranges
for 1980 indexed by a 3 to 6 percent rate of growth for M-1. The
sizable difference in growth rates of M-1 between alternatives I
and II--a difference of 1-1/2 percentage points--has been chosen
to help clarify differential economic impacts of policy alternatives.
Of course, the Committee may wish to choose growth rates between I
and II, or even higher than I or lower than II. Economic effects of various
longer-run strategies are noted in the ensuing paragraphs.
(11) The implications for the economy of alternative I, which
assumes a 6 percent M-1 growth over the projection period, are laid out in
detail in the Greenbook. A summary of effects of this assumption on
nominal GNP, real GNP, prices, and unemployment is shown in the first row
of each panel of the table on the next page. The second row of each panel
shows the projected effects of holding M-1 growth to 4½ percent--the mid-
point of the alternative II range--over each of the next three years. As
compared with the higher money growth rate, the lower M-1 growth rate
reduces the rate of increase in prices by about a percentage point after
three years (the end of 1982), but retarding effects on real GNP through-
out the period are substantial. The differential impacts of alternative M-1
strategies assume the rather long lag between monetary policy changes and
price effects that has characterized past experience and that is reflected
in our quarterly econometric model. If price expectations in labor and
product markets have become more directly sensitive to announced monetary
policy, the damping effects on price from a slowing in money growth might
well be more pronounced, and the retarding effects on output less so.
Announcement of a 4½ percent M-1 target may also have a favorable effect
on the exchange value of the dollar since it would probably be taken to
signify stronger efforts to contain inflation. But any benefits achieved
by announcement of a relatively low money growth target would be quickly
dissipated if sustained inflationary momentum, in combination with a need
to moderate economic weakness, made it impractical for the Committee to hold
money growth to the target.
Economic Implications of
Alternative Long-Run
Policy Strategies
Nominal GNP (% Change, Q4/Q4)
Real GNP (% Change, Q4/Q4)
Implicit GNP Deflator
(% Change, Q4/Q4)
Unemployment Rate (%, Q4 Level)
as III with regard to M-l, but also includes a federal tax
cut. The tax cut amounts to about $30 billion, half of
which reflects a reduction in corporate income tax rates,
effective mid-1980,and the other half a rollback of social
security rate and base increases scheduled for 1981.
(12) A faster rate of growth in M-1 than the midpoint of
alternative I--say one near the 7 percent upper end of the range--would
raise output and prices,with impacts roughly equal in magnitude to the
constraining effects of alternative II. While such an accelerated rate of
M-1 growth for 1980 could be construed as a temporary accommodation to the
increase in energy prices imposed by OPEC, it is also likely that its
announcement would further fuel inflationary expectations and adversely affect
the dollar in exchange markets. Thus, it could result in an even more
rapid increase in prices, less stimulative impacts on output, and,over
time,further upward pressures on interest rates.
(13) The third row of each panel in the table indicates the
probable results of a strategy of maintaining a 6 percent rate of growth
in M-1 for 1980, but reducing this growth rate gradually over the next two
years to 5 percent and then to 4 percent. This strategy would be
associated with less output loss over the period than strategy II and
would restrain inflation more than strategy I. Whether such a policy
can be undertaken with even less adverse effects on output and employment
depends, of course, on success of the policy in reducing inflationary
expectations, particularly as such expectations affect decisions in labor
and product markets. Announcement of a firmly held intention to lower
growth rates might tend to reduce such expectations more than would
announcement of only, for example, a one-year goal of 6 percent M-1 growth.
On the other hand, announcement of multi-year targets leaves the System
more exposed to the possibility that unforeseen events will require adjust-
ments in the announced targets, and therefore heightens the risk that the
credibility of the targeting process may be impaired.
(14) While there is not yet any clear Administration or
Congressional impetus for a discretionary fiscal policy change, the fore-
casted weakness of the economy does suggest the distinct possibility of
a tax cut initiative later this year. To provide the Committee with some
idea of how such an action--particularly one designed to have a relatively
favorable price impact--might affect the environment for monetary policy,
a tax cut projection has been included in the fourth row of each panel.
The rate of price increase is reduced by a rollback of social security
tax increases now scheduled for the beginning of 1981. Thisand an assumed
general corporate tax cut taking effect in the third quarter of 1980,also
would tend to increase real spending.
Policy alternatives for the short-run
(15) Shown below for Committee consideration are three alternative
growth rates for the monetary aggregates covering the first three months
of 1980 and associated federal funds rate ranges for the period between
now and the February meeting. Aggregates in the upper panel are based
on the current definitions, which would provide the basis for operations
until the next meeting. Preliminary estimates of consistent rates of
growth on the new definitions are shown in the second panel to help
prepare the transition to such measures at the February meeting. More
detailed data for current definitions, including growth rates on a quarterly
average basis related to alternative longer-run paths, are shown in the
tables on pp. 15 and 16 .
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Annual growth rates,
December to March
Current definitions:
Revised definitions:
Federal funds rate range
until next FOMC meeting 10½ to 15½ 11½ to 15½ 11½ to 16
(16) The Committee's choice of a shorter-run monetary growth
path for the first three months of 1980 may depend in part on the longer-
run target it chooses and in part on the pattern of money growth it wishes
to see over the course of the year. (The relation of the proposed shorter-
run targets to the midpoints of longer-run alternatives I and II is displayed
in chart 3, following page 16). Growth through the year can be
targeted at a pace roughly equal to the longer-run objective, or growth
can be higher (lower) early in the year and offsettingly lower (higher)
later in the year. Given the projected pattern of money demand, various
target paths during the year selected by the Committee would have differing
effects on interest rates, on exchange markets, and on the probability of
success in attaining particular long-run targets. In the ensuing analysis
the transactions demand for money is assumed to be weakest in the first
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
February
March
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
Alt, A
Alt. I Alt. II
Alt. B
Alt. I Alt. II
Alt. C
Alt. I Alt. II
Alt. A
Alt. I
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. II Alt. I
Alt. II
Alt. II Alt. I
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
February
March
Growth Rates
Monthly
Alt. A
Alt. I Alt. II
Quarterly Average
Alt. B
Alt. I
Alt. C
Alt. II
Alt. I Alt. II
Alt, A
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. I
Alt. II
Alt. I
Alt. II
Alt. I Alt. II
half of the year, when economic activity and nominal GNP growth are
projected to be weakest, and then to strengthen, along with nominal GNP,
in the second half.
(17) The recent relatively slow growth of M-1 raises the possi-
bility that the record level of interest rates following the October 6
program may have induced another round of one-time shifts out of existing
money balances. Even if any such shift has about run its course,
demands for cash in the first quarter of 1980 may still be fairly weak,
given the less than 5 percent annual rate of increase in nominal GNP that
is projected for that period. Thus, achievement of the 6 percent annual
growth rate for M-1 over the first quarter in alternative A--which appears to
involve increases of about 8 and 3 percent in the monetary base and total
reserves, respectively--may be accompanied by relatively substantial
declines of interest rates from current levels.
(18) The federal funds rate may drop to, or conceivably below,
the bottom of the 10½ to 15½ percent range specified for alternative A
over the next few weeks, and the 3-month bill rate could be in a 9 to 10
percent area. If the discount rate were not changed from the present
$200 to $300 million, and nonborrowed reserves would expand by about 15
percent over the quarter. Of course, if the discount rate were reduced
significantly under the circumstances, member bank borrowing would be
somewhat higher.
(19) A sizable rally in bond markets would seem likely under
this alternative, even though some pick-up in bond offerings may be expected
as corporations take the opportunity to fund large short-term indebtedness.
Mortgage rates also would decline, as spreads widen against bond yields
and thrift institutions become more confident about the availability of
lower cost deposits to fund mortgage acquisitions.
(20) The substantial decline in short rates that appear to
be implied by alternative A probably would be accompanied by significant
downward pressures on the international value of the dollar, especially
if the dollar also remains under pressure because of the crises in the
mid-East. Downward pressures would be strongest if market participants
come to expect a further decline in U.S. interest rates and interpret the
decline of interest rates as a sign that the Fed's resolve to combat
inflation has weakened.
(21) However, assuming that the decline in economic activity
has begun to abate by summer, but that the rate of inflation has not slowed
significantly, interest rates would probably begin rising during the spring
or summer if M-1 growth over the year 1980 were held to 6 percent or less,
as shown in the first and fourth columns of appendix C. For a given longer-
run growth rate, interest rates would be at higher levels by year-end under
this alternative than under alternatives B and C, partly because it will
provide a little greater stimulus to economic activity and partly because
the larger expansion of M-1 in the first quarter will allow less scope to
accommodate the subsequent increase in the transactions demand for money as
nominal GNP expands in the second half.
(22) In order to achieve the 5 percent rate of growth of M-1
in the first quarter specified under alternative B, a decline in interest
rates from current levels would also be likely. The funds rate, for example,
would probably drop over the next few weeks into the lower half of the 11½
to 15½ percent rate range shown for this alternative, with the 3-month bill
rate declining to the 10 to 11 percent area. Over the first quarter the
monetary base and total reserves might have to increase at about 7½ and 2½
percent rates, respectively, and with member bank borrowings falling to
around $800 to $900 million, nonborrowed reserves would expand by about
(23) Even the more modest decline in money market rates
associated with alternative B is likely to induce a rally in bond markets
as it becomes clear that interest rates have peaked. The decline in
mortgage rates would probably be moderate, though. Net inflows of funds
to thrift institutions are likely to pick up only modestly from their
second half of 1979 pace, and costs of such funds would not decline as
much as under alternative A. The exchange value of the dollar under
alternative B is likely to decline somewhat as market participants focus
on the decline of interest rates, but there would be less downward pressure
than under alternative A, in part because any interest rate declines under
alternative B would be associated with slower money growth.
(24) The more modest money growth over the next few months under
alternative B provides more scope for expansion in M-1 in the second half
of 1980 than does alternative A. Moreover, the smaller reduction of interest
rates, as compared with alternative A, would provide less stimulus to nominal
GNP and money demand later this year. Thus, under this alternative interest
rates may drift downward through summer under longer-run alternative I,
shown in the second column of appendix C. However, under the more restrictive
longer-run policy of alternative II, interest rates would probably begin
rising by spring as the quantity of money demanded tended to expand more
rapidly than the supply that would be provided consistent with the 4½ percent
midpoint of the alternative II path.
(25) Alternative C contemplates a rate of growth of M-1 of
about 4 percent in the first three months of 1980, which, given the
staff's GNP outlook, would probably involve little, if any, decline in
interest rates from current levels in that period. The funds rate may be
a bit below the 13 percent midpoint of the 11½ to 16 percent federal funds
rates specified for this alternative, with the 3-month bill rate around
and total reserves is likely to be about 7 and 1½ percent, respectively;
assuming borrowings of about $1¼ billion or a bit higher, nonborrowed
reserves might increase at about a 4 percent rate. Longer-term interest rates
probably would decline no more than modestly from current levels over the
next few weeks, as it became clear to market participants that, despite
relatively slow growth in M-1, very little ease was developing in money
market conditions. Alternative C would tend to help support the exchange
value of the dollar since it would be associated with maintenance of a
relatively high level of interest rates.
(26) The relatively high level of interest rates of alternative C
in the first quarter would probably not be long sustained, however, if the
Committee sought a 6 percent growth rate for M-1 for the year 1980. The
funds rate would be expected to decline by early spring, and reach levels
by year-end lower than under alternative B. However, should the Committee
seek to restrain M-1 growth to a 4½ percent rate during 1980, interest
rates would probably change little over the balance of the year.
Directive language
(27) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for
the directive consistent with the form of the directive adopted at
the October and November meetings. It calls for expansion of reserve
aggregates at a pace consistent with the desired rates of growth in
M-1 and M-2 over the first quarter of 1980, provided that the federal
funds rate on a weekly average basis remains within a specified range.
The range for the funds rate adopted on November 20 is shown in strike-
through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks [DEL: to restrain
expansion of reserve aggregates [DEL: to a pace] consistent with
[DEL: deceleration in] growth of M-1, AND M-2 [DEL: , and M-3 in] OVER the
[DEL: fourth] FIRST quarter of [DEL: 1979 to] 1980 AT ANNUAL rates OF ABOUT
____ AND ____ PERCENT RESPECTIVELY [DEL: that would hold growth
of these monetary aggrgegates over the whole period from the
fourth quarter of 1978 to the fourth quarter of 1979 within
the-Committee's longer-run ranges], provided that in the period
before the next regular meeting the weekly average federal
funds rate remains within a range of [DEL: 11½ to 15½] ____ TO ____
If it appears during the period before the next
meeting that the constraint on the federal funds rate is
inconsistent with the objective for the expansion of reserves,
the Manager for Domestic Operations is promptly to notify the
Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls for
supplementary instructions from the Committee.
