Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
March 14, 1980
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) March 14, 1980
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Growth of the monetary aggregates accelerated sharply in
February, moving them well above the Committee's December-to-March target
paths. M-1A grew at about a 12 percent annual rate in February, and at a
7¾ percent rate over the first two months of the year. M-2 was further
buoyed by larger than expected growth of money market mutual funds and M-3
by enlarged issuance of large time deposits at commercial banks to finance
a sharp pick-up in bank credit. Despite large MMC sales, outstanding
small denomination deposits at thrifts declined in January and February, and
only issuance of large time deposits by S&Ls (included in M-3) prevented
a contraction of total thrift deposits. In late February and early March,
transactions deposits declined sharply, and growth in M-1A and M-1B for
March is projected to be very low. On that assumption, growth rates in
these aggregates would be about 1 percentage point above the Committee's
targets for the December-March period. Growth in M-2 over that span would
likely be somewhat stronger relative to target.
Dec. to
Jan. Feb. Dec. to Feb. Mar. Target
Monetary Aggregates
(2) The seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth in the family
of reserve measures that originally appeared consistent with the monetary
targets adopted by the FOMC for the December to March period at its last
meeting are shown in the first column of the table below. As indicated by
the second column, the original path for total reserves was adjusted down-
ward to allow for reduced member bank demand for excess reserves, larger
than expected growth in nonmember bank deposits and currency, and less than
expected growth in reservable member bank deposits not included in M-1 or M-2.
In addition, the nonborrowed reserve path was reduced still more in an effort
to exert greater restraint on total reserves and money. Thus far in the
quarter, growth in the monetary base and total reserves has been running
above the adjusted target, while growth in nonborrowed reserves has fallen
below target.
Nonborrowed res
Total reserves
Monetary base
Reserve Targets for December to March Period
and Actual Growth
Original Path
for Dec.-Mar. Path Reflecting
Period Adjustments
(as of Feb. FOMC During Inter-1/
meeting) meeting Period -
erves 1.9 -6.8
-0.3 -4.9
7.1 5.8
Actual
Growth thus
far in Quarter
(Dec. to first
3 weeks of March)
1/ See appendix I for paths and adjustments during intermeeting period on a
not seasonally adjusted basis.
(3) With demands for reserves large relative to supply, and with
the increase in the discount rate on February 15, the federal funds rate
moved up from the 13¼ to 13¾ percent range of earlier weeks to the 14 to
15 percent range in the latter part of February. Recognizing that the
adjustments in the reserve paths would likely entail additional pressures on
the money market, the Committee approved an increase in the upper limit of its
federal funds rate constraint from 15 to 16 percent on February 22 and
then to 18 percent on March 7. By early March funds were trading in excess
of 17 percent on some days and averaged 16.45 percent in the most recent
complete statement week. Member bank borrowing rose in the course of
the intermeeting period, reaching an exceptionally higher level of $3.4
billion on average in the statement week ending March 12; in the preceding
three statement weeks borrowing had averaged about $2 1/4 billion.
(4) Interest rates moved up sharply on balance during the inter-
meeting period as inflationary expectations worsened. Continuing the
sharp rise that had begun in January, bond yields rose about to 1 per-
centage points further, and interest rates on home mortgages have jumped
sharply in the past three weeks. Short-term rates, which had not risen
earlier in the year, increased 3 to 4 percentage points over the inter-
meeting period. They began to rise in mid-February as bank reserve positions
tightened and the discount rate was increased. Pressures in short-term
markets were reinforced by bank issuance of CD's to finance strong credit
demands and by large sales of Treasury bills by foreign official institutions
to finance currency support operations. Uncertainties about the timing
and content of the government's anti-inflation program also contributed to
the market's unsettledness.
(5) In recent weeks, the dollar has shown remarkable strength
in the exchange markets.
, the weighted-average value of the dollar has risen by
about 44 percent since the last Committee meeting.1 This strength was
attributable to the steep rise in U.S. interest rates, to anticipations of
a forthcoming anti-inflation package, to a growing appreciation by the
market of the magnitudes of current account deficits in major countries
abroad, and to the acceleration of inflation in other countries.
(6) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for selected monetary and financial flows over
various time periods.
Partial data through late February, however,
indicate that U.S. banking offices have raised only a moderate amount
of funds offshore, perhaps because this would increase their reservable
managed liabilities. This implies that the privately acquired dollars
may have been channeled into increased net borrowing of U.S. nonfinancial
corporations (possibly through their own foreign affiliates) from foreign
banks or foreign commercial credit sources.
Past
Six
Past
Three
Months
Past
Month
Feb. '80 Feb. '80 Feb. '80
S/ I over over over
1977 /  1978- /  19791 /  Aug. '79 Nov. '79 Jan. '80
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Managed Liabilities of Banks
(Monthly average change
in billions)
1/ December to December.
2/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
3/ Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
4/ Primarily federal funds purchases and securities sold under agreements to repurchase.
investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institutions--which are derived
from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures. Growth rates for reserve
measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities
from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective Developments and Short-term Targets
(7) Shown below for Committee consideration are three alternative
targets for the monetary aggregates over the six-month December to June
interval, along with implied growth rates for the February to June period.1/
Also shown are intermeeting federal funds rate ranges. The funds range
currently in effect is shown under alternative B. Because of recent upward
adjustments in the upper limit, the range has become considerably wider
than the 4 point width that had been usual since the October program was
adopted. If the Committee wished to return to a narrower range, the staff
would suggest that a 13 or 14 to 18 percent range would be generally con-
sistent with alternative B under present market circumstances (and similar
adjustments would need to be made to alternatives A and C).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth rates from Dec. to June
M-1A 5 4½ 4
M-1B 5½ 5 4½
M-2 8 7¾ 7½
Implied growth for February
to June
M-1A 3¾ 3 2¼
M-1B 4½ 3¾ 3
M-2 7½ 7 6½
Intermeeting federal funds
rate range 11 to 17½ 11½ to 18 12 to 18½
1/ Because March levels of the aggregates are subject to considerable
uncertainty (with firm data available only for the first week of the
month), it did not seem desirable to focus policy for the period ahead
on a second quarter growth rate. The more detailed tables on pages
7 and 8 do, however, show growth rates of the aggregates (including
M-3) on the more usual calendar quarter basis (based on our current
projection for March).
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1A M-1B
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
1980 February 376.3 376.3 376.3 392.8 392.8 392.8
March 376.5 376.5 376.5 393.5 393.5 393.5
April 379.4 379.2 379.0 396.6 396.4 396.2
May 379.7 379.2 378.7 397.1 396.6 396.1
June 381.0 380.1 379.2 398.5 397.6 396.7
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
1980 QI 51 51 5% 6k 6 6
QII 5k 4% 4% 5% 5k 4%
QIII 3% 4 4k 4% 4% 4%
QIV 3% 4 4% 44 4% 5
4% 5\ 5k 5k1979 QIV to 1980 QIV
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-2 M-3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
1980 February 1546.6 1546.6 1546.6 1802.4 1802.4 1802.4
March 1555.3 1555.3 1555.3 1814.9 1814.9 1814.9
April 1567.3 1566.5 1565.7 1831.6 1831.4 1831.2
May 1574.9 1573.8 1572.5 1841.6 1841.1 1840.6
June 1584.5 1582.7 1580.6 1856.6 1855.8 1855.0
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
1980 QI 71 7% 7% 8 8% 8t
QII 8 7% 7% 9% 9% 9
QIII 6% 7 7k 8 8k 8
QIV 6% 7 7k 7k 7k 7%
1979 QIV to 1980 QIV 74 7% 7% 8% 8% 81
(8) Alternative B extends through June the FOMC's previous
target rates of growth of M-1A and M-1B for the December to March period
of 4 and 5 percent annual rates, respectively. Such growth, as shown on
chart 1 on the next page, would also achieve levels of M-1A and M-1B
by June that are on the midpoint paths of the Committee's longer-run
QIV '79 to QIV '80 target ranges for these aggregates. Of course, given
the surge in growth in the aggregates in February, M-1A and M-1B growth would
have to slow considerably in the February-June period--to 3 and 3¾ percent
average annual rates, respectively. With a significant weakening in these
aggregates recently, and with nominal GNP growth projected by the staff
to decelerate in the spring quarter, such average rates of growth might be
consistent with a federal funds rate over the next few weeks not far from
the 16 to 17 percent level that has prevailed recently.1/ Restraints on
use of credit cards and check overdraft facilities in the new anti-inflation
program could tend to increase the demand for money (or more particularly
currency), but probably by no more than a minor amount, if at all, since
a certain amount of spending might be curtailed and some spenders may simply
write more checks on existing demand deposit holdings.
(9) The staff expects that under alternative B M-2 for the
December-June period would grow around 7¾ percent and by 7 percent from
February to June. This is faster than would be implied by a simple extension
of the 6 percent rate targeted for the December to March period. However,
1/ There is as yet no evidence that larger than normal tax refunds--which
began in late February--have measurably affected money growth. As noted
in the last Bluebook, growth rate of M-1A in March and April could be
increased by 1 to 3 percentage points by such refunds, with offsetting
effects in the ensuing three months. Given the continued uncertain
influence of tax refunds on the aggregates, and the lack of evidence
of any positive impact in the limited data thus far, the staff has still
made no special adjustment in the targets presented to the Committee.
The specified growth for February-June represents a significant slowing
from the February pace, and as shown in chart 2, such growth would place
M-2 in June at the midpoint of its longer-run range.
(10) The slowing of M-2 is largely a reflection of the assumed
lower rate of expansion in M-1A and M-1B. Within the nontransactions
component of M-2, inflows to money market mutual funds are projected to
moderate, but outflows at thrifts of small denomination deposits are expected
to abate. Inflows to money market funds may be restrained more substantially
by actions taken in connection with the government's new anti-inflation
program, but much of the money involved likely would remain in, or be shifted
to, other deposit accounts in M-2, as well as in M-3. Thus, we would expect
only a relatively minor effect on the total of M-2 and M-3 growth from the
new program, though the distribution of growth among components of the
aggregates would be affected.
(11) The specifications of alternative B imply an annual rate of
growth from February to June of the monetary base and of total reserves of
about 7¾ percent and 5¾ percent, at annual rates, respectively. Member
bank borrowings might average around the $2½ billion over the next few
weeks; assuming that they then edge down toward about $1¾ billion by mid-
year, nonborrowed reserves would increase at about a 4¾ percent annual
rate over the February-June period. The level of borrowing and growth of
nonborrowed reserves would, of course, be affected by any changes in bank
attitudes toward the discount window. It is not clear whether the newly
instituted 3 point surcharge over the basic discount rate will tend to
encourage more willing use of the window, at least up to the point where
the surcharge goes into effect, or will encourage banks to be more
conservative for fear that unexpected events may force them to borrow at
the higher rate.
(12) Business external financing requirements are expected to
remain substantial in the second quarter as capital outlays are projected
to move higher while internal cash flow falls off. It is possible that
some of the financing need may have already been met to the extent that the
recent surge in borrowing at banks reflected anticipation of credit controls.
Even so, there is likely to be some conflict between business borrowing
needs in the near-term and the special credit restraint program. If the
guidelines of that program are followed, they would imply a marked slowing
in loan growth, given the relatively rapid growth that has already occurred
this year. However, if the new program leads to a reduction of inflationary
expectations, the associated drop that is likely to occur in bond yields
may divert some business borrowing to that market. On balance, it seems
likely that bank credit growth will slow in the months ahead from the very
rapid January-February pace, but still may be large enough to require banks
to continue to issue high cost managed liabilities. Thrifts and mortgage
markets too are likely to remain under considerable tension in the months
ahead absent any substantial decline in short-term rates over the near-term--
which seems unlikely given the monetary targets of alternative B.
(13) Alternative C calls for lower money targets than alternative
B. In the February-June period, M-1A would expand at a 2¼ percent annual
rate. This alternative probably would require some further rise in the
federal funds rate over the next few weeks toward the 18 percent area.
Money market rates generally would follow the funds rate upward, but rate
effects in bond markets would tend to be dominated by factors influencing
inflationary expectations. The tightening of money markets that appears
needed under alternative C might be construed by the market as reinforcing
the new anti-inflation program, and this could lead to some easing of bond
market pressures even as short rates rise. Still, earnings pressures on
financial intermediaries would be intensified, and consumer and mortgage
credit conditions would tighten further. The dollar would likely strengthen
further, even though some additional U.S. monetary restraint would not come as
a great surprise to the market; foreign central bank intervention sales,
however, would likely limit the extent of the rise in the dollar's exchange
(14) As shown in the charts, the aggregate specifications of
alternative C imply that M-1A and M-1B would be below their midpoint paths
by June. Consequently, to achieve the midpoint of the longer-run ranges
for all of 1980, the Committee would have to raise money growth in the
second half of the year. In that period, interest rates are expected to be
under downward pressure in any event in view of the sharp reduction in real
GNP that the staff is projecting. A federal funds rate of around 14 per-
cent would be projected for late 1980 under alternative B, and would be
a bit lower under alternative C.
(15) Alternative C would probably require growth in the monetary
base over the February to June period at about a 7 percent annual rate,
while total reserves would expand at a 5 percent rate. Nonborrowed
reserves may expand at about a ½ percent annual rate, assuming an initial
level of borrowing of around $2¾ billion and a gradual decline beginning
around mid-spring.
(16) Compared to the other alternatives, alternative A involves
a greater increase in money over the four months ending in June, with
M-1A targeted to expand at a 3¾ percent rate over that period. The monetary
base and total reserves might expand at annual rates of 8 and 6 percent,
respectively. As shown in the charts, the more rapid rates of growth of
aggregates anticipated under alternative A would carry them to levels in
June above their midpoint paths. The somewhat greater reserve supply would
tend to be associated with some downward pressure on money market rates.
The federal funds rate possibly would decline to about the 15 to 15 per-
cent area over the next few weeks, with an associated member bank borrowing
of around $1¾ billion. Nonborrowed reserves would expand at about a 6½
percent annual rate in the February to June period.
(17) The immediate decline in money market rates that could
develop under alternative A might be viewed by the markets as inconsistent
with the new anti-inflation program. Under that interpretation, the
dollar might weaken on foreign exchange markets; in addition, any
tendency of the bond markets to rally would be limited by continued
inflationary expectations. The short-term rate decline under this alterna-
tive over the next few weeks is not likely to be large enough to make any
significant difference for thrift deposit flows, and mortgage markets would
continue taut.
-14-
Directive language
(18) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for
the directive consistent with the form of the directive adopted at recent
meetings. It calls for expansion of reserve aggregates at a pace consistent
with the desired rates of monetary growth over the first half of 1980, pro-
vided that the federal funds rate on a weekly average basis remains within
a specified range. The specifications adopted at the last meeting, adjusted
for the March 7 increase in the upper limit of the range for the federal
funds rate, are shown in strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks expansion of reserve
aggregates consistent with growth over the first {DEL: quarter] HALF of
1980 at an annual rate of about [DEL: 4½] ____ percent for M-1A and [DEL: 5] ____
percent for M-1B, provided that in the period before the next
regular meeting the weekly average federal funds rate remains within
a range of [DEL: 11½ to 18] ____ TO ____ percent. The Committee believes
that, consistent with this short-run policy, M-2 [DEL: as newly defined]
should grow at an annual rate of about [DEL: 6½] ____ percent over the
first [DEL: quarter] HALF.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that the
constraint on the federal funds rate is inconsistent with the
objective for the expansion of reserves, the Manager for Domestic
Operations is promptly to notify the Chairman who will then decide
whether the situation calls for supplementary instructions from the
