Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
May 16, 1980
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC May 16, 1980
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) The record decline in demand deposits in April led to a
contraction in all of the targeted monetary aggregates last month. M-LA
and M-1B showed particularly sharp rates of decrease, even after allowing
for a probable 5 to 8 percentage point impact from larger-than-seasonal
reductions in private demand balances in connection with the Treasury's
quicker processing of nonwithheld tax payments. The underlying
weakness in money supply over the past several weeks most likely reflects
not only the lagged effect of previous high interest rates, but also
net repayment of bank debt at a time of sizable reduction in economic
activity. The non-transactions component of M-2 also was weaker in April,
largely as a result of marked slowing of the growth of MMMF shares that
followed the Board's March 14 actions and of reductions in overnight RP
and Eurodollar deposits. Total managed liabilities at banks declined as
bank credit contracted. Owing mainly to the April developments, the growth
in the monetary aggregates over the first four months of 1980 has been
Target Actual
Monetary Aggregates Dec. to June Dec. to April April
M-1A 4½ -1.5 -18.5
M-1B 5 0.0 -14.4
M-2 7¾ 4.6 -2.8
M-3 - 6.0 -0.3
Bank Credit 7.3 -5.1
considerably below the target pace for the first half set at the last
Committee meeting. In early May, there was a substantial increase in both
demand deposits and money market fund shares.
(2) With the aggregates weakening in April, required reserves
in the four-week intermeeting period began to fall well below levels built
into the total reserve path thought to be consistent with the Committee's
April decision. As the Desk adhered to the nonborrowed reserves path
(defined to include special borrowings, which have averaged about $775 million
during the period), the weaker demand for reserves by banks led to a sharp
reduction in adjustment borrowing; such borrowings averaged only about
$200 million in the last complete statement week, down from $1.9 billion
in the week of the April meeting.1/ Total reserves over the four-week
intermeeting period turned out to be about $850 million below path.2/
(3) As the demand for reserves weakened, the federal funds rate,
which had averaged above 18 percent just before the April meeting, almost
immediately began to fall below the 16 percent level. In a telephone consulta-
tion on April 28, the Committee reconfirmed that the federal funds rate could
fluctuate in the full 13 to 19 percent range adopted at the April meeting. In
early May, the funds rate began to approach the lower limit of the range, and
on May 6 the Committee voted to reduce the lower limit to 10½ percent.
Later in the day, the Board eliminated the 3 percent surcharge on continuous
1/ The original path had assumed adjustment borrowing averaging between
$1¼ to $1½ billion.
2/ See Appendix I for reserve paths and other adjustments during the
intermeeting period.
borrowing. In the most recent complete statement week, the federal funds
rate averaged 10-7/8 percent, and, as noted above, adjustment borrowing
fell to minimal levels.
(4) The broad rally in debt markets gained momentum during the
intermeeting period, as market participants reacted to evidence that a
recession had begun, to the sustained money stock weakness, and to the
decline in the federal funds rate. Treasury bill rates and private short-
term rates have fallen substantially further; the 3-month bill rate is
currently around 9 percent and the 3-month CD rate around 10 percent.
Most short-term rates are now about 5 to 8 percentage points below their
recent highs. The prime lending rate at banks, however, has declined only
about 3½ percentage points from its 20 percent peak, as banks attempt to
maintain profit margins.
(5) Capital markets have also rallied further since the last FOMC
meeting, with bond yields declining ½ to 1½ percentage points. In response
to the lower levels of bond yields--down 2½ to 3 percentage points since
their March highs--corporate and municipal bond offerings increased
markedly in April and early May, far eclipsing the first quarter pace. The
Treasury conducted its quarterly financing auction in early May, and in the
ebullient market atmosphere the $7.5 billion offering of two notes and a
long bond was well bid; the new issues did, however, soon drop below their
auction prices. The average rate on new mortgage commitments at S&Ls declined
to 14.68 percent in early May from the record high of 16.35 percent, and
recent press reports indicate much larger cuts in mortgage rates at some
S&Ls as these lenders anticipate larger deposit inflows at the lower short-
term market rates of interest.
(6) Since the last FOMC meeting, the dollar has declined by
about 3 1/2 percent on a weighted-average basis, reflecting the relative
decline in U.S. short-term interest rates. Toward the end of the period
the dollar stabilized as some market participants began looking for some
back-up in U.S. interest rates and as news of the April Producer Price
Index provided some indication of a slowing of U.S. inflation.
(7) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for selected monetary and financial flows over
various time periods.
Past
Month
QI '80 Apr. '80 Apr. '80
/ , over over over
1977-1 19781/ 1979- QIV '79 Jan. '79 Mar. '80
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Managed Liabilities of Banks
(Monthly average change
in billions)
1/ December to December.
2/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government
3/ Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
4/ Primarily federal funds purchases and securities sold under agreements to repurchase.
Prospective developments and short-term targets
(8) The recent shortfall in money growth appears to make it
impractical to achieve the Committee's December to June targets for the M's
adopted at the last meeting. To reach these targets, M-1A would have to
expand at a 16¾ percent annual rate over the two months of May and June,
M-1B at 15 percent rate, and M-2 at an 11 percent rate. Attempts to
encourage such a large rebound over a short period would probably entail a
drop in the funds rate in the near term to levels as low as in the 1 to
5 percent range. It would also very probably entail a sharp subsequent
reversal of those rates to keep money growth in later months within the
Committee's longer-run ranges.
(9) The staff expects some rebound of money growth to occur
in any event in May and June--for example, a growth of 7 percent on average
in M-1A at around current interest rate levels and growth of about 7¾
percent in M-2. The recent contraction in transactions balances implies
a need by the public to rebuild their cash holdings to sustain growth
in nominal economic activity in the second quarter at the projected 4½
percent annual rate. Moreover, the lagged impacts of the recent sharp
drop in interest rates should serve to increase the quantity of money
demanded in the months ahead. Our projected expansion of M-1A in May-June
would generate a 1¼ percent annual rate of growth over the 6 months from
December to June, and a one percent rate of growth from the QIV '79 average
level to the QII '80 average. Associated growth in M-2 over the December
to June period would be about 5¾ percent, 1/ somewhat closer to the
Committee's target than in the case of M-1.
1/ And 5 percent from QIV '79 to QII '80.
(10) Against this background, the Committee, in framing its
approach to operations between now and the next meeting, may wish to
consider policies that recognize the high probability of a shortfall in
growth of the aggregates over the first half of the year and that aim to
get the aggregates back on path over a longer period. Two such alternatives
are presented below, and depicted in the charts on the following pages.
Alternative A is designed to achieve a level of M-1A in December equal
to that implied by the midpoint growth path of the 3½ to 6 percent range
for this aggregate over the QIV '79 to QIV '80 period. Alternative B
is designed to return M-1A to the midpoint path by September. Growth in
M-2 would follow similar patterns. (More detailed specifications, with
implied rates of growth over various time periods, are shown in the
tables on pages 8 and 9.)
Alt. A Alt. B
Back to Path Back to Path
by Dec. by Sept.
Growth rates from April to Sept.
M-1A 7.6 9.5
M-1B 8.0 9.8
M-2 8.0 9.8
Growth targets for May-June
M-1A 7.0 8.4
M-1B 7.6 9.1
M-2 7.8 8.7
Intermeeting federal funds
rate range, percent 10 to 14 9 to 14
Chart 2 CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Class II - FOMC
Actual and Targeted M-2 and M-3
M-2 Billions of dollars
I- "--11680
Billions of dollars
0 N
-1979
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1A M-1B
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
1980--April 369.6 369.6 387.7 387.7
May 370,8 371.0 388.5 388.7
June 373,9 374.8 392.6 393.6
Growth Rates
quarterly Average
1980--QI 5k 5k 6 6
QII -3% -3k -1% -1k
QIII 8 10 8% 10%
QIV 7t 64 7% 6k
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-2 M-3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
1980--April 1547.5 1547.5 1808.8 1808.8
May 1555.9 1556.4 1820.8 1821.4
June 1567.7 1569.9 1836.2 1838.3
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
(11) Alternative A calls for growth in M-1A at about a 7½
percent annual rate between April and September, and continuation of that
growth rate over the remainder of the year. For purposes of monetary
targeting between now and the July 9 FOMC meeting, however, the Committee
may wish to target a somewhat slower money growth of 7 percent for the
two months of May and June, given the relatively moderate growth that is
apparently in train for May. As noted in paragraph 9, such a growth rate
is not likely to involve any appreciable change in the funds rate from its
recent trading range of 10½ to 11½ percent. The federal funds rate range
suggested for alternative A is 10 to 14 percent. The suggested lower
limit is a bit lower than that currently in place to provide for some
operational flexibility. The proposed upper limit has been lowered to 14
percent on the thought that the Committee might wish to limit fluctuations
on the upside, given the recent shortfall in money growth and the apparent
weakness in the economy.
(12) Looking beyond the current quarter, some upward pressure
on interest rates might develop. The recent weakness in M-1A has left it
well short of what might have been expected on the basis of historical
relationships among money, income, and interest rates. Thus, although
nominal GNP is projected to rise at only a 5½ percent annual rate in the
second half of the year, our econometric models would suggest that, at
current interest rates, money would tend to grow much more rapidly than
that, and probably somewhat in excess of the 7½ percent alternative A path,
as the public attempts to restore recently depleted cash balances. This
would generate upward rate pressures at a time when income velocity of M-1A
would be declining, a reversal of the normal situation.1/ If, however,
the recent evident weakness in M-1A should prove largely to represent a
lasting shift in the public's liquidity preferences, then upward rate
pressures might be minimal, or indeed there could be some further downward
drift in rates.
(13) The specifications for alternative A call for a considerable
pick-up in growth of M-2 for the May-June period, to about a 7¾ percent
annual rate. The implied rate of growth for the nontransactions component
of this aggregate period--at around an 8 percent rate--is considerably
higher than has occurred recently. A return to MMMF growth after the decline
associated with the March 14 actions appears already to have begun, and with
market rates far below their recent peaks, growth of small time and savings
deposits, especially the 2½ year variable ceiling certificates, is expected
to pick up.
(14) With the federal funds rate essentially unchanged in the
near term, as contemplated under alternative A, other market interest rates
probably would hold near current levels or edge upward a bit, especially
if and as monetary growth strengthened perceptibly. A limited back-up in
market rates, however, is unlikely to halt the downtrend of bank loan and
mortgage rates, rates that are still high relative to competitive instruments.
Business credit demands in the period ahead may still fall relatively heavily
on the corporate bond markets, as firms continue efforts to restructure
their balance sheets at what appear to be relatively attractive long-term
yields. But even so loan growth at banks could pick up, particularly if
recent loan weakness makes banks a bit more sanguine about their ability
to remain within loan restraint guidelines.
1/ Of course, at this point it seems likely that the opposite, and also
unusual, pattern will prevail in the second quarter--a sharp rise in
velocity and a substantial decline of interest rates.
(15) To achieve the growth in aggregates for the May-June period
specified under alternative A, total reserves would have to expand at about
a 4 percent annual rate from April to June. Nonborrowed reserves would
expand at about a 27 percent annual rate, assuming a frictional level of
adjustment borrowing from Reserve Banks on the order of $100 to $200 million
(and continued special borrowing of about $750 million).
(16) Alternative B contemplates a more rapid growth in the monetary
aggregates than alternative A over the short run--for example, an 8 per-
cent annual rate of growth in M-1A over the May-June period--in the process
of reaching the Committee's longer-run path by September (rather than by
December as in alternative A). Such an approach involves a greater likeli-
hood that interest rates, particularly short-term rates, will decline further
over the weeks ahead. The proposed federal funds rate range for this
alternative is 9 to 14 percent.
(17) A decline of the funds rate into the 9 to 10 percent range
would probably lead to a 3-month bill rate in the 7½ to 8 percent range.
Bond yields could drop further, although such a decline would be limited
if growth in the monetary aggregates began to pick up substantially. Inflows
to thrift institutions would probably strengthen as they benefit from full
ceiling rate differentials on both the 6-month money market certificate and
the higher-yielding 2 year certificate. This would tend to make thrifts
more eager to lend and encourage further declines in rates on new mortgage
loans. In foreign exchange markets, the dollar would probably weaken, as
short rates fell further relative to foreign interest rates.
(18) To attain the aggregates of alternative B over the May-
June period, total reserves would have to increase at a 5 percent annual
rate. With borrowing at frictional levels, as in alternative A, nonborrowed
reserves would increase at a 28 percent rate. For both alternatives A
and B, it should be pointed out that if growth of money stock deposits
and related required reserves over the weeks immediately ahead runs below
target, attainment of the nonborrowed reserve path in the short-run would
involve adding to banks' excess reserves (since there are practically no
borrowings to be paid off). This would generate downward pressure on
interest rates, of course, and possibly very substantial downward pressures,
particularly on the funds rate, if banks are not very willing to hold excess
reserves at relatively high interest rate levels. Thus, the lower limits
of the funds rate ranges could rather promptly become the operative guides
for open market operations.
Directive language
(19) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for the
directive consistent with either of the short-run policy alternatives dis-
cussed earlier. The proposed directive contains only qualitative language
for the objectives for monetary aggregates over the months ahead. The
specific numerical guidelines decided on by the Committee for the aggregates
seem likely to involve relatively rapid growth to compensate to some degree
for the recent large shortfalls. It was felt that such numerical specifica-
tions might be omitted from the directive and included only in the policy
record, where they would be fully explained and less subject to misunder-
In the short run, the Committee seeks expansion of reserve
aggregates consistent with growth [DEL:over the first half of 1988 at an
annual rate of 4½ percent for M-1A and 5 percent for M-1B, or some
what less] OF M-1A, M-1B, AND M-2 OVER A PERIOD OF MONTHS AT RATES THAT
WOULD PROMOTE ACHIEVEMENT OF THE COMMITTEE'S LONGER-RUN OBJECTIVES FOR
MONETARY GROWTH, provided that in the period before the next regular
meeting the weekly average federal funds rate remains within a
range of [DEL: 13 to 19] ____ TO ____ percent. [DEL: The-Committee-believes
that, to be consistent with this short run policy, M-2 should grow
at an annual rate of about 6¼ percent over the first half and that
bank credit-should grow in the months ahead at a pace compatible
with-growth over the year as a whole withing the range agreed upon.]
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the constraint on the federal funds rate is inconsistent with the
objective for the expansion of reserves, the Manager for Domestic
Operations is promptly to notify the Chairman who will then decide
whether the situation calls for supplementary instructions from
the Committee.
