Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
August 8, 1980
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) August 8, 1980
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Growth of the key monetary aggregates was somewhat slower in
July than in June, but nonetheless the pace of expansion of M-1B and
especially M-2 exceeded the Committee's minimum targeted rates for the third
quarter as a whole. M-1A still remains somewhat below its range for the
QIV '79 to QIV '80 period, but M-1B is now at the lower end and M-2 near
the upper end of their respective longer-run ranges. (See charts following
page 9.) The gap between the growth rates of M-1A and M-1B remained wide
in July, reflecting the continued strength of ATS accounts. The rapid
growth of ATS balances may have been related to the surge in passbook
savings generally, as well as to marketing efforts by banks to place them-
selves in better competitive position for the introduction of nationwide
NOW accounts. The nontransactional component of M-2 maintained the advanced
pace of other recent months, as money market mutual funds and overnight RPs,
along with savings deposits, continued to expand sharply. Small time
deposits, however, declined slightly in July. With large CDs continuing
to run off, growth in M-3 once again fell well short of that in M-2.
Minimum Target
Monetary Growth for
Aggregates July June-September
M-1A 7.4 7
M-1B 10.7 8
M-2 17.0 8
M-3 11.4
Memo: Bank credit 6.4
(2) At its July meeting, the Committee again indicated that
monetary expansion moderately in excess of its minimum targets should be
accommodated by an increase in reserve paths. Such adjustments were made
in the early part of the intermeeting period as money growth slightly
exceeded the targets. After mid-July, however, as projections for both
M-1B and M-2 placed them well above the Committee's targets, the reserve
paths were not adjusted further to accommodate the additional demand for
1/
reserves. With the demand for reserves augmented by exceptionally high
excess reserves, adjustment borrowings increased to an average of about
$450 million in late July and early August from about $80 million in the
first two weeks of the intermeeting period. As shown in the table below,
both total and nonborrowed reserves grew only modestly in July,.despite the
continued rapid growth of the monetary aggregates. Not only did large
denomination time deposits continue to decline, thereby releasing reserves
to support growth in other deposits, but, in addition, a substantial pro-
portion of the growth of the monetary aggregates was in nonreservable
components. The relative strength of the monetary base reflected the
comparatively rapid growth of currency.
Growth in Reserve Aggregates (SAAR)
Memo: ($ millions)
Average level of member
bank adjustment borrowing 750 72 142
Average level of special
borrowings 534 307 253
1/ See Appendix I for the pattern of reserve targets established over
the intermeeting period.
(3) The federal funds market eased slightly following the July
Committee meeting, with daily effective rates falling mainly in a range
of 8½ to 9 percent compared to 9 to 9 percent in the weeks just prior
to the meeting. However, given the somewhat less accommodative provision
of nonborrowed reserves by the System against a backdrop of an unusually
large demand for excess reserves, the market tightened in late July and
early August, and funds traded on some days in excess of the 10 percent
discount rate established on July 25. With the demand for excess reserves
apparently subsiding, federal funds have traded most recently in a range of
8-3/4 to a little over 9 percent.
(4) Short-term yields generally fluctuated narrowly until late
July when they came under substantial upward pressure in response to the
firming of the funds market and to changes in expectations prompted by
incoming monetary and economic data. Short-term rates are now roughly 1/2 to
3/4 of a percentage point above their levels at the time of the last meeting
and 1 to 2-1/2 percentage points above their June lows.--The bank prime rate
moved against this trend, dropping from 11-1/2 to 11 percent and to 10-3/4
at a few large banks. These latter institutions moved back to 11 percent
in early August when market rates firmed.
(5) Bond yields also have risen about 1/2 to 3/4 percentage point
since early July and are roughly 1-1/4 percentage point above their June lows.
The rise in these yields apparently reflected, in addition to the tightening
of the money markets and changing expectations, the continued heavy demands
placed on capital markets by private and governmental borrowers. Public
offerings of corporate bonds in July were just below the record second-
quarter pace, as corporations continued to lengthen the maturity of their
liabilities. Long-term offerings by State and local governments remained
sizable, and net coupon offerings by the Treasury have grown with the
deepening deficit. In its largest mid-quarter financing operation since
1976, the Treasury offered $8 1/4 billion of securities, raising $3 1/4 billion
of new cash.
(6) Bank credit is estimated to have expanded at a 6 percent
rate in July, following three months of decline, as holdings of securities
increased sharply and total loans stopped declining. Business loans
increased marginally, and real estate loans rose moderately; however,
consumer loans probably fell again. Given the strength of core deposits
and limited credit expansion, banks reduced slightly further their managed
(7) Domestic chartered banks continued in July to advance funds
to their foreign branches; from April to July net advances by these insti-
tutions totaled about $13 billion. About $3 billion of these funds were
used by foreign branches of member banks to finance lending to nonbank
U.S. residents in the last three months; the level of such loans had been
virtually unchanged for some time. At the same time, the interest rate
spread in favor of Eurodollar deposits narrowed, contributing to a cessa-
tion of acquisitions by U.S. residents of such claims.
(8) The dollar was fairly stable on exchange markets over most
of July. However, during the last week of the month, the rise in U.S.
interest rates--coupled with further indications of an easing in foreign
rates--sharply increased demand for the dollar. Relatively favorable
U.S. trade figures for June also contributed to the dollar's strength.
The dollar's rise since the July FOMC meeting amounted to 2 percent on
a weighted-average basis, and by larger amounts against the mark, yen, and
Swiss franc.
(9) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for selected monetary and financial flows
over various time periods.
Past
Three
Monn-hs
Past
Month
QII '80 July '80 July '80
S/ over over over
1978- 1979- QIV '79 Apr. '80 June '80
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Managed Liabilities of Banks
(Monthly average change
in billions)
1/ QIV to QIV.
2/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government
3/ Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
4/ Primarily federal funds purchases and securities sold under agreements to repurchase.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures except for data on total loans
and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institutions--which
are derived from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures. Growth rates
for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of
discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(10) Shown below, and depicted in the charts on the following
pages, are two alternative sets of targets for the monetary aggregates for
the current June to September policy period. The lower panel of the table
shows the implied growth rates of the aggregates from July to September.
Also indicated is a range for the federal funds rate over the intermeeting
period that it is believed would accommodate either of these growth patterns.
(Detailed data for these alternatives are contained in the tables on
pp. 8 and 9.)
Alt. A Alt. B
June to September
M-1A 7 6
M-1B 9-1/4 8-1/4
M-2 12 11-1/2
Implied:
July to September
M-1A 6-3/4 5-1/4
M-1B 8-1/2 6-3/4
M-2 9-1/4 8-3/4
Intermeeting range
for funds rate 8 to 14 8 to 14
(11) Alternative A is indexed to the 7 percent growth rate of
M-A for June to September that the Committee established at its last
meeting, while alternative B is a more restrictive specification for-
mulated in light of the tendency for M-2 to run high relative to its
long-range target. Both alternatives call for slower growth in M-1B
and M-2 over the next two months than has occurred in the last two.
Even so, under either alternative, expansion of these aggregates over the
third quarter would exceed the 8 percent minimum growth rates targeted
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1A M-1B
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
1980--June 371.3 371.3 390.9 390.9
July 373.6 373.6 394.4 394.4
August 375.7 375.4 397.4 397.1
September 377.8 376.9 399.9 398.9
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
1979 QIV to 1980 QIV 4 3 5-
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-2 M-3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
1980--June 1585.6 1585.6 1844.4 1844.4
July 1608.1 1608.1 1862.0 1862.0
August 1621.4 1621.0 1870.8 1870.5
September 1632.7 1631.4 1880.7 1879.6
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
by the Committee in July, and the September level of M-2 would be above
the upper end of that aggregate's 6 to 9 percent QIV '79 to QIV '80 growth
range. The specifications of both alternatives embody an assumption that
the recent rise in market interest rates will contribute to a slowing of
the extraordinarily rapid growth of ATS balances and regular passbook
savings that has occurred in recent months. Growth of MMMF shares is also
expected to moderate further as these yields appear less attractive relative
to those on other investments. The slower savings deposit and MMMF growth
is expected to be partly offset by a pick-up in small time deposit expansion
as MMC yields rise and as growth in the 30-month SSCs continues strong.
These projections imply that the gaps between the growth rates of M-1A and
M-1B, on the one hand, and M-1B and M-2, on the other, will narrow sub-
stantially from what has occurred in the past two months.
(12) Under alternative A, given the demand for transactions
balances implied by the staff's stronger economic projection for the
current quarter, money market interest rates are likely to remain at the
higher levels attained recently. Aggregate credit demands may pick up,
especially in the household sector. The runoff in consumer installment
debt likely will slow, while the demand for home mortgages probably will
strengthen somewhat. Borrowing by the Treasury and state and local
governments will remain quite large. In the business sector, although
total borrowing probably will rise in coming weeks, a significant portion
of the increase will reflect a rebuilding of liquidity positions.
(13) To achieve the growth in the aggregates specified under
alternative A, total reserves would have to expand at about a 5 percent
annual rate from July to September. Assuming a level of member bank
borrowing (excluding special borrowings) of about $100 million, nonborrowed
reserves would expand at about a 6-1/4 percent annual rate. With member
bank borrowings at such minimal levels, the federal funds rate would be
expected to fluctuate around the current 10 percent discount rate.
(14) Alternative B calls for a slower expansion in the aggregates--
with growth of M-1A below the minimum targets adopted by the Committee last
month--in order to counter the tendency for M-2 growth to exceed the
Committee's longer-run range. To achieve the alternative B targets, growth
in total reserves at about a 5 percent annual rate would be required. With
adjustment borrowings assumed to be about $200 million, nonborrowed reserves
would expand at a 4-1/4 percent annual rate. At the current discount rate,
these specifications suggest that the federal funds rate would move toward
the 11 percent area in the intermeeting period. Interest rates would be
expected to rise throughout the maturity spectrum. The bank prime rate
almost certainly would be increased, and home mortgate rates, already
under upward pressure from recent increases in other interest rates, pro-
bably also would rise significantly-especially in light of the greater
concerns about deposit flows that would develop among lenders. The recent
strength of the dollar in foreign exchange markets probably would
continue, moderated by U.S. official purchases of foreign currencies to
repay swap debt.
(15) A simple extrapolation of the June to September target
for M-1A under alternative A would yield a 4 percent growth of this
aggregate for the QIV '79 to QIV '80 period. Alternative B could be
viewed as consistent with M-1A growth over the longer period of 3 percent--
the lower bound of the Committee's long-run range. In either case, interest
rates at year-end would be expected by the staff to be significantly higher
than current levels, given our GNP projection. Even with such an increase
in rates, M-2 growth for the QIV '79 to QIV '80 period is likely to be
near or above the upper end of its 6 to 9 percent long-run growth range.
Directive language
(16) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for the
directive consistent with the form of the directive adopted at the July
meeting. The language continues to call for expansion of reserve aggregates
at a pace consistent with the desired rates of monetary growth over the
third quarter, provided that the weekly average federal funds rate remains
within a specified range. The specifications adopted at the July meeting
are shown in strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks expansion of reserve
aggregates consistent with growth of M-1A, M-1B, and M-2 over the
third quarter of 1980 at annual rates of about [DEL: 7] ____ percent, [DEL: 8] ____ per-
cent, and [DEL: 8] ____ percent, respectively, provided that in the period
before the next regular meeting the weekly average federal funds
rate remains within a range of [DEL: 8-1/2 to 14] ____ to ____ percent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the constraint on the federal funds rate is inconsistent with the
objective for the expansion of reserves, the Manager for Domestic
Operations is promptly to notify the Chairman who will then decide
whether the situation calls for supplementary instructions from the
