Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
November 14, 1980
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC November 14, 1980
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Rates of expansion of M-1A and M-1B were relatively rapid
in October, though below rates of the previous two months. Growth in M-2
and M-3 accelerated slightly as inflows of time deposits at banks and thrifts
strengthened and withdrawals from money market mutual funds slowed. The
recent growth of M-1A-which was well above the Committee's target path
for the last three months of the year--puts it within one-half percentage
point of the upper end of its long-run range for the year, while growth rates
of the other aggregates are now almost one percentage point above longer-run
upper limits (in the case of M-1B and M-2) or equal to the upper limit (in
the case of M-3). Though business lending continued to expand rapidly, growth
of bank credit declined somewhat from the September rate and the year-to-date
growth in this aggregate remains in the lower half of its longer-run range.
Target Growth
for Sept. Growth from
Monetary to December QIV '79 to Target Growth
Aggregates Sept. Oct. (3 months) Oct. '80 for 1980
(2) Total reserve growth moderated in October,reflecting
a slowing of demand deposits. Nevertheless, over the intermeeting period
required reserves outran the System's provision of nonborrowed reserves,
leading to increasing member bank borrowings and firming conditions in
the funds market.1/ In the most recent statement week, borrowings reached
a level of about $2 billion, somewhat higher than expected (a $1.6 billion
level of borrowing had been implied by the nonborrowed path). The federal
funds rate rose from around 12½ percent in mid-October to an average of 14-5/8
percent in the most recent full statement week. In recent days, funds have
traded around 14 percent.
Recent Growth in Reserve Aggregates
(SAAR)
September
over June October
Memo: ($ million)
Average level of member
bank borrowings in last
month of period:
* Special borrowings include emergency credit as well as a large borrowing
by one bank in the week ended September 24 that resulted from a break-
down of computer facilities.
(3) Since the last meeting, short-term interest rates have
increased about 3/4 of a percentage point. Municipal bond yields have
now returned to their all-time highs set last spring, and corporate and
Treasury bond yields are also close to their earlier peaks. A one per-
centage point increase in the basic discount rate to 12 percent, and a
surcharge of 2 percentage points applicable to large frequent borrowers
of adjustment credit, were announced after the markets closed on Friday.
(4) The Treasury continued to be a large borrower in the inter-
remained strong as rate relationships continued to induce shifting of business
credit demands from the capital market. Such demands continued to be
focussed on commercial banks, with commercial paper run-offs accelerating in
response to aggressive bank loan pricing. Reflecting both rising bond rates
and the increasing cost of deposit funds, the average commitment rate on
conventional mortgages at S&L's rose by 30 basis points over the inter-
meeting period to 14.08 percent; even at that rate the spread of the mortgage
rate over the corporate bond. rate remained narrow by historical standards.
In some areas of the country mortgage rates of 15 to 16 percent have been
(5) Reflecting the further increase in U.S. interest rates, while
rates abroad were essentially unchanged, the weighted average foreign
exchange value of the dollar has risen by more than 2 percent, on balance,
since the last FOMC meeting.
U.S. authorities purchased
$1¾ billion, nearly all against DM, as the System and the Treasury accumulated
balances,with the latter seeking to cover its Carter bond obligations.
(6) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for selected monetary and financial flows over
various time periods.
Past
Three
Months
Past
Month
QIII '80 Oct. '80 Oct. '80
S 1/ over over over
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Manazed Liabilities of Banks
(Monthly average change in
billions)
l/ QIV to QIV.
2/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
3/ Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
/ Primarily federal funds purchases and securities sold under agreements to repurchase.
Prospective developments
(7) The upper panel of the following table shows three alternative
sets of targets for the monetary aggregates for the current quarter; for
comparative purposes, the last column indicates the targets for this period
established at the last Committee meeting. The lower panel of the table dis-
plays the growth rates for the last two months of the quarter implied by
these targets. Associated federal funds rate ranges for the intermeeting
period are also shown. (Detailed and longer-run data for the monetary
aggregates are contained in the table on the next two pages.)
Target Established
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C at October Meeting
Growth from September
to December (3 months)
M-1A 4½ 2½ 2½
Implied Growth from
October to December
(2 months)
M-1A 2 -¾ -3
M-1B 4½ 1¾ -½
(8) With only six weeks remaining in the year the Committee's
policy decision can have little impact on growth rates for the year as a
whole, measured from QIV '79 to QIV '80. Under each of the alternatives,
growth in M-1B and M-2 over the year would be above, and M-3 near, the upper
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1A M-1B
Alt. A Alt B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-2 M-3
At. A Alt. B Alt, C Alt. A Alt, B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
end of their respective longer-run ranges. Growth of M-1A would be some-
what above the midpoint of its longer-run range. However, as may be seen in
the charts following this page, the alternatives have different implica-
tions for the level of the aggregates relative to growth cones by year-end,
particularly for the narrow aggregates. Moreover, the choice among these
policy options could have a significant effect on inflationary expectations
and real economic activity over the months ahead, and thus on the pattern of
economic and financial developments associated with achieving next year's
monetary targets.
(9) Alternative B continues the Committee's current targets for
the fourth quarter, as indexed by M-1A and M-1B. Given what has already
occurred in October, to achieve these targets M-1A would have to contract
over the remaining weeks of the year. The staff still believes that a
significant slowing in the growth of transactions balances is likely, partly
because of the sharp run-up in interest rates of the last three months and
partly on the assumption that the recent very rapid month-to-month growth
in economic activity slows significantly. However, achieving the negative
growth in M-1A over the balance of the year implied by alternative B would
probably require further near-term increases in short-term interest rates.
(10) To achieve the specifications of alternative B, total reserves
would have to increase at about a 6 percent annal rate over the October
to December period.1/ Nonborrowed reserves would have to contract by about
a 1 percent annual rate if the level of adjustment borrowing is around
required reserves associated with the substantial reduction of weekend
Eurodollar arbitrage activities.
Chart 2 CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Actual and Targeted M-2 and M-3 "
M-2 Billions of dollars
A- 1680
-- Longer-Run Range '
--**Short-Run Alternatives , -1660
- 1540
I I I I I 1480
o N- b0 J "F M A M; J J A S 0 N 0
M-3 .Bllions of dollar
C-- 9%% .. *" " 1940
-- Longer-Run Range ..
.- ** Short-Runr Alteratlves -1- 920
- 1780
- 1760
*- Note: A, ., and C atmrnativs air indisnguishable on this scale.
$1¾ billion and by more if the level of borrowing rises further. However,
the exact setting on the nonborrowed reserve operating path will depend
in part on bank responses to the new discount rate structure. If past
experience with the surcharge is any guide, banks are likely to become
less willing borrowers, thereby reducing the level of borrowing for any
given spread of the funds rate over the basic discount rate. However,
earlier experience with the surcharge was within the context of a bank
credit restraint program,and bank behavior may differ under current circum-
stances. Thus, there is more than usual uncertainty about the demand for
borrowing, and therefore about the level of the nonborrowed reserve path
consistent with money supply and total reserve targets of alternative B.
(11) Under alternative B, a funds rate in the 15 to 16 percent
range is likely to emerge over the weeks immediately ahead, and possibly
higher before the year is out. The 3-month bill rate may move up into a
reflecting in part continued relatively strong demands on short-term credit
markets over the balance of the year. The Treasury is expected to raise
about $4½ billion in cash in the bill market and $7.5 billion in coupon
offerings of 2, 4, and 5 years. Business credit demands may fall most
heavily on short-term markets, especially if, as seems likely, long-term
rates rise further under this alternative, inducing added restraint
on corporate bond offerings. Finally, continued intervention by the U.S.
to slow the appreciation in the foreign exchange value of the dollar--which
is likely to continue rising under alternative B--could generate additional
pressure on Treasury yields as the Federal Reserve or Treasury offers
securities to the market to finance foreign currency purchases.
(12) The further increase in interest rates under alternative
Deposit flows are projected to decelerate, but to remain relatively ample.
Nonetheless, mortgage rates would be expected to rise considerably in
reflection of the increases in the cost of deposit funds and yields on
alternative assets. With mortgage rates already at levels that have begun
to choke off demand, new commitment activity for longer-term residential
mortgages at thrift institutions would probably become quite depressed.
(13) The further rise in interest rates under alternative B--the
underlying assumption for the Greenbook projection-is an element in the
staff's anticipation that real GNP will decline in early 1981. The dampening
of the transactions demand for money in lagged response to the run-up in
interest rates and to the projected weakening in economic activity suggest
that interest rates could temporarily ease in early 1981, assuming 1981
monetary targets as reported to the Congress in July.1 / However, for all
of next year, the effects of inflation on the transactions demand for money
are expected to require historically high interest rates in order to restrain
growth in the monetary aggregates to the preliminary FOMC targets.
(14) Alternative A encompasses somewhat higher money targets for
the fourth quarter than alternative B--targets that are thought to be
achievable with little change in interest rates from current levels. Assuming
a level of member bank borrowing of around $1½ billion, nonborrowed and
total reserves under this alternative would be expected to increase at
annual rates of 4 and 7 percent, respectively, over the October to December
period, and the federal funds rate may be around the 14 to 15 percent area.
Other market interest rates also would be expected to remain at about their
current levels. However, some short-term rates might adjust up slightly
further due to the strength in short-term credit demands and, in the case
of the prime and mortgage rates, to lagged adjustments to the tightening
that has already occurred. With interest rates lower over the balance of
the year than under alternative B, money growth and economic activity would
be expected to be less weak in early 1981.
(15) Alternative C contemplates a reduction in the Committee's
current fourth quarter money growth target, and implies a substantial
reduction in money growth over the balance of the year that brings the level
of M-1B into the FOMC's target zone by December. To achieve the alternative
C specifications would probably require a reduction in nonborrowed reserves
at about a 5 percent annual rate over the last two months of the year, if
a borrowing level of $2 billion, or a bit higher, is assumed. The funds
rate may move up to around the 16 to 17 percent area over the next few
weeks, and possibly higher by year-end. This alternative increases the risk
of a more significant drop-off in money growth and economic activity in
early 1981, and consequently increases the likelihood that interest rates
will be lower in the first quarter of the year than under the other two
alternatives. However, the staff would anticipate that, even under this
alternative, interest rates over the next year would still have to be high
by historical standards to constrain money growth to the Committee's
preliminary targets.
Directive language
(16) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for
the directive consistent with the form of the directive adopted at
the October meeting. The language continues to call for expansion of
reserve aggregates at a pace consistent with the desired rate of monetary
growth over the last three months of the year, provided that the weekly
average federal funds rate remains within a specified range. The specifi-
cations adopted at the October meeting are shown in strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks behavior of reserve
aggregates consistent with growth of M-1A, M-1B, and M-2 over the
PERIOD FROM September to December [DEL: period] at annual rates of about
[DEL: 2½] ____ percent, [DEL: 5] ____ percent, and [DEL: 7¼] ____ percent respectively,
[DEL: or somewhat less,] provided that in the period before the next regular
meeting the weekly average federal funds rate remains within a range
of [DEL: 9 to 15] ____ TO ____ percent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting
that the constraint on the federal funds rate is inconsistent with
the objective for the expansion of reserves, the Manager for Domestic
Operations is promptly to notify the Chairman, who will then decide
whether the situation calls for supplementary instructions from the
