Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
July 3, 1980
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL July 3, 1980
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) The narrow monetary aggregates, M-1A and M-1B, expanded
in May-June at annual rates marginally above the minimum target growth
rates set by the Committee for the period. Continued weakness in May
was offset by a considerable resurgence of growth in June. However, as
shown in the last two columns of the table below, in the first half of
the year both of these aggregates have grown at rates significantly below
the lower end of the Committee's longer-run ranges for the QIV '79 to
QIV '80 period. The Committee's longer-run targets imply that ATS/NOW
accounts would add about percentage point to M-1B growth relative to M-1A;
so far in 1980 relatively faster growth of interest-bearing transactions
accounts has added close to 1½ percentage points to M-1B.
May-June
Minimum Actual Target
Monetary Target QIV '79 to QIV '79 to
Aggregates ay June Actual Growth QII '80 QIV '80
(2) M-2 increased in May and accelerated sharply in June,
expanding well above the Committee's minimum target rate for the two
month period. With market interest rates declining and the public
apparently placing a greater premium on liquidity, in the face of
uncertainty about the economic outlook, MMMFs resumed their strong growth
and savings deposit registered a reduced outflow in May and a significant
inflow in June for the first time in almost a year. Inflows of small-
denomination time deposits weakened over the two months as a large part
of the sharply stronger growth in the 30-month variable-ceiling certifi-
cate was offset by the first net decline in MMCs since their introduction
in mid-1978. M-3 expanded less rapidly than M-2, as banks continued
to reduce their reliance on managed liabilities, partly because of
continued weakness in bank loan demand. Over the first half of the year,
M-2 and M-3 expanded at just above the lower bound of the Committee's
longer-run ranges, but bank credit grew at a rate considerably below
the Committee's targets for the year.
(3) The Desk has fostered more ample availability of non-
borrowed reserves to member banks since the Committee meeting in May to
encourage and support growth of the monetary aggregates. Adjustment
borrowing at Federal Reserve Banks was reduced to less than $100 million
throughout most of June. Total reserves declined slightly, however,
over the past two months, largely because required reserves were reduced
by the substantial drop in recent weeks of large time deposits of
member banks and by deposit shifts that reduced the average required
reserve ratio for other time deposits and demand deposits.1/
Bank reserves half QI QII May June
(4) Conditions in the money market continued to ease following
the May Committee meeting, as the Desk moved toward more plentiful provi-
sion of nonborrowed reserves. Around the time of the meeting, the federal
funds rate was generally about 11 percent, but subsequently funds began
trading at substantially lower levels. In the two weeks ending June 25
the federal funds rate averaged around 9 percent, but most recently the
funds rate has averaged 9¼ to 9½ percent. The discount rate was lowered
in two steps from 13 to 11 percent over the intermeeting period in
recognition of the easing in money markets.
(5) The decline in other short-term market rates that began in
late March continued following the May Committee meeting, and by mid-June
these rates had declined another 1½ to 2 percentage points. However,
more recently private yields and Treasury bill rates have backed up sub-
stantially. Market participants reportedly have become more cautious in
their expectations for further easing by the Federal Reserve, particularly
as stronger growth of the monetary aggregates became evident in the
published weekly figures. On balance, bill rates and private short-term
rates are about ½ to 1 percentage point lower than their levels at the
time of the May Committee meeting. Over the intermeeting period, the
bank prime rate was lowered 4½ to 5 percentage points to 11½ and 12 per-
cent, but it still remains far out of line with borrowing costs in the
money market for prime-rated firms.
(6) The rally in long-term debt markets also lost much of its
force in recent weeks. Treasury bond yields had declined a further one
percentage point by mid-June before backing up 30 to 40 basis points more
recently. The corporate bond market, digesting a record volume of issues
brought to market as yields fell, experienced a similar pattern of rate
movements as market sentiment changed. With their deposit outlook
stronger and other long-term rates declining, the average commitment rate
on mortgages at S&Ls declined from over 14 percent in late May to 12-3/8
percent most recently.
(7) In foreign exchange markets, the dollar is down 3 percent
on a weighted average basis from its level at the time of the last
Committee meeting. Most of this decline occurred shortly after the May
meeting, as U.S. interest rates fell further and the credit control program
was eased. When U.S. interest rates turned steady to firmer in the
following weeks, the dollar steadied and traded in generally very quiet
billion to support the dollar mainly with DM,
(8) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted
annual rates of change, in percent, for selected monetary and financial
flows over various time periods.
Past
Three
Months
Past
Month
QII '80 June '80 June '80
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Managed Liabilities of Banks
(Monthly average change
in billions)
repurchase.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on total loans
and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institutions-which
are derived from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures. Growth rates
for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of
discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Longer-run targets and strategy
(9) At this meeting the Committee will be reconsidering its
growth ranges for the monetary aggregates for 1980 and coming to a
preliminary view about ranges for 1981, as is required under the
Humphrey-Hawkins Act. As noted in paragraphs 1 and 2 of the preceding
section, thus far this year expansion in narrow money measures has been
well below the lower limit of the growth ranges for the QIV '79 to
QIV '80 period established in February, while growth in broader measures
has been just above the bottoms of their ranges. Partly for this reason,
the staff has assumed that the practical alternatives before the Committee
are retention of the present ranges or some lowering of them. In addition,
announcement of a higher range may well have an adverse impact on inflationary
expectations, since interest rates have declined so sharply over the past
few months and since a higher range would appear inconsistent with an
intention gradually to curtail money growth.
(10) Given the behavior of monetary aggregates in the first
half of 1980, the need for adjustment in the present longer-run ranges
depends, among other things, on an assessment of factors affecting the public's
demand for narrow money and the relationship between the narrow and broader
money measures. M-1 growth in the second quarter of 1980 was much slower
than would have been predicted by either our quarterly or monthly econo-
metric models, given actual income growth and interest rates. This raises
the question of whether there has been once again a downward shift in the
level of the money demand function, perhaps as a response to the unusually
high level of interest rates in the first quarter, or whether the public will
find that it is short of cash relative to nominal income and will seek to
rebuild balances. The staff has assumed that the public will
make some effort to enlarge depleted cash balances in the second half of
the year, partly because we believe that some of the decline in cash
balances may have been a transitory result of the large short-term debt
repayments that followed the March credit control program. If that
assumption proves to be correct, the demand for money in the second half
of the year should be stronger than in the first half, even with the
projected weakness in nominal GNP. Thus, the considerable acceleration
in growth of narrow money in the second half of the year needed to bring
M-1A to the lower limit of, or even within, its present range may well
be feasible. However, we would expect M-1B to grow at a still stronger
pace over the year in view of the recent evidence that the public has
shown a greater preference for interest-bearing transactions accounts
over demand deposits than the staff earlier anticipated. We would now
project M-1B to grow about 1-1/4 percentage points faster for the year
than M-IA, rather than the 1/2 percentage point projected in February.
(11) As noted above, growth in the broader aggregates has been
running strong relative to both M-1A and M-1B. Not only have money market
funds again been growing rapidly, but also the contraction in savings
deposits has been reversed. Furthermore, the recent upward adjustment in
ceiling rates on variable ceiling certificates has strengthened the attrac-
tiveness of these instruments. While a slowing in growth of money market
fund shares from the recent exceptionally rapid pace should be expected,
it still appears probable that growth in the nontransactions interest-
bearing component of M-2 in the second half of the year will be relatively
rapid. Thus, in the staff's judgment it seems likely that M-2 will tend
to grow more rapidly relative to M-1A than had been assumed when the
longer-run ranges were origially set in February. On the other hand,
M-3 growth may be a bit weaker as modest demands for bank loans reduce
banks' need to issue large CDs.
(12) The table below shows, for Committee consideration,
two alternative sets of longer-run ranges for 1980. Alternative I is the
current longer-run ranges. But to take account of changing relationships
among M-1A and M-1B, we have assumed that an unchanged objective for
the narrow money aggregates over the year 1980 would mean growth in M-1A
at about a 4-1/2 percent rate from QIV '79 to QIV '80--which would be a
little below the midpoint of the Committee's present range--and growth in
M-1B at around 5-3/4 percent--somewhat above the midpoint of its current
range. Consistent growth in M-2 appears likely to be somewhat above, and
expansion of M-3 somewhat below, the midpoints of their ranges; bank
credit growth is likely to be below the lower end of its present
for M-1A and M-1B, as well as bank credit, but retains the present ranges
for M-2 and M-3 in view of their performance thus far this year.
Alt. I Alt. II
M-1B 4 to 6½ 3½ to 6
(13) To assist the Committee in evaluating the proposed ranges
for 1980 and in forming a preliminary view about monetary growth targets
in 1981, specific alternative assumptions for money growth in 1980 and
the subsequent two years, with their implications for economic activity,
prices, and interest rates, are presented in the table on page 11.
Strategy 1 in that table continues growth in narrow money measures at the
same rate in 1981 and 1982, as in 1980-that is, at a rate of about 4½ per-
cent for M-1A and 5-3/4 percent for M-1B. Of course, the ranges for M-1A
and M-1B may have to be adjusted next year for the introduction of
nationwide NOW accounts.1/ In addition, the staff's analysis suggests
that, even with the same effective M-1A growth as in 1980, M-2 and M-3 may
grow near the upper limits of the current year's ranges, or possibly
above them, as income flows and credit demands strengthen. To provide
the Committee with a basis for assessing a monetary policy that calls for
Economic Implications of Alternative Long-run
Policy Strategies
Nominal GNP (% change,
Q4/Q4)
Real GNP (% change,
Q4/Q4)
Implicit GNP Deflator
(7. change, Q4/Q4)
Unemployment Rate
(7., Q4 Level)
Federal funds rate
7., Q4 Level)
M-1A Velocity
(. change, Q4/4)
a gradual reduction in money growth rates, strategy 2 employs the
monetary assumptions of the first strategy for 1980, but then assumes
that growth in M-1A is reduced to 4 percent in 1981 and 3½ percent in
to 3½ percent in 1980 and maintaining that rate over the next two years.
All these strategies assume a tax cut of $25 to $30 billion that takes
effect in early 1981. Strategy 4 excludes a tax cut and assumes money
growth as in strategy 1.
(14) Strategy 1--which is consistent with the basic staff
green'book projection--suggests a quite modest economic recovery beginning
next year and continuing into 1982. The rate of price increase decelerates
next year, and more markedly in 1982, while the unemployment rate edges
down from a high of near 9 percent at the end of 1980 to 8.5 percent two
years later. Policy strategies 2 and 3 imply a slower economic recovery,
and a slightly improved price performance. The deceleration in price
increases from these strategies becomes more evident after 1982 in view
of the rather long lags between money growth and prices that characterize
most econometric models, including the Board's quarterly model. Strategies
increases earlier if expectations of participants in labor and product
markets have become more sensitized to the ultimate implications of
monetary restraint. It should be emphasized that implicit in all of these
projections is a large increase in the income velocity of M-A in 1981-
indeed, the largest annual rise since 1955 (in the case of strategies 1
through 3). This reflects our assumption that there will be continued
weakness in money demand relative to historical experience. Should this
assumption prove wrong, upward interest rate pressures may be stronger
than projected, serving to reduce nominal GNP growth below projections--
with some beneficial impact on prices but with probably the greatest
impact in the short-run on real activity.
Shorter-run targets
(15) Shown below, and depicted on the charts on the following
pages, are three alternative targets for the monetary aggregates over the
next several months, together with suggested federal funds rate ranges
for the intermeeting period. Growth rates shown are for the three-month
period from June to September. (Detailed data for these alternatives are
contained in the tables on pp. 14 and 15.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M-1A 10½ 8¼ 6
M-1B 11½ 9¼ 7
(16) Alternatives A and B are consistent with longer-run
alternative I and are indexed by M-1A growth of 4½ percent from QIV '79
to QIV '80. Alternative A assumes that such a 4½ percent growth line is
reached relatively soon-by September; it therefore would also assume a
slowdown in M-1A growth to 4½ percent after September. Alternative B
targets a more gradual rebound in M-1A from the first half pace. It
assumes an 8¼ percent M-1A growth rate for June-September which, if
continued through December, will yield growth of 4½ percent over the year.
Alternative C is based on a slower long-run growth of M-A of 3 percent
from QIV '79 to QIV '80, which would be more consistent with longer-run
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1A M-1B
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
June '80-Sept. '80
Quarterly Average
QII
QIII
QIV
annual rates of growth in bank credit for the year and for the
expected under alternative B; year 1980, 4-3/4; QI, 9-1/2; QII,
i; QIV, 7-1/2. Only minor variations in growth rates would be
expected under the other alternatives.
quarters are
alternative II. Under alternative C, M-1A growth would be 6 percent from
June to September, and growth would need to continue at that rate in the
fourth quarter.
(17) Of the three short-run alternatives, alternative B would
probably have the least effect on market rates of interest over the forth-
coming intermeeting period. Even under this alternative, however, there
might be some further upward pressure on interest rates if the market
comes to feel that monetary policy will have to begin restraining money
growth or that fiscal policy will be turning more expansionary. In any
event, Treasury borrowing needs appear rather substantial over the months
ahead. Mortgage rates are likely to decline only a bit further, particu-
larly if short rates stabilize or back up some and thrift institutions
become concerned about the cost and magnitude of future deposit inflows.
Looking toward the fall of the year, it appears more likely that interest
rates would be under some upward pressure, as nominal GNP growth-and
accompanying money and credit demands-accelerates. If, however, the
public's transactions demand for money remains on the low side relative
to GNP, upward interest rate pressures could be quite minimal.
(18) The specifications of alternative B call for a considerable
slowing in M-2 from its May-June pace. MMMF growth, while remaining large,
is expected to slacken from its recent exceptionally rapid rate as previous
market yield declines are reflected in returns posted by the funds. Not
all of this slowdown is expected to be reflected in gains for the depository
institutions, although the 30-month small saver certificate is projected
to grow strongly. With domestic bank loan demands remaining weak, CD and
Eurodollar borrowing will continue to decline, and there will probably be
further advances from U.S. banks to their foreign branches in response
to relatively strong credit demands in Eurodollar markets.
(19) To achieve the growth in the aggregates specified under
alternative B, total reserves would have to expand at about an 8¼ percent
annual rate from June to September. Assuming a level of member bank
borrowings (excluding special borrowings) of about $50 to $100 million,
nonborrowed reserves would expand at about an 8 percent.annual rate.
(20) Alternative A, which is designed to hit the 4½ percent
path for M-1A by September, calls for a 10 percent rate of growth of
that aggregate from June to September, followed by a sharp slowing to 4½
percent in the September to December period. Reserve supplying operations
to achieve this target would call for growth in both total and nonborrowed
reserves at about a 10¼ percent annual rate in the next three months. It is
anticipated that money market rates would decline under this alternative
over the next few weeks, with the federal funds rate moving towards the 7
percent lower end of its proposed range and the 3-month bill rate moving
back into the 6 to 7 percent range. Such a decline in rates would bring
increased pressure on banks and thrift institutions to cut their lending
rates and would very likely cause a further erosion in the exchange value
of the dollar unless accompanied by drops in interest rates abroad. A
significant decline in short rates is likely to lead to some sympathetic
response in capital markets as well. However, the substantial volume of
oncoming issues from both the private and public sectors, as well as
investor concerns about inflation, would tend to limit declines in bond
yields. Staff projections suggest that short-term rates would have to
rise sharply by late summer or early fall to lower growth in the aggregates
if the midpoints of the longer-run targets for the year are to be achieved.
(21) Alternative C contemplates a 6 percent rate of growth
in M-1A from June to September and continuation of that rate for the
balance of the year in order to achieve a 3 percent growth in that
aggregate from QIV '79 to QIV '80. Total reserves would have to expand
at a 6¼ percent rate. Assuming member bank adjustment borrowings of about
$200 million during the forthcoming intermeeting period-given the current
discount rate--nonborrowed reserves would increase at a 5¼ percent rate.
These reserve specifications suggest that the funds rate would increase
to around the midpoint of the 9 to 14 percent range suggested for this
alternative. And an even higher funds rate would be likely to emerge by the
fourth quarter. The policy stance of alternative C would intensify the
recent weakness in money and capital markets, and interest rates would be
expected to rise throughout the maturity spectrum. These interest rate
developments would probably lead to a strengthening of the dollar in foreign
exchange markets.
Directive language
(22) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for the
directive consistent with the form of recent directives, except for the
one adopted in May. The language calls for expansion of reserve aggregates
at a pace consistent with the desired rates of monetary growth over the
third quarter of 1980, provided that the federal funds rate on a weekly
average basis remains within a specified range. The range for the
federal funds rate adopted at the May meeting is shown in strike-through
In the short run, the Committee seeks expansion of reserve
aggregates consistent with growth of M-1A[DEL: ,] and M-1B [DEL: , and M-2 at rates
high enough to promote achievement of the Committee's objectives for
monetary growth over the year] OVER THE THIRD QUARTER OF 1980 AT ANNUAL
RATES OF ____ PERCENT AND ____ PERCENT RESPECTIVELY, provided that in
the period before the next regular meeting the weekly average federal
funds rate remains within a range of [DEL: 8½ to 14] ____ TO ____ percent.
TEE COMMITTEE BELIEVES THAT, CONSISTENT WITH THIS SHORT-RUN POLICY,
M-2 SHOULD GROW AT AN ANNUAL RATE OF ABOUT ____ PERCENT OVER THE
THIRD QUARTER.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the constraint on the federal funds rate is inconsistent with the
objective for the expansion of reserves, the Manager for Domestic
Operations is promptly to notify the Chairman who will then decide
whether the situation calls for supplementary instructions from the
