Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
April 18, 1980
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC
April 18, 1980
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent Developments
(1) Following strong growth in February, M-1A and M-1B con-
tracted in March and data for early April suggest that these aggregates
are likely to decline further this month. As shown in the fourth column
of the table, M-1A and M-1B are now expected to decline over the two-month
February to April period, at rates of 3-3/4 and 2-1/2 percent, respectively.
Thus, these aggregates have been running quite low relative to the targeted
growth rates based on the Committee's decision at the March FOMC meeting.
M-2 also has been running weak relative to target recently, reflecting
mainly the contraction in the narrow measures of the money stock. Growth
in MMMF's slowed earlier in March and then declined absolutely following
the imposition of special deposit requirements on March 14, but this has
been offset by greater strength in small time deposits.
Monetary
Aggregates
Targets
Dec. to Feb. to April
June Segment
4-1/2 3.0
5 3.7
7-3/4 7.0
Actual (incl. April projection)
Dec. to Feb. to April
April April March (proj.)
(2) In constructing the nonborrowed reserve path following the
March FOMC meeting, borrowing was assumed to be $2-3/4 billion. However,
early in the intermeeting period it seemed clear that the newly instituted
surcharge was exerting a significant constraint on the demand for borrowing
for reserve adjustment purposes relative to initial expectations. As a
result, a substantial upward adjustment was made to the nonborrowed reserve
path; this adjustment amounted to $600 million, viewed--because of the
uncertainties involved--as the center of a $450 to $750 million range.
This, together with certain adjustments for multiplier shifts, raised the
targeted rate of growth for nonborrowed reserves over the February to
April period to a range centered on 4.9 percent, at an annual rate, as
shown in the middle column of the table below.
Reserve Targets for the February to April Period
and Actual Growth
(Seasonally Adjusted Percent Annual Rates)
Original
Path for
February-April Path Reflecting Actual Growth
Period Adjustments February
(As of March During Inter- to First Three
FOMC meeting) Meeting Period Weeks of April
Total Reserves 8.8 11.6 4.3
Monetary Base 8.6 10.1 5.1
(3) In the event, nonborrowed reserves declined from February to
the average for the three weeks ending April 16 by 6-1/4 percent at an
annual rate, but this decline in nonborrowed reserves reflected a rise in
emergency-type borrowing by one large member bank (to a level of $420 million
on average during the first three weeks of April). Emergency-type borrowing
is considered to be similar to nonborrowed reserves because the bank is
not subject to normal administrative pressure to repay the borrowing in
the short-run. Thus, adjusting for such borrowing, nonborrowed reserves
rose by 0.6 percent at an annual rate over the period, as shown in the
1/
parenthesis in the last column of the table, a bit below path. With the
aggregates expanding below targeted rates, and required reserves therefore
considerably weaker than expected, the seasonally adjusted growth in total
reserves fell substantially below its path.
(4) As the demand for reserves weakened relative to nonborrowed
path levels, the funds rate declined in the course of the intermeeting period,
with most trading in the 18 to 18-1/2 percent area in recent days. In the
early weeks of the intermeeting period, the federal funds market had
tightened considerably further, and the funds rate exceeded 19 percent
in late March and early April. Pressures on the funds market in part
appeared to reflect efforts of banks to avoid borrowing at the discount
window in light of their changed perception of administrative pressure
following adoption of the surcharge and the Special Credit Restraint
Program announced on March 14. Member bank borrowing other than emergency-
type borrowing averaged about $1.9 billion in the first three statement
1/ See Appendix I for paths and adjustments during intermeeting period
on a not seasonally adjusted basis.
weeks of April. Such borrowing subject to the surcharge averaged less than
$100 million over the period.
(5) Short-term financial markets continued to exhibit consider-
able volatility over the intermeeting period, as market participants reacted
to the announcement of the Administration's anti-inflation package, un-
expected Treasury financings, weakening economic indicators, the initial
sharp increase in the federal funds rate, and the most recent decline in
that rate. In the last few days, market expectations have shifted dramatically
in reflection of weak economic statistics, and both short- and long-term
interest rates extended their decline which had begun earlier in the month.
On balance, most short-term rates are 1 to 3 percentage points lower than
at the time of the last meeting. Commercial banks raised their prime rate
from 18-1/2 percent in mid-March to 20 percent in early April before reduc-
ing it to 19-1/2 percent more recently. Bond yields are now 1 to 1-1/2 per-
centage points below their levels at the time of the last meeting. Mortgage
rates at S&Ls have leveled off, but at a record 16.35 percent are up nearly
1 percentage point since mid-March.
(6) Business lending by banks slowed sharply in March from the
rapid pace set in January and February, and growth of other categories of
bank lending and investing also moderated. Data for large banks for early
April do not suggest any strengthening of loan growth. Total loans and
investments at banks expanded at only a 3-1/2 percent annual rate in
March. Lending by thrift institutions may also have slowed in March, as
thrift deposit flows remained weak. Borrowing from the Home Loan Banks by
S&Ls surged to a record $3.6 billion in March and has continued to rise
rapidly in the early weeks of April. Life insurance companies have sharply
reduced their commitment activity in bond and mortgage markets as policy
loans and diminished inflows from pension funds have severely curtailed
cash flows.
(7) The dollar's exchange value has changed little on balance
since the last FOMC meeting, with a large appreciation followed by a sharp
decline. By early April the trade-weighted value of the dollar was 3-1/2
percent above its level at the time of the last Committee meeting and
11-3/4 percent above its January low. In the second week of April, a
change in market expectations about the near-term course of U.S. interest
rates led to a sharp decline in the international value of the dollar.
(8) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for selected monetary and financial flows
over various time periods.
1/ U.S. intervention sales of marks were split equally between the System
and the Treasury, while much smaller sales of Swiss francs and French
francs were entirely for System account, with the latter financed by
swap drawings on the Bank of France.
Past
Month
QI '80 Mar. '80 Mar. '80
1 977/ 1 over over over
1977- 1978- 1979- QIV '79 Dec. '79 Feb. '80
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Managed Liabilities of Banks
(Monthly average change
in billions)
1/ December to December.
21 Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
3/ Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
4/ Primarily federal funds purchases and securities sold under agreements to repurchase.
measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities
from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective Developments and Short-term Targets
(9) Shown below for Committee consideration are three
alternative targets for the monetary aggregates over the December to June
interval, along with implied growth rates for the March to June period.
Also shown are intermeeting federal funds rate ranges, with the
funds rate range currently in effect shown under alternative B. (More
detailed and longer-range specifications are shown on the tables on pages
8 and 9.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth rates for December to
June, SAAR
M-1A 5 4½ 4
M-1B 5½ 5 4½
M-2 7 6¾ 6½
Implied growth rates from
March to June, SAAR
Intermeeting federal funds
rate range, percent 12 to 19 13 to 20 14 to 20
(10) Alternative B retains the December to June target rates
of growth for M-1A and M-1B adopted by the Committee in March. As shown
in Chart 1 on the next page, such growth would achieve levels of M-1A and
M-1B by June that are on the midpoint paths of the Committee's longer-run
QIV '79 to QIV '80 target ranges for these aggregates. As indicated in
the table on page 8, if the staff's April estimate proves correct,
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1A M-1B
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
1980--March 375.3 375.3 375.3 392.2 392.2 392.2
April 374.0 374.0 374.0 391.3 391.3 391.3
May 377.4 377.0 376.5 394.8 394.3 393.8
June 380.8 379.9 378.9 398.4 397.3 396.4
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
1979 QIV to 1980 QIV 4-3/4 4-3/4 4-3/4 5-1/4 5-1/4 5-1/4
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
1980--March 1550.9 1550.9 1550.9 1810.2 1810.2 1810.2
April 1555.4 1555.4 1555.4 1815.2 1815.2 1815.2
May 1566.9 1565.8 1564.7 1827.1 1826.6 1826.1
June 1577.5 1575.3 1573.7 1841.0 1840.0 1839.0
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
May-June growth in these aggregates would have to accelerate to about a
9½ percent annual rate to attain the June target level. Such growth over
a two-month span is relatively strong historically, but not without precedent
for this volatile series. Even though real GNP is expected to decline
significantly this quarter, the rate of increase in nominal GNP is still
projected at over an 8 percent annual rate, suggesting a need for appreciable
growth in transactions balances.1/ However, given the restraining effects
on money demanded of past increases in interest rates, and with real economic
activity apparently slowing significantly, the May-June increases in M-1A
and M-1B required under alternative B may lead to a decline in the federal
funds rate to the 16 to 17 percent area, or perhaps even lower, over the
intermeeting period.
(11) The specifications for alternative B call for a 6¾ percent
rate of growth of M-2 for the December-June period, and a 6¼ percent rate
from March to June. Such growth would leave this aggregate in June below
the midpoint of its longer-run range, as shown in Chart 2. The December-
June growth is about 1 percentage point below that adopted by the Committee
in March, as the expected continued sluggishness of money market mutual
funds is not fully offset by stronger deposit flows.
(12) Bank credit growth under any of the alternatives is likely
to pick up over the next few months from the low March pace, although a
return to the elevated January-February rates is unlikely in light of the
Board's guidelines for bank loan expansion and the projected weakening of
1/ If M-1A and M-1B increase at a 9 percent in May-June, following
the projected April declines, the average second-quarter increase in
these aggregates would be only 2¼ and 3 percent, respectively; the
implied increase in velocity would be quite large--almost 6 percent.
economic activity. With the marginal reserve requirement on managed
liabilities also discouraging bank credit expansion, bank issuance of
large time deposits and other open market liabilities is expected to be
somewhat lower than in the first quarter. M-3 growth under alternative B
is projected at a 6½ percent annual rate over the March-June span,
considerably slower than in the first three months of the year.
(13) Growth in the aggregates at the rates specified under
alternative B implies an annual rate of growth from March to June of the
monetary base and of total reserves of about 4½ and 7½ percent, respectively.
On the assumption that member bank borrowings average around $1¾ billion
over the next few weeks and then decline to about $1¼ billion by mid-year,
nonborrowed reserves would increase at about a 20 percent annual rate over
the March-June period.1/ We have not made any special assumption about the
level of borrowing under the new temporary seasonal credit program. Such
borrowing as it develops would be considered to be economically equivalent
to nonborrowed reserves and therefore the nonborrowed reserve path would be
automatically adjusted to offset fluctuations in such credit.
(14) Market participants appear already to have discounted some
near-term decline in the funds rate associated with a cyclical turn in the
economy. If the funds rate did drop to the 16 to 17 percent area, however,
some further declines in short-term rates might occur, probably accompanied
by further weakening of the dollar on exchange markets, unless foreign
central banks also eased their own monetary policies. Recent declines in
longer-term market rates, however, have been so sharp relative to short rates
1/ This assumes continuous emergency-type borrowing by one bank of $400
million or so, and a level of adjustment credit borrowing of about
$1.4 billion over the next four weeks, declining to $800-900 million
by mid-year. If the emergency-type borrowing declines, the rate of
growth of nonborrowed reserves would be even larger than the 20 percent
indicated.
that they probably would not drop any further. Actual behavior of longer-
term rates will depend in part on offerings in the Treasury's mid-May
refunding--when they will be replacing $1.7 billion of maturing coupon issues
and probably will raise a certain amount of new cash--as well as the eagerness
of corporations to take advantage of the lower bond rates. Mortgage rates
in any event are likely to edge off from their recent peaks in view of the
sharp recent drop in bond yields and the likelihood that thrifts will find
it a little easier to attract deposits.
(15) Alternative C calls for one-half percentage point less growth
in M-1A and M-1B, at an annual rate, over the December to June period relative
to alternative B. This would imply growth in M-1A over the two months of
May and June of about 7¾ percent, or more than 1½ percentage points less
than alternative B. The funds rate would probably be in the area of 18
percent in the weeks ahead, or perhaps a little lower. Shorter-term market
rates are likely to back up a bit under this alternative, as market
participants become more doubtful about the timing and amplitude of a
cyclical downturn in rates. However, any tendency for longer-term market
rates to rebound from their recent lower levels might be limited if the
relatively tight monetary policy stance is construed as increasing the odds
of controlling inflation and/or intensifying the recession. The dollar
probably would not weaken further on foreign exchange markets and might
strengthen a bit.
(16) As shown in the charts, alternative C implies that all of
the monetary aggregates would be below their midpoint paths by June. In
order to achieve the midpoint of the longer-run aggregates growth ranges
for all of 1980, the Committee would therefore have to adopt a policy in
the second half of the year designed to accelerate money growth somewhat.
Such a policy would add to the downward interest rate pressures likely to
occur in any event in reflection of the sharp reduction in real GNP that the
staff is projecting. The staff anticipates, for example, a federal funds
rate of around 13 to 14 percent for late 1980 under alternative B, and this
rate would have to be lower under alternative C.
(17) Alternative C would probably require growth in total
reserves at about a 4 percent annual rate. Assuming an initial level of
borrowings of around $2 billion, gradually declining over the quarter to
$1 to $11 billion, nonborrowed reserves would expand at about a 16 percent
annual rate from March to June. This alternative, however, is more likely
to induce borrowing under the new temporary seasonal credit program, thereby
requiring a downward adjustment in the nonborrowed reserves path.
(18) Alternative A calls for more rapid growth in the monetary
aggregates than B and C, and entails almost an 11 percent annual rate of
increase in M-IA over the next two months. As indicated in the charts, M-1A
and M-1B would be somewhat above their long-run midpoint paths by June,
implying less rapid growth of the narrow money stock (and higher interest
rates) in the second half of 1980 than the other two alternatives.
(19) To achieve alternative A targets, total reserves might have
to expand at an annual rate of 5¼ percent in the March to June period. Assuming
member bank borrowings of around $1 billion in the next few weeks, and
gradually declining over the quarter to $1 to $1¼ billion, nonborrowed
reserves would rise by a 22½ percent annual rate. Such growth of
reserves probably would be associated with a fairly substantial drop in the
federal funds rate in the intermeeting period, perhaps into the lower half
of the 12 to 19 percent range suggested for this alternative.
(20) Alternative A would be accompanied by further declines in
short-term market rates as market participants became more firmly convinced
that the System would not be putting a floor under interest rates. However,
questions may well be raised in markets about the consistency of a sharp
further drop in rates with last month's anti-inflation program, and these
concerns would tend to limit rate declines in longer-term markets. Nonethe-
less, conventional home mortgage rates would probably retrace a large part
of the sharp run-up of the last 60 days, as the further decline in short-term
rates strengthens thrift deposit inflows this quarter.
Directive language
(21) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for the
directive consistent with the form of the directive adopted at the March
meeting. The language continues to call for expansion of reserve aggregates
at a pace consistent with the desired rates of monetary growth over the
first half of 1980, provided that the federal funds rate on a weekly
average basis remains within a specified range. The specifications
adopted at the March meeting are shown in strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks expansion of reserve
aggregates consistent with growth over the first half of 1980 at an
annual rate of [DEL: 4½] ____ percent for M-1A and [DEL: 5] _____ percent for
M-1B, [DEL: or somewhat less,] provided that in the period before the next
regular meeting the weekly average federal funds rate remains within
a range of [DEL: 13 to 20] ____ TO ____ percent. The Committee believes
that, TO BE consistent with this short-run policy, M-2 should grow
at an annual rate of about [DEL: 7¾] ____ percent over the first half and
[DEL: expansion of] THAT bank credit should [DEL: slow] GROW in the months ahead
to AT a pace compatible with growth over the year as a whole within
the range agreed upon.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the constraint on the federal funds rate is inconsistent with the
objective for the expansion of reserves, the Manager for Domestic
Operations is promptly to notify the Chairman who will then decide
whether the situation calls for supplementary instructions from the
