Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
May 15, 1981
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 15, 1981
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Adjusted for estimated shifts of funds from nontransactions
to NOW accounts, growth in M-1B accelerated in April to about a 14 percent
annual rate.1/ To some extent, this pick-up in M-l growth may reflect
a realignment in the public's stock of money holdings toward more
normal relationships with income and interest rates following the near-
record increase in velocity earlier this year. Growth of M-lB in April
was substantially more rapid than the pace implicit in the Committee's
performance of M-1B in the winter, the level of M-1B in April was well
within the Committee's longer-run range--about at the midpoint. Growth
of M-2 remained relatively rapid last month, and its level continued to
be above the upper end of its longer-run range. Growth in the nontrans-
action component of M-2 slowed markedly, however. The total of savings
and small time deposits did not expand in April, and MMMF growth slowed
as market rates rose substantially above average MMMF yields around mid-
month. M-3 in April expanded at almost a 10 percent rate, and its level
remains above the upper end of the Committee's longer-run range.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
First Four Months of 1981
Seasonally Adjusted
Dec. to QIV '80 to
April April April
(2) Nonborrowed reserves declined sharply in April, as banks
were forced to borrow more to meet their reserve needs; they also reduced
their excess reserves by a sizable amount. By the statement weeks ending
April 29 and May 6 average borrowings had increased to the $2.3 to $2.5
billion area, and the funds rate had moved higher--by late April and early
May tending to exceed the upper end of the 13 to 18 percent range for
consultation adopted at the March meeting. After consultation in early
May, the Committee agreed to adhere to the previously adopted money
targets, recognizing that the federal funds rate would probably fluctuate
above the upper limit of the funds rate range.1 / Most recently, the rate
has been in the 18 to 19 percent area. The basic discount rate and the
surcharge were raised 1 percentage point each, effective May 5.
Reserve Aggregates and Related Measures
Seasonally Adjusted
Annual Rates of Growth
Dec.-March April
Weekly Averages, Not Sea-
sonally Adjusted ($ Billions)
Excess Federal
Week ended Borrowings Reserves funds rate
(3) In response to the strength of money demand relative to
the Committee's short-run targets, and to the discount rate action, short-
term market rates generally rose sharply over the intermeeting period.
While still below their December highs, Treasury bill rates have increased
private money market obligations have risen by even larger amounts. The
bank prime rate was raised in steps from 17 percent at the end of March
to 19 percent, but these increases lagged the rising commercial paper
and Eurodollar rates, contributing to a shift of credit demands toward
U.S. offices of large banks in late April and early May.
(4) Treasury and corporate bond yields have risen about 1
percentage point since late March to record levels. Despite the increase
in longer-term yields, and an increase in the number of postponements,
public offerings of corporate and municipal notes and bonds have remained
relatively large. The Treasury has raised about $8 billion in note and
bond sales, including around $2 billion in its recently completed quarterly
refunding auctions. The average commitment rate on primary conventional
mortgages at S&Ls increased to more than 16 percent in the intermeeting
(5) Since the last FOMC meeting, the dollar has risen against
all major currencies, increasing on a weighted-average basis by 9 percent
to the highest level since late 1977.
U.S. authorities have not been
in the market. The dollar's strength over this period primarily reflected
the sharp rise in U.S. interest rates.
(6) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for selected monetary and financial flows
over various time periods. M-1A and M-lB data in parentheses are not
adjusted for the estimated impact of nationwide NOW accounts.
Mar. '81 Apr. '81
over over
Concepts of Money
(-20.2) (-15.1)
M-1B (M-1A plus other check-
Bank Credit
Loan and investments of all
Managed Liabilities of Banks
(Monthly average change in
billions)
p - Preliminary estimates.
1/ QIV to QIV.
2/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
3/ Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
4/ Primarily federal funds purchases and securities sold under agreements to repurchase.
5/ Adjusted for nationwide NOW accounts. Numbers in parentheses are observed changes un-
adjusted for shifts.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures except for data on total loans
and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institutions--
which are derived from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures.
Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to
remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve
requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(7) Shown below for Committee consideration are three alternative
policy strategies for the current quarter. The upper panel of the table
shows growth rates for the two-month April to June period, and the lower
panel gives consistent growth rates for the March to June interval covered by
the Committee's short-run target adopted at the last meeting. The M-1B
growth targets abstract from the estimated impact of nationwide NOW
accounts, as do the Committee's longer-run targets.1/ (More detailed
and longer-run data for the aggregates, on both an adjusted and unadjusted
basis, including those for M-1A, are shown in the tables on pp. 6 and 7.)
The last line of the table indicates federal funds rate ranges thought
by the staff to be consistent with the three alternatives.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
by about 2 percentage points to a range of -7 to -4 percent for 1981.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
April '81 - June '81
March '81 - June '81
Quarterly Average
(3.9)
2.1
(3.6)
-1.2
(3.0)
-4.3
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
April '81 - June '81
March '81 - June '81
Quarterly Average
(8) Alternative C is based on continuation of the 5 percent
annual rate of growth for M-1B over the March to June period targeted by
the Committee at its last meeting--a growth rate which, as shown in
chart 1, would result in a June level about at the lower end of the
Committee's longer-run range. To achieve this short-run target would
require growth of narrow money at a 1¼ percent annual rate on average in
May and June, with June probably needing to show a contraction in the
outstanding level of money.
(9) Given the sharp rise of M-1B in April the Committee may
wish to consider alternatives that in effect avoid squeezing out all of
the excess April growth over the balance of the quarter. Alternative A
targets M-1B growth in May and June at the 4¾ percent midpoint of its
longer-run range, a rate of growth that would keep the level of M-1B
just below its midpoint by June. Alternative B calls for a growth rate
of 3 percent over the two months, which would bring the level of M-1B well
into the lower half of its range by June.
(10) All of the alternatives contemplate slower growth in M-2
than expected at the time of the Committee's previous meeting, when a
March to June M-2 target of 10 percent was considered acceptable.
We would now expect growth of M-2 at about a 7 to 8 percent annual rate
over the March-June period for alternative C. Somewhat higher growth
rates would be expected under alternatives A and B. The slower
March-June growth projected for M-2 essentially reflects the unexpectedly
sharp deceleration recently in growth of its nontransactions component,
including both small time and savings deposits and money market funds.
Money market fund growth is expected to remain weak over the near-term,
and particularly so if market interest rates rise and thereby temporarily
widen their spread over MMMF yields. As shown in chart 2, the level of M-2
in June would be at the upper bound of its longer-run range for the year
under alternative C, while it would remain somewhat above the range under
the other two alternatives.
(11) The projected slowing of real and nominal GNP this quarter,
as well as the recent increases in interest rates, should tend to retard
narrow money growth from the extremely rapid April pace. However, money
demand may remain fairly strong, and interest rates under upward pressure,
unless the economy is considerably weaker than the staff now anticipates
or unless the current level of interest rates induces another shift to
more intensive cash management. Even under alternative A--which involves
growth in total reserves from April to June at an 8 percent annual rate--
the federal funds rate seems likely to remain in a 17 to 20 percent range
over the balance of the quarter.1/ Assuming the present discount rate
structure, adjustment borrowing would probably be around $1 to $2 billion.
Continued high long-term rates may tend to induce firms to focus their
growing credit demands on banks and other sources of short-term credit
over the near term--although the limited flexibility of many borrowers
and a desire to stem the deterioration of balance sheets likely will
maintain bond issuance at a high level.
(12) Alternatives B and C would call for a growth in total
reserves over the April to June period at annual rates of 6 and 4 percent,
respectively. A federal funds rate around 20 percent or a bit higher is
likely to emerge over the next few weeks under alternative B, while the
funds rate under C could rise further. Given current discount rates,
borrowing at the discount window might rise to around the $2 billion
area under alternative B and to around $3 billion under alternative C.
Of course, any increase in the present discount rate level and structure
would work to reduce the demand for borrowing. Other short-term rates
would probably rise substantially further under these alternatives, with
upward pressures particularly intense under alternative C. Long-term
interest rates would also rise further over the weeks ahead, probably
inducing a large volume of postponements and cancellations of bond
(14) The outlook for interest rates under all three alternatives
suggests continued weakness in mortgage demands and also intense earnings
pressures on thrift institutions, with alternative C implying a higher
probability of a number of failures this summer. Moreover, with their
deposit flows weak--and less than they may have anticipated--some institu-
tions may find it necessary to draw down their stock of liquid assets.
Although the new mortgage instruments recently approved by the FHLBB are
likely to be translated into an increased willingness of thrifts to make
mortgage loans, their impact on interest income will be modest for some
Directive language
(15) Given below is a suggested operational paragraph for
the directive consistent with the form of the directives adopted at
recent meetings. The specifications adopted at the meeting on March 31
are shown in strike-through form.
In the short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve
aggregates consistent with A SUBSTANTIAL DECELERATION OF growth in
M-1B from [DEL: March] APRIL to June [DEL: at] TO an annual rate of [DEL: 5½] ____ percent
[DEL: or somewhat less,] after allowance for the impact of flows into NOW
accounts, and WITH growth in M-2 at an annual rate of about [DEL: 10½]
____ percent. It is recognized that shifts into NOW accounts will
continue to distort measured growth in M-1B to an unpredictable
extent, and operational reserve paths will be developed in the
light of evaluation of those distortions. If it appears during the
period before the next meeting that fluctuations in the federal
funds rate, taken over a period of time, within a range of [DEL: 13] ____
to [DEL: 18] ____ percent are likely to be inconsistent with the monetary
and related reserve paths, the Manager for Domestic Operations is
promptly to notify the Chairman, who will then decide whether the
situation calls for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
