Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
October 2, 1981Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC October 2, 1981
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Growth of M1-B (adjusted for shifts into NOW accounts)
accelerated to almost a 7 percent annual rate in August, but then con-
tracted in September. Over the June to September short-term target period
growth was at about a 1¾ percent annual rate, well below the Committee's
objective for that interval. As shown in the last column of the table
on the next page, growth in adjusted M-1B for the year to date is just
a little over 1 percent at an annual rate, well below the lower limit of
the Committee's 3½ to 6 percent longer-run range.
(2) Growth of M2 over the June to September period was at a
end of the FOMC's longer-run range. The nontransaction component of M2
in August and September showed considerable strength, led by continued
large inflows into money market mutual funds.
(3) In interpreting the third quarter behavior of M2, it should
be noted that its growth was restrained by diversion of M2 balances to
retail RPs issued by depository institutions in part to compete with MMMFs
but mainly to attract customer funds in anticipation of the October 1
issuance of All Saver Certificates (ASCs).1  These RPs were not included
in M2 when it was redefined in early 1980 because they were not of any
importance at that time. Inclusion of all such RPs in M2 would raise its
$6.3 billion at S&Ls, $1.3 billion at mutual savings banks, and
$3.5 billion at commercial banks. Staff estimates based on sample
data suggest such RPs rose a further $4 billion by the end of
Key Monetary Policy Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
July August Sept.2 / June '81 QIV '80
Money and Credit Aggregates
Reserve Measures 2/
p/ Preliminary.
Memorandum: FOMC Targets
(percent increase)
Longer-run
(QIV '80 -
.QIV '81)
growth from June to September by about 2 percentage points. If adjusted
to include retail RPs, growth of M2 would be about ¾ of a percentage point
above the longer-run target range.
(4) Nonborrowed reserves expanded at a 20 percent annual rate
over the third quarter. Total reserves expanded substantially less, though,
as adjustment borrowing from the discount window declined, reflecting the
weakening in required reserves against transaction balances. In the
most recent statement week, adjustment borrowing averaged a little over
$1 billion, some $350 million below the level assumed in constructing the
reserve paths after the last meeting. Growth in the monetary base was
considerably less rapid than expansion in total reserves, as expansion of
currency slowed to an unusually low 4 percent annual rate over the past
three months.1/
(5) The federal funds rate, which had averaged around 19 percent
in July and around 18¼ percent at the time of the August meeting, recently
has traded in a 14½ to 16½ percent range as pressure in the reserves market
to 2½ percentage points. The bank prime rate was reduced by 1 percentage
point to 19½ percent, and the Federal Reserve reduced by 1 percentage point
to 3 percent the surcharge rate for large, frequent borrowers at the
discount window.
(6) Despite the easing in the money market, bond yields have
increased on balance since the last meeting by 50 to over 100 basis points.
The advance in long-term yields reflected in large part market concerns about
federal deficits in fiscal 1982 and beyond. The Treasury raised over
$8 billion of new money in September to build up its cash balance to help
meet the large fourth-quarter combined (unified and off-budget) deficit of
around $50 billion, and it has recently held or announced auctions
to raise another $5 billion of cash through 20- and 7-year issues.
(7) Since its peak in early August, just prior to the last
FOMC meeting, the dollar has declined on balance by about 7 percent.
Lower short-term interest rates in the United States contributed to the
dollar's net decline, but the market also reacted to the prospective
improvement in Germany's current account and a weakening in that of the
United States.
Prospective developments
(8) The table below presents three alternative approaches to
the monetary aggregates for the fourth quarter of 1981. Implied growth
rates for the QIV '80 to QIV '81 longer-run policy period for each of
these alternatives are also shown. Possible ranges for the intermeeting
federal funds rate are indicated in the last line of the table. (More
detailed data on these and other aggregates may be found on the following
two pages, and charts indicating the relationship of the alternative three-
month targets to the Committee's existing longer-run ranges for 1981 may
be found on the next three pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from September
to December
Implied growth from
QIV '80 to QIV '81
(9) Alternative A is designed to achieve a rapid enough expansion
of M1-B over the next three months so that it would reach the lower limit
of the FOMC's 3½ to 6 percent longer-run target range by December. This
approach would probably lead to growth in M2 (and also M3) for the year
well above target. Alternative C is designed to bring M2 closer to its
target for the year, with the projected small overshoot accounted for mainly
by shifts of funds out of non-M2 assets into ASCs; such an approach would
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1-A M1-B
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
Chart 3 CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
M 3 and Bank Credit Class FOMC
Billions of dollars
S 2200
*Actual Level
-Short-Run Alternatives
: :
*NOTE. A, B. and C alternatves are inditingulhatble on this scale
N
1980
D J F M A
BANK CREDIT
" Actual Level
Billions of dollars
1350
.60/b -1300
SI I I I III _J
O N D J
I I I I I I
A S 0 N D
I I J I
leave M1-B for the year well below the lower end of its range. Alternative
B falls midway between the two approaches.1/
(10) Under the specifications of alternative C we would expect
growth in M1-B at a 6 percent annual rate over the September to December
period to be consistent with maintaining M2 relatively near to the upper
limit of its longer-run target range. The staff does not expect this
alternative to involve further downward pressures on short-term interest
rates, given the 7 percent increase in nominal GNP projected for the
fourth quarter and assuming less rapid downward shift in demand for M1-B
(11) Over the next few weeks, the federal funds rate under
this alternative may fluctuate for the most part in the area of 15 to 16
percent. Other short-term rates are not likely to drop further under
such circumstances, and they could edge higher. Business net demands on
financial markets are expected to remain sizable as profits continue
to be squeezed, and to focus, as in the recent past, on short-term markets.
About half of the Treasury's large cash need between now and year end
is expected to be raised in the bill market.
(12) Total reserves would need to expand at a 3 percent annual
rate over the last three months of the year if the monetary specifications
of alternative C are to be achieved. Adjustment borrowing at the discount
window would probably vary between $900 million and $1.2 billion, given
the current structure of discount rates and a federal funds rate in the area
of 15 to 16 percent. Nonborrowed reserves would be targeted to expand at a
(13) The specifications of alternative B call for a more rapid
growth in M1-B at around a 9 percent annual rate from September to
December, sustained by 6 percent annual rate of growth in total reserves.
The federal funds rate under these conditions is likely to decline to
around the current 14 percent basic discount rate or just below. Adjust-
ment borrowing at the discount window would move down to minimal levels
in the area of $200 to 300 million or so. Nonborrowed reserve growth
would be at a 14 percent annual rate over the next three months.
(14) Other short-term rates would decline along with the
-funds rate, and a substantial rally in bond markets might develop. The
possibilities of such a rally, or the length of one, would be limited by
the large pent-up corporate and municipal demands for long-term credit that
are likely to materialize as credit conditions ease. Declines in mortgage
rates are likely to lag drops in other longer-term yields, in part reflecting
continued pressures on thrift institutions only partially relieved by ASCs.
It would probably take some time before any significant pick-up in mortgage
commitments was evident, given the past volatility of market conditions and
the relatively short-term maturity of ASC deposits.
(16) Under alternative A, M1-B growth is targeted to rise at
about a 12 percent annual rate from September to December in order to
bring this aggregate back to the lower bound of its long-run range by the
end of the year. We would expect a substantial drop in short-term rates--
with the funds rate dropping into a 10 to 12 percent range on average and
to reach this objective. Total reserves would have to rise at a 9 percent
annual rate over the quarter, and nonborrowed reserves at about an 18
percent annual rate. A reserve operating path that appears to entail market
rates well below the present 14 percent discount rate calls into question
the sustainability of that rate, for technical reasons if for no other.1/
(17) M2 under this alternative would probably grow at a 12
percent annual rate over the next three months. Net inflows of funds to
thrift institutions may pick up somewhat, but more importantly, pressures on
their earnings would be greatly alleviated. Both mortgage market rates and
bond yields are likely to show a substantial drop, calling forth stronger
demands for longer-term financing. In exchange markets, the dollar would
probably weaken considerably. However, the declines in long-term rates
and exchange rates would tend to be moderated in the degree that market
participants came to believe that a substantial rebound of short-term
rates was in prospect over a reasonably near term. Such a rebound would
be expected by the staff early next year in the process of restraining money
growth to FOMC's 1982 targets. Such upward interest rate pressures would
be intensified as the sharp easing of credit conditions between now and
year-end contemplated by alternative A leads to more of a strengthening
in economic activity in the first part of next year than is in the current
staff projection.
Directive language
(18) Given below is a suggested operational paragraph for the
directive. The specifications adopted at the meeting on August 18 are
shown in strike-through form.
In the short run the Committee [DEL: continue to seek] SEEKS behavior
of reserve aggregates consistent with growth of M-1B from [DEL: June to]
September TO DECEMBER at an annual rate of [DEL: 7] ____ percent after
allowance for the impact of flows into NOW accounts [DEL: (resulting in
growth at an annual rate of about 2 percemt from the average in the
second quarter to the average in the third quarter),] provided that
growth of M2 remains around the upper limit of, or moves within, its
range for the year. It is recognized that THE BEHAVIOR OF M2 WILL
HAVE TO BE EVALUATED IN THE LIGHT OF THE EFFECTS OF RECENT REGULA-
TORY AND LEGISLATIVE CHANGES, PARTICULARLY THE PUBLIC'S RESPONSE TO
THE AVAILABILITY OF THE ALL SAVERS CERTIFICATE [DEL: shifts into NOW
accounts will continue to distort measured growth in M1-B to an
unpredictable extend and operational reserve-paths-will-be-developed
in-the-light-of-evaluation of these distortions]. The Chairman may call
for Committee consultatin if it appears to the Manager for Domestic
Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related
reserve paths during the period before the next meeting is likely
to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a
range of [DEL: 15 to 21] ____ TO ____ percent.
