Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
August 14, 1981
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemBy the staff
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC August 14, 1981
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1-B, adjusted for shifts into NOW accounts, expanded at
a 3½ percent annual rate in July, after contracting at nearly a 7 percent
annual pace in the previous two months. Available data for the first
two weeks of August are very strong, however; part of that increase,
perhaps one-quarter, seems to reflect the transitory influence of demand
balances accumulated to pay for stock tendered in connection with mergers.
Even after allowance for this, M1-B in early August appears to be back to
a level more nearly in line with the 7 percent June to September target
path. M2 expanded at an 8 percent annual rate in July, as its non-
transactions component rose more rapidly last month than had been previously
anticipated. Fragmentary data for early August suggest a further strength-
ening in that component. This strengthening, together with the sizable
increase in M1-B so far this month, suggests that M2 has moved to a
level above its third-quarter target path.
(2) Through July, as shown in the last column of the table on
the next page, growth in Ml-B was well below the lower end of its 3½ to
well above the 9½ percent upper end of its range. The early August data
would place M1-B a little closer to the long-run path this month, but
still well below it, and would probably place M2 at/or somewhat above,
the upper end of its range.
Key Monetary Policy Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Money and Credit
Aggregates
M1-B (shift-adjusted)
Bank Credit
Reserve Measures
Monetary base /
March '81
over
Dec. '80
June '81
over
March '81
July '81
over
June '81
July '81
over
QIv '80
Target ranges for 1981 (percent increase):
M1-B (shift adjusted)
M2
M3
Bank Credit
(3) Credit growth at U.S. banking offices was at a 5¾ percent
annual rate in July. Business loan growth accelerated somewhat, as
businesses chose to meet an increased share of their credit needs at
banks rather than in the commercial paper or capital markets, where net
issuance slowed. Merger activity was an insignificant factor in July
loan expansion at U.S. banking offices, since virtually all of such loans
were booked offshore by both U.S. and foreign banks. However, in early
August business loans at large banks expanded sharply, with a little over
half the growth reflecting merger loans.
(4) In line with the Committee's decision to strengthen growth
in M1-B, the reserve aggregates expanded rapidly in July (as shown in
the table on the preceding page). Nonborrowed reserves rose particularly
sharply. At the same time, borrowings declined, dropping by about
$350 million in July on average and another $500 million in the first half
of August, as weakness of M1-B in the latter part of July reduced required
reserves (with a lag) relative to the nonborrowed reserve path.1/ Member
bank borrowing averaged about $1.2 billion in the first two statement
weeks of August.
(5) The federal funds rate, which averaged a bit over 19 percent
in June and July, recently has traded in a 17½ to 18½ percent range.
Despite this decline, most other interest rates--both short- and long-term--
have risen by ½ to 1¼ percentage points on balance since the July
Committee meeting. The upward pressure on interest rates generally
reflected increasing concern about the Treasury's longer-run financing
needs following enactment of the Administration's tax proposals, a slower
than expected drop in the funds rate, incoming economic news that has been
less weak than many had anticipated, and the market's need to absorb a
large amount of new Treasury issues in a relatively short period in late
July and early August. Since late July the Treasury has announced issues
to raise $7.9 billion of new money, with issues ranging from a 23-day
cash management bill to a 30-year bond in the current mid-August refunding.
(6) The dollar strengthened further in foreign exchange
markets over the intermeeting period, rising on balance 3 percent on a
weighted average basis, reflecting relatively high and rising interest
rates here and political uncertainties abroad.
Prospective developments
(7) Shown below for Committee consideration are two alternative
monetary policy strategies for the current quarter. The upper panel of
the table shows growth rates for the June-to-September interval covered
by the Committee's short-run targets adopted at the last meeting, while
the next panel shows implied July-to-September growth rates, given last
month's actual growth. Possible intermeeting ranges for the federal funds
rate also are shown. More detailed data on these and other aggregates may
be found on pages 6 and 7, and charts indicating the relationship of the
alternative two-month targets to the Committee's existing longer-run
ranges for 1981 may be found on the next three pages.
Alt. A Alt. B
Growth from June to September
M1-B 7 6
M2 10½ 10
Implied Growth from July to
September
M1-B 8½ 7½
M2 11½ 10½
Federal funds rate range 15 to 21 16 to 22
(8) Alternative A retains the Committee's 7 percent June-to-
September target for M1-B adopted at the last meeting, a target that would
require an 8½ percent annual rate of growth over the two-month July-to-
September period. However, in view of the greater than expected strength
of the nontransactions component of M2, it seems likely that attaining the
M1 target for the third quarter will result in M2 expansion in excess of
the growth rate of 9 percent or less desired by the Committee at its last
meeting. We would now expect growth in M2 from June to September under
Alternative levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1-A M1-B
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
alternative A to be on the order of 10½ percent. Alternative B provides
an option that would exert greater restraint on M2 growth, involving a
lower target for M1-B growth in the third quarter, one of 6 percent.
(9) Both alternatives call for an acceleration of growth of
M1-B (adjusted for shifts into NOW accounts) from its modest July pace,
an increase which appears to be well in train in early August. Both would
reach a level of M1-B in September below the low end of the Committee's
longer-run range for this aggregate, and would imply a very slow annual
growth rate on a quarterly average basis, 1¼ to 1¾ percent. On the other
hand, both alternatives involve an acceleration of M2 over the balance of
the quarter that would place this aggregate somewhat above the upper end
of its longer-run range in September, though less so under B than A. The
specifications for alternatives A and B assume that MM growth slows a bit
from its recent extremely rapid pace, while small time deposit growth
strengthens relative to July, owing to growth of the 30-month SSC, whose
ceiling rate since August 1 can fluctuate in line with Treasury yields.
M3 is expected to remain well above its longer-run range under both
alternatives, reflecting continued CD growth to finance loan expansion.
(10) To achieve the alternative A specifications, total reserves
probably would have to expand at about a 13 percent annual rate in August
and September, considerably more than in July. Even such a rapid expansion
in reserves, and the associated faster money growth, would likely be con-
sistent with short-term interest rates holding near current levels.
Nominal GNP is expected by the staff to expand at a 7 percent annual rate
in the third quarter, suggesting strong transactions demands for money over
the balance of the quarter. Even with the alternative A target specifi-
cations, income velocity of M-B would rise at a relatively rapid annual
rate of about 5 percent this quarter. It seems reasonable to expect that
under alternative A the federal funds rate over the next few weeks might
be in the area of 18 percent. With the current level of discount and
surcharge rates, borrowing at the discount window could be in a $1 to $1
billion range.
(11) It is possible that long-term interest rates could decline
some over the next several weeks, as investors become increasingly
interested in bonds at the unusually high level of rates currently pre-
vailing. However, the projected stability in short-term rates and the
large prospective demands on bond markets would tend to limit the size--
and perhaps the duration--of any drop in rates. The Treasury is likely
to raise another $7½ billion of new money this quarter, sponsored agency
borrowings will also probably continue to be relatively large, and the
Treasury and sponsored agencies may need to borrow about $44 billion in
cash in the fourth quarter. In addition, any improvement in rates can
be expected to call forth a substantial volume of corporate issues to fund
short-term debt. Tax-exempt and foreign borrowings in U.S. capital
markets are also projected to remain large.
(12) The alternative B specifications imply growth of total
reserves from July to September at an 11 percent annual rate. The federal
funds rate probably would be around 19 percent or higher during the
intermeeting period, and, given the present discount rate structure,
borrowing would likely run around $1½ to $2 billion. Under alternative B,
market interest rates, especially short-term rates, are likely to rise,
perhaps appreciably. Pressure on thrift institution earnings would be
more intense under this alternative than under alternative A, and mortgage
rates would probably rise further. Longer-term market rates may also rise,
at least temporarily, in reflection of higher costs of financing positions;
business credit demands would continue to be centered on short-term markets.
The dollar would remain under upward pressure in foreign exchange markets.
Directive language
(13) Given below are two alternative operational paragraphs
for the directive. Alternative I retains the structure of the current
directive, focusing on the June to September growth rate for M1-B, with
the proviso adopted at the last meeting related to M2. The language
would be consistent with either alternatives A or B (with the directive
indicating under B that the Committee had lowered its third quarter
M1-B target). In this directive structure, it would need to be recognized,
however, that the proviso clause for M2 might well be promptly triggered
given the staff's current expectation of a strengthening in M2 growth.
The language of alternative II would be consistent with a
decision by the Committee to choose an M1-B growth rate over the balance
of the quarter presently thought needed to exert desired restraint on M2,
without prejudging that a lower growth in M1-B than earlier targeted for
the quarter will in practice be required. Thus, if this directive included
the July to September growth rate for M1-B in alternative B, the language
of the directive would permit the higher growth in M1-B needed to meet the
bound of its longer-run range. This language is similar to the approach
adopted by the Committee at the last mid-quarter meeting on May 18.
Alternative I
In the short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve
aggregates consistent with growth of M1-B from June to September
at an annual rate of [DEL: 7] ____ percent after allowance for the impact
of flows into NOW accounts (resulting in growth at an annual rate
of about [DEL: 2] ____ percent from the average in the second quarter to
the average in the third quarter), provided that growth of M2
remains around the upper limit of [DEL:, or moves within,] its range for
the year. It is recognized that shifts into NOW accounts will
continue to distort measured growth in M1-B to an unpredictable
extent, and operational reserve paths will be developed in the
light of evaluation of those distortions. The Chairman may call
for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives and
related reserve paths during the period before the next meeting
is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently
outside a range of [DEL: l5 to 21] ____ TO ____ percent.
Alternative II
In the short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve
aggregates consistent with a pick-up in growth of M1-B from July
to September to an annual rate of ____ percent, or somewhat
higher, after allowance for the impact of flows into NOW accounts.
Provided that growth of M2 remains around the upper limit of, or
moves within, its range for the year, growth of M1-B at an annual
rate somewhat higher than the ____ percent specified above would
be acceptable, in light of the relatively weak growth experienced
in July and the objective adopted by the Committee at its July
meeting for growth from June to September at an annual rate of
from the average in the second quarter to the average in the third
quarter). It is recognized that shifts into NOW accounts will
continue to distort measured growth in M1-B to an unpredictable
extent, and operational reserve paths will be developed in the light
of evaluation of those distortions. The Chairman may call for
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic
Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related
reserve paths during the period before the next meeting is likely
to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside
a range of [DEL: 15 to 21] ____ TO ____ percent.
Reserve Targets and Related Measures Intermeeting Period
($ millions, not seasonally adjusted)
Targets for
3-week Average Projection of 3-week Average
July 15 to July 29 July 15 to July 29
Total Nonborrowed Total Required Excess Adjustmen
Reserves Reserves Reserves Reserves Reserves Borrowing
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (3)-(2)
As of
July 7
(FOMC Meeting) 41,359 39,859 41,359 41,109 250 1,500
Actual 3-week
Average 41,216 39,548 41,216 40,913 303 1,668
Targets for
3-week Average Projection for 3-week Average
Aug. 5 to Aug. 19 August 5 to August 19
July 31 40,782 3/ 39,282 3/ 40,627 40,410 217 1,345
Aug. 7 40,954 4/ 39,530 / 40,815 40,522 293 1,285
14 40,982 1/ 39,558 51 40,824 40,518 306 1,266
Actual 3-week 6/ 6/ 6/ 6/ 6/
Average n.a. - n.a. n.a. - 40,518 n.a. - n.a. -
/ Total and nonborrowed reserve paths adjusted downward by $255 million due to
multiplier changes.
Table 1
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II--FOMC
August 17, 1981
Short-Term ILong-Term
Period Federal Treasury Bills CDs Comm. Bank U.S. Govt. Constant Corp. Aaa Muni- RHome Mortgagese r io d  
Secondary per Pme Maturity Yields Utility cipal Secondary Market
MarketPaper Prime 
Primary
Market Auction Market ae 3-yr 1-yr 30-yr New Recently Bond FNMA GNMA
3-mo l-yr I 6-mo 3-mo Issue Offered Buyer Co4 Auc. Sec.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16)
Oct. 12.81
Nov. 15.85
Dec. 18.90
Apr.
May
June
July 1
8
Daily--Aug. 7
13
14
of 6-month bills that will be issued on the Thursday following the end of the statement week. For column 11, the weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar
week over which data are averaged. Columns 12 and 13 are 1-day quotes for Friday and Thursday, respectively, following the end of the statement week. Column 14
is an average of contract interest rates on commitments for conventional first mortgages with 80 percent loan-to-value ratios made by a sample of insured savings
and loan associations on the Friday following the end of the statement week. The FNMA auction yield is the average yield in a bi-weekly auction for short-term
forward commitments for government underwritten mortgages; beginning July 7, 1980, figures exclude graduated payment mortgages. GNMA yields are average net
yields to investors on mortgage-backed securities for immediate delivery, assuming prepayment in 12 years on pools of 30-year FHA/VA mortgages carrying the
coupon rate 50 basis points below the current FHA/VA ceiling.
Table 2 /
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1 /
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II--FOMC
August 17, 1981
Treasury Coupons Federal Agencies Net Change
Treasury Net Purchases 3/ Net Purchases 4/ Outright
Period Bills Net Within Within 0 Holdings
Chane 2/ 1 year 1 - 5 5 - Over 10 Total year5 5 - 0 Over 10 Total Total 5/
i68 6,307 2,373
-- -2,157 -1,381
-- - 1,107
- -2,555 -1,694
- 2,944 -1,352
Apr.
May
June
-- -- -- -23 --
-- -- -- -- --
-------- -382
S- - - 1,592
S- - - 1,975
S - - - 790
- -- -- - 179
-- -90
-- 295
- - 1,322
- - 978
- - -100
-- ---- -710
S - - 915 -898
rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury borrowing from the System.
4/ Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts only. Excludes redemptions and maturity shifts.
5/ In addition to the net purchases of securities, also reflects changes in System holdings of bankers' acceptances, direct Treasury borrowing from the System and
redemptions (-) of agency and Treasury coupon issues.
6/ Includes changes in RPs (+), matched sale-purchase transactions (-), and matched purchase-sale transactions (+).
7/ Maturing 2-year notes were exchanged on June 2, 1980, for special 2-day bills. At their maturity the bills were exchanged for new 2-year notes.
July 1
8
" "
" '"
" '"
Table 3
Security Dealer Positions and Bank Positions
Millions of dollars
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
August 17, 1981
U.S. government securities dealer positions Underwriting Member bank reserve postone
.Period bco ns ues ad dsyndicate positionseess seasonal brrowing at me FRB
cash futures nd forwards corporate municipal reserves seasonal special adjustment total
bills coupons bills I coupons bonds bonds I
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
July 1
8
Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in
syndicate, which are Friday figures. Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowing are weighted
averages of statement week figures. Monthly data for dealer futures and forwards are end-of-month
figures for 1980.
*Strictly confidential
FO 1RAQ I7AIR1
