Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
December 17, 1982
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC December 17, 1982
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) Following an 8-1/4 percent annual rate of expansion in
October, M2 growth accelerated to near an 11-3/4 percent rate in November.
However, M2 expansion slowed considerably in late November and the first
half of December, so far as can be judged from available data, as growth
in its nontransactions component was weaker than anticipated. This
slowing brought M2 growth into line with, indeed a bit below, the path
for this aggregate consistent with the FOMC's 9-1/2 percent growth rate
objective for the September-to-December period.
(2) While growth in the total of nontransaction accounts seems
to have slowed in recent weeks, expansion of savings deposits remained
generally strong. This has been accompanied by strength in NOW accounts
(and also demand deposits), suggesting that the public has been positioning
itself in anticipation of the availability of new deposit accounts in mid-
December and early January. Such positioning would appear to have con-
tributed to a greater than expected expansion of M1 in late November and
the first part of December, with November growth at almost a 17 percent
annual rate and December possibly also double digit (currently estimated
at around an 11 percent rate.)
(3) Given the level of M2 now estimated for the fourth quarter,
growth over the QIV '81 to QIV '82 period is likely to run about 9-3/4
percent, compared to the 6 to 9 percent range set by the Committee. This
growth, which is a little higher than registered in 1981, implies a 5-1/2
percent drop in M2 velocity over the year, the largest four-quarter decline
in the postwar period. As for M1, growth from QIV '81 to QIV '82 will
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted, annual rates of growth)
Oc to to over to over
Oct. Nov. Dec. Dec. 04 Year Q4 Year
Money and Credit Aggregates
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
began expanding rapidly early this year. If such balances were to be included in
the money stock, growth in M2 and M) would be boosted in 1982 by .4 and .5 percentage
points, respectively, on a Q4 to Q4 basis.
6/ Measured from December-January base.
7/ Includes data through November.
6/ Through the first two statement weeks of December.
probably be about 8-1/2 percent, well above the Committee's longer-run
range of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent. The income velocity of M1 declined by
(4) Bank credit growth weakened further in November, when out-
standing business loans (and also total loans) contracted. With core deposit
flows more than adequate relative to credit demands, banks have let large
CDs run off. This, together with the weakness of institution-only money
funds, has contributed to restraining M3 growth to around a 9-1/4 percent
annual rate in November and to a considerably slower pace in December. For
the year M3 growth would be about 10-1/4 percent, compared to the FOMC's
longer-run range of 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent.
(5) Nonborrowed and total reserves expanded at about 15 and 18
percent annual rates respectively in November, reflecting the strength
of transactions balances. However, the monetary base expanded at a
moderate 6-1/2 percent annual rate, as currency growth was unusually slow.
The level of borrowing implied by the intermeeting nonborrowed reserves
path was $250 million initially, but most recently the level of implied
borrowing fell to $230 million in reflection of the slowing of M2 growth
late in the intermeeting period.1/ In the statement week ending December 15,
however, actual adjustment and seasonal borrowing came to $514 million, as
a shortfall in reserves on the last day of the statement week and unusually
strong bank demand for excess reserves led to over $3 billion of borrowing
on Wednesday.
(6) Reflecting two further 1/2 percentage point cuts in the
discount rate to a level of 8-1/2 percent, the federal funds rate has
fallen to the 8-1/2 to 9 percent area in recent days compared to around
interest rates generally have dropped 35 to 75 basis points on balance
since mid-November. Bond yields, however, are a little higher on balance
over the intermeeting period, reflecting unusually heavy borrowing by
businesses and governments. Yields in primary mortgage markets edged down
further in response to earlier declines in bond rates, and activity in
these markets continued to show signs of reviving.
(7) The weighted-average value of the dollar has depreciated
by 4 percent since the November FOMC meeting, mainly in association with
heightened market awareness of the growing U.S. trade and current account
deficits. Bilateral dollar exchange rates have shown divergent movements,
with the yen strengthening more than the mark against the dollar, while the
pound weakened.
Prospective developments
(8) The specification of policy alternatives for the Committee
over the period immediately ahead is complicated by the uncertainties
surrounding the behavior of the monetary aggregates in the transition period
to the new deposit instruments authorized by the DIDC. Uncertainties
appear greatest with respect to M1. The behavior of M1 over the next
three months, and over the year, will depend considerably on how depository
institutions price and advertise the new accounts, as well as on how the
public's management of cash balances is influenced by interest rates and
convenience factors in managing one or several accounts. At one extreme,
super-NOW accounts, available beginning January 5, could receive the great
bulk of shifting funds, causing M1 to rise sharply. At the other extreme,
money market deposit accounts (MMDAs), available since December 14, could
dominate, retarding M1 growth sharply. We have tentatively assumed that,
on balance flows into super-NOWs from non-M1 sources will tend to be
greater than flows out of M1 into MMDAs, with an upward impact on M1 growth
over the first three months. However, there is also a distinct possibility
that the net flows of funds will work to depress M1 growth.1/
(9) Uncertainties surrounding M2 may be less than M1 because
much of the shifting of funds in response to the availability of the new
accounts will represent a redistribution of funds among the component assets
of M2. However, M2 is by no means free of uncertainties in the transition
because of the unknown degree to which funds will shift out of market
instruments into the newly authorized deposits. We have assumed that such
shifts in the first quarter (when much of the adjustment to the new accounts
may take place) will increase M2 growth on the order of 3 percentage points
at an annual rate and that the impact for the year may be on the order
of 1-1/2 percentage points--with relatively wide margins of error around
those estimates. M3 growth would probably be less affected than M2 by
shifts, as banks tend to reduce issuance of large CDs in response to the
availability of additional funds through MMDAs and super-NOWs.
(10) Alternative specifications for policy in the first quarter
are based on an underlying growth of M2 (abstracting from shifts) consistent
with the FOMC's tentative 6 to 9 percent range for 1983. However, all of
the alternatives, as shown in the table below, involve actual M2 growth
above the longer-run range in the first three months of the year, assuming
that shifts into M2 develop in the dimension noted in the previous paragraph.
M2 should move closer to, or perhaps within, its tentative longer-run range
as the year progresses, as shifts abate and the underlying demand for
liquidity remains below last year's exceptional pace relative to GNP.
(More detailed data for the alternatives are shown in the table and charts
on the next few pages. The quarterly interest rate path consistent with
the staff's GNP projection is contained in Appendix II.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from Dec. to March
(11) While the specifications of alternative B call for an
observed 11 percent assumed rate of growth in M2 over the next three months,
such growth, given our preliminary estimate of shifts from market instruments,
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 _Ml- '
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
Growth Rates
Quarterly
Average
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Class II -FOMCActual and Targeted M2
M2 Billions of dollars
-- 2100
ACTUAL LEVEL*
SHORT-RUN ALTERNATIVES
* December 1982 level is prlcte.
Chart 2
Actual and Targeted M3
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Class -FOMC
M3 Billions of dollars
--- 2540
- ACTUAL LEVEL*
.." SHORT-RUN ALTERNATIVES
il ~~I I
-- 2300
*December 1982 level s proected
would represent a substantial slowing from 1982's pace in underlying
M2 expansion (abstracting from the impact of shifts associated with the
new accounts). Such a slowing would appear to be consistent with little
change in short-term interest rates from current levels despite an expected
acceleration in the rate of growth of nominal GNP. M2 balances grew
unusually rapidly relative to GNP in 1982, and we would anticipate an abate-
ment of such liquidity demands in the course of 1983 as economic activity
begins to rise and consumer and business confidence is restored.
(12) It would appear that alternative B would be consistent
with a federal funds rate around the current 8-1/2 percent discount rate,
or edging down further, and other market interest rates generally little
changed. The 3-month Treasury bill rate may continue in a 7-1/2 to 8 per-
cent range, with private rates running about 1/2 to 3/4 of a percentage
point higher; however, a failure of the economy to show generalized signs
of a revival in aggregate demand--as the market might infer from weak
retail sales and similar incoming data for December, should that develop--
could well lead to anticipatory rate declines. The prime loan rate could
drop somewhat from its current 11-1/2 percent level, given its spread
over prevailing open market rates. Mortgage rates might come under some
further downward pressure if inflows into the new accounts at thrifts
induce these institutions to step up their new commitment activity.
(13) The growth of credit to domestic nonfinancial sectors is
likely to moderate a little over coming months, although continuing to
outpace the increase in GNP. The slowing in credit expansion is expected
to be concentrated in the state and local sector, where borrowers have
advanced their offerings in anticipation of registration requirements
after year-end. Consumer installment loan growth also may slow, reflecting
the shift in auto purchases to the current quarter to take advantage of con-
cessionary loan rates. Treasury borrowing is expected to remain close to
the rapid fourth-quarter pace in order to finance the massive federal
deficit. In mortgage markets, lending should continue to recover, stimu-
lated by the declines in interest rates since mid-year. Overall business
financing needs may be a little higher in the first quarter than in the
fourth. With bond rates expected to stay close to current levels, business
borrowing in long-term markets should remain quite strong, as corporations
continue to attempt to strengthen balance sheet structures; bank business
loans probably will continue to be fairly weak.
(14) Total reserve growth at about a 6-1/2 percent annual rate
over the December '82 to March '83 period would probably be consistent with
the M2 and M3 specifications of alternative B. The relation of reserves
to M2 is more uncertain than usual, however, because of the wide range
of possible shifts of funds into or out of deposit accounts included in M1,
which bear sizable reserve requirements. If more funds than expected move
into super-NOW accounts, a larger growth in total reserves would be con-
sistent with any given growth of M2-and vice versa if more funds than
anticipated move out of M1 into MMDAs. For purposes of an initial estimate
of total reserves, we have assumed M1 growth from December to March at
about an 8 percent rate on the assumption, noted earlier, that shifts into
super-NOWs dominate shifts from Ml into MMDAs. We would anticipate non-
borrowed reserve growth under alternative B at about 8 percent over the
next three months, assuming borrowing from the discount window in the
neighborhood of $250 million.
(15) Alternative A calls for a more rapid expansion in aggregates
during the first quarter of the year. It would accommodate a rise in M2
at about a 12 percent annual rate (including assumed shifts). Such an
approach may make it a bit more difficult than under alternative B to
keep M2 growth over the year as a whole within its longer-run target range.
Since alternative A would probably be associated with a drop in short-term
rates over the near-term--typified by federal funds falling to around
that a fairly substantial reversal of interest rates as the year 1983
progresses may be required under this alternative to restrain M2 growth
to its longer-term range (assuming that economic activity improved in the
course of the year).
(16) Total reserves might increase at a 9-1/2 percent annual
rate over the first three months of the year under alternative A and
nonborrowed reserves at a 12-1/2 percent annual rate, assuming adjustment
borrowing of around $100 million or so. The discount rate would come under
further downward pressure. The further easing in short-term markets con-
templated by this alternative may be associated with additional declines in
longer-term rates, particularly if signs of economic recovery remained
weak or scattered and if a revival of upward price and wage pressures was
not apparent. On the other hand, signs of an easing in reserve availability,
particularly against a backdrop of continued relatively rapid money growth,
might intensify inflationary concerns, exerting upward pressure on bond
(17) Alternative C involves slower growth in the monetary
aggregates than alternatives A or B, with M2 growth specified at 10 percent
over the first quarter. This would probably require restraining total
reserve growth to about a 4 percent annual rate, and nonborrowed reserve
growth by even more to a one percent rate. Borrowing would probably be
around $700 million.
(18) Under those conditions, the federal funds rate might be
expected to rise to a level about a percentage point over the present
discount rate. With funds around 9-1/2 percent, or possibly a bit higher,
the 3-month bill rate could move up to the 8-1/2 to 9 percent area, and
private short-term rates of similar maturity to the 9 to 10 percent range.
Bond rates are likely to increase in sympathy, though their rise would be
moderated by substantial postponements of corporate and state and local
issues. Further declines in the exchange value of the dollar may be
moderated, at least in the short run, under this alternative. It is possible,
that the increase in short- and also long-term rates would not be sustainable
over a long period, however. The greater borrowing costs for businesses and
in the mortgage market, in conjunction with possible adverse effects on
business and consumer psychology from a turn-about in credit conditions
while confidence was still fragile, could damp economic activity and private
credit demand significantly.
Directive language
(19) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for the
directive, with proposed deletions of language adopted on November 16 shown
in strike-through form. The suggested language (with bracketed options)
makes an effort to provide sufficient operating flexibility in light
of the considerable uncertainties about deposit shifts in the period
immediately ahead, while still retaining a directive structure keyed to
monetary aggregates.
Specification of the behavior of M1 over the [DEL: balance of the
year] MONTHS AHEAD remains subject to substantial uncertainty because
of special circumstances in connection with [DEL: the reinvestment of funds
from maturing all savers cerfiticates and] the public's response to
the new [DEL: account] DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS AVAILABLE AT DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS
[DEL: directly competitive with money market funds mandated by recent
legislation]. The difficulties in interpretation of M1 continue to
suggest that much less than usual weight be placed on movements
in that aggregate during the [DEL: current] COMING quarter. THE INSTITUTIONAL
CHANGES ALSO ADD A DEGREE OF UNCERTAINTY TO THE BEHAVIOR OF THE
BROADER MONETARY AGGREGATES.
In all the circumstances, the Committee seeks to maintain
expansion in bank reserves [DEL: needed for an orderly and sustained flow
of-money-and-credit,] consistent with growth of M2 [DEL:(and M3)] of around
[DEL: 9-1/2] ____ percent at an annual rate, AND OF M3 AT ABOUT A ____ PERCENT
RATE, from [DEL: September to] December TO MARCH. [DEL: Somewhat-slower-growth
bringing those aggregatres around the upper part of the ranges set
for the year, would be acceptable and desirable in a context
of-declining interest rates. Should economic and financial
uncertainties-lead-to-exceptional liquidity-demands, somewhat
more rapid growth int he broader aggregated would be tolerated.]
THESE SPECIFICATIONS TAKE INTO ACCOUNT THE LIKELIHOOD THAT GROWTH
IN THE BROADER AGGREGATES, AND PARTICULARLY M2, WILL BE TEMPORARILY
AUGMENTED BY [AROUND ____ PERCENTAGE POINTS AT AN ANNUAL RATE BY]
INFLOWS INTO THE NEW MONEY MARKET ACCOUNTS FROM SOURCES OUTSIDE
OF THAT AGGREGATE. IN THIS CONTEXT, THE COMMITTEE INDICATED THAT
VARIATIONS AROUND THE SPECIFIED GROWTH RATES WOULD BE ACCEPTABLE
IN LIGHT OF INCOMING INFORMATION RELATED TO THE IMPACT OF THE NEW
ACCOUNTS [AND TO UNDERLYING DEMANDS FOR LIQUIDITY]. The Chairman
may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager
for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives
and related reserve paths during the period before the next meet-
ing is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently
outside a range of [DEL: 6-to 10] ____ TO ____ percent.
(20) The preceding language is designed to accommodate a relatively
high number for M2 growth so as to encompass a sizable expected shift into M2
as a result of the new accounts. If the Committee wished to specify a lower
number for M2 growth, and did not wish to refer specifically to a "shift
adjusted" growth rate, the following language might be considered for the
second of the two operational paragraphs.
In all the circumstances, the Committee seeks to maintain
expansion in bank reserves [DEL: needed for an orderly and sustainted flow
of money and credit,] consistent with growth of M2 [DEL: (and-M3)] of around
[DEL: 9-1/2] ____ percent at an annual rate, AND OF M3 AT ABOUT A ____ PERCENT
RATE, from [DEL: September to] December TO MARCH. [DEL: Somewhat-slower-growth
bringing these-aggregates around the upper part of the ranges set
for the year, would be acceptable and desirable in a context of
delcining interest rates. Should economic and financial uncertainties
lead to exceptional liquidity demands;somewhat more rapid growth in
the broader aggregates would be tolerated.] THE COMMITTEE INDICATED
THAT GREATER GROWTH WOULD BE ACCEPTABLE IF THERE WERE EVIDENCE OF
SUBSTANTIAL SHIFTS OF FUNDS INTO BROADER AGGREGATES BECAUSE OF THE
NEW MONEY MARKET ACCOUNTS [OR SIGNS OF EXCEPTIONAL LIQUIDITY DEMANDS].
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives
and related reserve paths during the period before the next meeting is
likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside
a range of [DEL: 6-to-10] ____ TO ____ percent.
