Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
August 20, 1982
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC August 20, 1982
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) M1 was about unchanged in July. While data thus far available
for the first half of August suggest a strengthening, the aggregate has been
running below the Committee's 5 percent annual rate growth objective for
the June to September period. Relative to the expectations built into
the intermeeting path for M1, the shortfall in growth has been in currency
and demand deposits. NOW accounts through the first half of August have
increased on balance by somewhat more than expected, with most of the
growth taking place in late July and the first half of August.
(2) M2 growth in July--at 9.4 percent--was consistent with
the targeted path for the June-to-September period as stronger growth in
its nontransaction component offset the weakness in M1. In the first half
of August, however, M2 strengthened and moved above the Committee's near-
term objective, reflecting the pickup in M1 growth and a further acceleration
in the nontransaction component of M2. Money funds and small time deposits
have been the primary sources of strength in M2 in July and early August.
Savings deposits, in contrast, have declined sharply, after growing moderately
over the first half of the year. The strengthening of M2, and the recent
pick-up of M1 paced by NOW accounts, raises the possibility that somewhat
more of the tax cut is being saved than earlier anticipated, or at least
saved in more liquid forms.
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted, annual rates of growth)
Money and Credit Aggregates
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
1st Half
August -
n.a. - Not available.
j/ First two full statement weeks of August.
2/ Growth rates of reserve measures are adjusted to remove the effects of discon-
tinuities resulting from phased changes in reserve ratios under the Monetary
Control Act.
(3) M3 growth has accelerated markedly since the last Committee
meeting, reflecting more rapid expansion in both large CDs and institutional
money funds. Large CD issuance has been boosted in response to cost advan-
tages in the domestic market versus the Eurodollar market and, reportedly,
by a desire of some banks to build liquidity in an uncertain environment
by issuing longer-term CDs. The recent surge in institutional money fund
inflows has been prompted by attractive returns in comparison to faster
declining market rates.
(4) Bank credit grew at about a 6-1/2 percent annual rate in
July, somewhat faster than in June but still below the pace of the first
half as a whole. Business loan growth tapered off in July and large bank
figures suggest a further weakening in early August. Other forms of
short-term borrowing offset the weakness in business loans in July, as
loans booked at foreign branches of U.S. banks and commercial paper
issuance by nonfinancial corporations accelerated, but data for early
August suggest a slowing in these forms of short-term borrowing as well.
Corporate bond issuance in domestic markets strengthened moderately in
July and,impelled by the recent rally in debt markets, appears to be
strengthening further.
(5) After showing virtually no growth in June, nonborrowed re-
serves expanded at about a 20 percent annual rate through the first half
of August. A relatively substantial growth was implicit in the higher
targeted growth rate for money decided at the last Committee meeting and
the initial borrowing assumption of $800 million that was lower than the
actual June level. Nonborrowed reserves grew even more than the initial
path implied mainly because of adjustments to accommodate greater than
anticipated expansion of large time deposits as well as adjustments in
response to the considerable shortfall of M1 from the short-run money
target. 1/ Meanwhile, with actual borrowing at the discount window (other
than extended credit) declining to about $335 million in the first two
full statement weeks of August, total reserve growth from June through
the first half of August was at about a 7-1/2 percent annual rate.
(6) With bank reserve positions easing and the discount rate
reduced in three steps to 10-1/2 percent, the federal funds rate fell from
the 14-3/4 percent area in early July to around 10 percent on average in
the last full statement week; however, trading in very recent days has
been around 9 percent, perhaps in sympathetic reaction to the general
market ebullience. Since the July Committee meeting, other short-term
market rates have declined 4-1/2 to 6-1/2 percentage points. Even as
rates have declined, there has been a marked widening of quality spreads
on commercial paper and a more pronounced tiering in the CD and RP
markets, in the aftermath of the Penn Square failure, the recent bank-
ruptcy of Lombard-Wall, and rumors about bank problems with Mexican
(7) Bond rates declined about 1-3/4 percentage points on balance
over the intermeeting period. A substantial part of these declines occurred
in the unusually sharp bond market rally on August 17, when record price
increases were also established in the stock market, spurred in good part
by a greatly revised forecast of interest trends by prominent market
analysts. Interest rates on new conventional mortgages have as usual
lagged the decline in market rates, falling about 50 basis points since
the July meeting. With the federal deficit expanding, the Treasury has
stepped up its borrowing in the note sector, as well as in the bill
market; statutory authority to issue new bonds is included in the new tax
legislation just passed. Tax-exempt offerings have continued at about
the same rapid pace seen over the first half of the year.
(8) The weighted average value of the dollar fell in July,
rose again to a new peak in mid-August, and is now just below the high
level recorded at the last FOMC meeting. The net decline in U.S. short-
term interest rates over the intermeeting period greatly exceeded the
moderate rate declines in major foreign countries. Thus, the continued
strength of the dollar seems to reflect investors' preference for dollars
at a time of widespread political and financial strains.
Alternative near-term targets
(9) The upper panel of the following table presents alternative
targets for M1 and M2 for the third quarter. The middle panel indicates
the implied two-month July-to-September growth rates for each alternative,
and the last row suggests possible associated intermeeting ranges for the
federal funds rate. More detailed data for the alternatives are shown in
the table and charts on the next few pages, and the quarterly interest
rate path underlying the staff's GNP projection is contained in Appendix II.
Alternative A Alternative B
Growth from June to
September
Implied growth from
July to September
(10) Alternative A represents the Committee's current third-
quarter M1 target of 5 percent, but with an upward revision of the M2 target
from 9 to 10 percent in reflection of the strength of this aggregate
currently. To attain the 5 percent target, M1 would have to accelerate to
a 7-3/4 percent annual rate of growth on average in August and September.
This is likely to be consistent with short-term rates over the intermeeting
period at around recent levels, or perhaps a little higher--with the funds
on a quarterly average basis of only about 2 percent at an annual rate,
Chart 1 CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Class II - FOMC
Actual and Targeted M1 ss F
M1 Billions of dollars
480
-ACTUAL LEVEL
*. SHORT-RUN ALTERNATIVES
- 470
SI I I I I I I I I I N 410
O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. A ALt. B
M3
Alt. A Alt. B
Growth Rates
Monthly
June-September
July-September
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
as compared with the 7-1/2 percent annual rate of expansion in nominal
GNP projected for this quarter by the staff.
(11) Total reserves under alternative A would expand at about
a 4-3/4 percent annual rate over the balance of the quarter. This probably
would be associated with somewhat more rapid growth in nonborrowed than
in total reserves, assuming borrowing drops to around $250 million,
a nearly frictional level after taking account of seasonal borrowing.
For this level of borrowing to be consistent with no more than a modest
back-up in short-term rates may, however, require a drop in the discount
rate from the current 10-1/2 percent level.
(12) Persistence of short-term interest rates at around recent
lower levels would tend to be associated with growth in M2 and M3 at a
relatively rapid pace, largely in consequence of an exceptionally strong
August advance. A considerable slowing in growth rates is likely in
September as returns on money market fund shares move closer to alignment
with market rates, and perhaps as investors shift into stocks and bonds.
On September 1, the new 7-to-31 day consumer time deposit will become
available, but this is not expected to have a very significant effect on
the overall demand for M2.
(13) Under this alternative corporate bond rates might remain
around 14 percent or fall somewhat lower, depending in part on how large
a surge in corporate bond issuance develops. Most of the proceeds from
expansion in bond issues would be used to pay down bank loans and to redeem
commercial paper. The weakening of business loan demand and sustained
relatively low market rates would likely cause banks to cut the prime rate
to less than 13 percent over the next few weeks. The mortgage markets
would benefit from the decline in interest rates generally and from im-
proved prospects for thrift institution profitability. Mortgage rates are
unlikely to fall below the 15 percent level, however, so that the boost to
housing would be modest. Short-term U.S. interest rates at around recent
levels would give foreign authorities greater scope to ease their interest
rates further, which would probably forestall any appreciable weakening of
the dollar on exchange markets over the near-term.
(14) Alternative B, which calls for 4 percent growth in M1 over
the third quarter, likely would be consistent with a federal funds rate in
the vicinity of the current 10-1/2 percent discount rate. M1 would be
expected to grow at about a 6-1/4 percent annual rate on average in August
and September, with total reserves expanding at a 3-3/4 percent annual
rate over the balance of the quarter. Borrowing at the discount window
may be in the $350 to $400 million area.
(15) The firming of the funds rate from very recent levels
contemplated in this alternative would seem to run counter to the expec-
tations of a good many market participants. As a result, it is quite
likely that short-term rates would back up, with the 3-month bill rate
moving back toward 9 percent. Bond yields would retrace some of their
recent declines, though any reaction in credit markets could be mild in
the context of M1 remaining below the 5-1/2 percent upper bound of the
Committee's 1982 target range (which is assumed in the path) and if incoming
economic data continue weak. Because money market fund yields would more
quickly come into alignment with market rates, M2 and especially M3 growth
would probably be a bit slower than under alternative A. The very recent
downward pressures on the dollar in exchange markets probably would abate,
and may be reversed.
(16) Given the staff's GNP projection, the outstanding debt of
domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to expand at about an 8-1/2
percent annual rate over the third quarter, the same pace as in the first
half of the year, but down from the 9-1/2 to 9-3/4 percent increases of
of the projected third quarter GNP, up from 12 percent on average in the
first half. This rise reflects a sharp increase from 3-1/2 to 5-1/4 per-
cent in the ratio of federal government borrowing to GNP, while private
credit demands abate. The strength of federal government borrowing,
reflecting in part a marked shift toward greater fiscal stimulus as
evidenced by a larger high employment deficit, is working to hold up in-
come and interest rates.
(17) In the fourth quarter of the year, interest rates may be
under upward pressure as compared with levels anticipated between now and
September in either alternative A or B. Nominal GNP growth is expected to
be maintained at close to the third-quarter rate in part because of lagged
effects of the recent tax cut. And in the degree that the quantity of
money demanded is also increased from the lagged effects of recent short-
term rate declines there will be a greater likelihood that a rebound in
short-term rates would result from efforts to constrain money growth to
the upper end of the longer-run M1 range, with the odds on a rebound
greater under alternative A than alternative B. To the extent that the
Committee is willing to tolerate growth for the year above the 5-1/2 per-
cent limit--say, at around 6 percent--the chances of a rate rebound would
be diminished. The table below shows fourth quarter M1 growth rates for
alternative 1982 M1 outcomes, given the two current short-term policy
alternatives. In any event growth in M2 and M3 for the year seems likely
to be fractionally above the Committee's ranges.
Growth Rate
Over September-December to
Attain M1 Growth for 1982 at
5% 5-1/2% 6%
Directive language
Given below is a suggested operational paragraph for the
directive. The specifications adopted at the meeting on June 30 -
July 1 are shown in strike-through form. Deletion of the second
qualifying sentence is proposed since it no longer seems relevant.
However, the first qualifying sentence still appears to be germane,
particularly in light of the current strength of M2.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the short run, the Committee seeks behavior of reserve
aggregates consistent with growth of M1 and M2 from June to September
at annual rates of about [DEL:5] ____ percent and about 9 ____ percent
respectively. Somewhat more rapid growth would be acceptable depending
on evidence that economic and financial uncertainties are leading to
exceptional liquidity demands and changes in financial asset holdings.
[DEL: It was also noted that seasonal uncertainties, together with increased
social security payments and the initial impact of the tax cut on cash
balances, might lead toa temporary bulge in the monetary aggregates,
particularly-M1.] The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if
it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the
monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the period before
the next meeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate
persistently outside a range of [DEL: 10 to 15] ____ TO ____ percent.
