Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
December 16, 1983
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 16, 1983
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) M2 decelerated to a 7-3/4 percent annual rate in November as
both its transactions and nontransactions components slowed, and data so
far available suggest a similar rate for December. Given the relatively
more rapid October growth, M2 over the 3-month September-to-December period
is likely to be close to the 8-1/2 percent annual rate specified by the
Comittee. As can be seen in the table below, from its February-March
base, M2 is estimated to have grown at close to an 8 percent annual rate to
the fourth quarter, in the lower half of its 7 to 10 percent long-run
range. Of course, growth for the year as a whole was substantially more
rapid, as shown in the table on the following page, because of the shift
of funds into MMDAs early in the year.
M2 M3 M1 Credit
(2) M3 accelerated to a 12-1/2 percent annual rate in November,
bringing growth over the past two months to 10-1/2 percent. In large
measure, this pick-up reflected very heavy reliance on managed liabilities
to fund a considerable acceleration in bank credit expansion in the face
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Money and Credit Aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve Measures 2
Nonborrowed reserves 3
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
Oct. Nov.
e - Preliminary estimate
1. Fourth quarter to fourth quarter growth rates, except for the credit
aggregates, which are measured from December to December, and borrowing and
excess reserves, which are average levels for the year. The data for 1983
include preliminary estimates for December.
of a massive rundown of Treasury balances. Same slowing of M3 growth
from the rapid November pace appears to be in train for December, although
this aggregate is likely to remain above its 3-month September-to-December
growth path of 8-1/2 percent. Fran the fourth quarter of 1982 to the
fourth quarter of 1983, M3 has advanced at close to the upper bound of
its 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent target range.
(3) Expansion of M1 slowed to only a 3/4 percent annual rate
in November, leaving this aggregate just above the lower bound of its 5
to 9 percent monitoring range and considerably short of the 5 to 6 per-
cent growth rate range established by the Committee for September-to-
December. The weakness in M1 continued to reflect declines in demand
deposits, which in November dropped for the fourth straight month, and
minimal growth in OCDs. Since July, growth in M1 has been consistently
below rates predicted by the Board staff's monthly model (and growth in
the fourth quarter is also much lower than predicted by the quarterly
model), perhaps reflecting some reversal of the unusually strong demands
for M1 that had been evident over the preceding several quarters. A pick-
up in M1 growth appears in store for December, however; based on data for
the first two weeks, growth might be in the neighborhood of 8 percent at
an annual rate this month.
(4) Borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors is estimated to
have accelerated a bit in November--to about an 8-1/2 percent annual rate-
as an increase in funds raised by non-federal sectors offset a marked
drop in federal borrowing attributable to the delayed extension of the
federal debt ceiling. Growth in nonfinancial debt is now estimated at
about a 10-1/2 percent annual rate for 1983, well within its 8-1/2 to
to a sizable 14 percent annual rate in November, reflecting stepped up
growth in total loans and continued heavy acquisitions of Treasury securi-
ties. Real estate and consumer lending, while moderating somewhat in
November, nevertheless remained strong. Business borrowing from commercial
banks strengthened further in November as commercial paper issuance slack-
ened considerably from the brisk pace of previous months and financing in
long-term debt markets remained light.
(5) Total reserves contracted in November at a 6-1/2 percent
annual rate, as required reserves declined--owing mostly to runoffs of
demand deposits--and nonborrrowed reserves fell even more sharply as the
average level of adjustment borrowing rose. Growth in the monetary
base slowed last month to a 6-1/4 percent pace reflecting mainly the
decline in total reserves, as currency growth was relatively well sus-
tained. Over the intermeeting period, adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
ranged from about $440 million to $865 million per week and averaged close
to $685 million, only slightly above the $650 million level assumed in
constructing the weekly nonborrowed reserves paths.
(6) The federal funds rate has continued to average in the 9-1/4
to 9-1/2 percent range since the last FOMC meeting, with most recent
trading around the upper end of that range. Other market interest rates
generally have moved upward amid investor concerns generated by the
stronger-thanexpected economic recovery in the context of continued large
budgetary deficits. Most short-term interest rates increased 30 to 75
basis points over the intermeeting period, while yields on Treasury bonds
increased around 20 basis points. Rates on municipal revenue bonds
jumped almost 40 basis points as issuers rushed to market a flood of
mortgage revenue and other private-purpose bonds, which may be subject to
new constraints next year. Interest rates on primary conventional mort-
gages were little changed from the November FOMC.
(7) Since the last FOMC meeting the dollar has advanced by
reached in August. The dollar dropped slightly on the announcement of a
record trade deficit for October; however, this decline was more than off-
set as the market responded to somewhat higher U.S. interest rates and to
an apparent increase in demand for the dollar as a safe haven in the face
of increasing tension in the Middle East.
U.S. authorities sold $50 million
against German marks.
Background for preliminary consideration of 1984 long-term ranges
(8) This section of the blue book raises issues the Committee
may wish to consider in its preliminary assessment of longer-run money and
credit ranges for next year. At its meeting last July the Committee set
tentative growth ranges for the fourth quarter of 1983 to the fourth quarter
of 1984 of 6-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent for M2, 6 to 9 percent for M3, 4 to 8
percent for M1, and 8 to 11 percent for the debt of domestic nonfinancial
sectors--which are shown in the table below in relation to the ranges for
half percentage point from 1983 ranges,1 while the tentative M1 range
embodies a reduction of 1 full percentage point from the monitoring range
for the second half of 1983. The ranges for 1984 also generally call for
slower growth in the monetary aggregates than experienced either over 1982
or the full year of 1983, although not necessarily slower, in the cases of
Ml and M2, than growth in 1983 from the QII and February-March bases for
these aggregates.
Current Long-Term Ranges
(Percent growth at annual rates)
M2 M3 M1 Credit
* M2 is based on February/March and M1 on QII.
(9) A reduction in monetary growth, as tentatively contemplated
for next year, would be consistent with continuing progress over time toward
attainment of reasonable price stability, as well as continued economic
recovery. If the ranges, or at least some significant group of them, were
not reduced, this might be viewed by market participants as a weakening in
the System's resolve to contain inflation, especially at a time when fiscal
policy is perceived to be highly stimulative and private spending appears
to be generally strong. However, at some point further reductions in mone-
tary growth rates may no longer be necessary or desirable. What a floor for
monetary growth might be depends importantly on ultimate objectives for
inflation--that is, whether policy strives for complete stability in the
average level of prices or, say, for reasonably small rates of increase (such
as 2 or 3 percent). Resolution of this policy issue requires consideration
of the risk of unacceptable shortfalls in employment and economic growth
that may be involved in the process of attaining price objectives. This
risk is lessened in the degree that nominal wages and prices adapt flexibly
to reductions in monetary growth. And the odds on such flexibility consis-
tent with both satisfactory economic growth and progress toward price
stability may be enhanced if the System is perceived as continuing to
adhere to a policy of restraint on inflation and this reduces expectations
of price increases. The extent to which the Committee may desire ultimately
to reduce money growth would also depend, for a given price objective, on
the trend growth in the velocity of money and the trend growth in producti-
vity and the labor force.
(10) While uncertainties about these technical and economic fac-
tors determining velocity, productivity, and the labor force are vast,
it is probable that the reductions in monetary growth ranges tentatively
contemplated for next year do not approach the ultimate limit to reductions,
unless price increases on the order of 5 percent are considered acceptable
for the longer run. The question becomes more pressing, however, when mone-
tary growth ranges need to be set for 1985 as well, and more particularly
for the year just beyond. In any event, next year's tentative ranges also
need to be considered in terms of their consistency with continuation of
economic recovery at a satisfactory pace.
(11) With regard to the consistency of the monetary ranges with
continued economic recovery, the midpoints of the tentative ranges for 1984
all imply small to moderate increases in velocity next year, given the staff's
forecast of growth in nominal GNP of around 9 percent. For instance, if M2
expands by about 8 percent or a little more, as assumed by the staff in the
GNP projection, a small increase in velocity would be implied for that aggre-
gate. This would represent a slowdown from the 3 percent pace of velocity
increase for M2 over the last three quarters of 1983 (a period that is
largely free of the effects of shifting into MMDAs which distorted M2 early
in the year). While the experience in earlier cycles may be of limited use-
fulness because of the considerable institutional change affecting M2, such
a slowing in velocity growth is consistent with behavior in the second year
of earlier expansions, when M2 velocity typically decelerated.
(12) In the three economic recoveries since 1960 that lasted at
least two years, the velocity of M1 increased on average by about 2-3/4
percent in the second year of expansion (inclusion of cyclical recoveries
of the 1950s would raise that average to about 3-1/4 percent), with part
of the increase representing a response to rising short-term interest
rates. If interest rates show only minor net changes over next year, as is
anticipated in the staff forecast, it would appear that growth in the upper
half of next year's proposed 4 to 8 percent range for M1 would be consistent,
on historical grounds, with the projected nominal GNP growth for 1984.
However, should demands for goods and services and associated interest
rates be considerably stronger, or weaker, than expected, there could be
substantial implications for the appropriate M1 growth. Rising interest
rates would tend to induce a shift of funds out of NOW accounts with ceiling
rates to other deposits or market instruments; of course, in the degree
that funds shift into super-NOW accounts the demand for M1 would be main-
tained. On the other hand, declining interest rates may bring sizable
funds into NOW accounts as market rates fall toward existing ceiling rates.
(13) Even with the continuing uncertainties about the demand
properties of M1 arising from the institutional changes of recent years,
the Committee may wish to consider whether Ml should be placed on the same
footing as M2 and M3 as a longer-run target rather than being designated
as a "monitoring" variable. The average increase in M1 velocity since the
first quarter and particularly the large rise in the fourth quarter suggests
some unwinding of the large build-up in M1 balances of 1982 and early 1983.
It is possible that a more stable or predictable behavior of M1 velocity may
be in the offing. Moreover, no significant further regulatory changes appear
in prospect for next year. The minimum denomination for super-NOW accounts and
ceiling-free MMDAs is not slated to be reduced to $1,000 until January 1985,
and bills pending in the Congress to remove the prohibition on interest
payments on demand deposits and to allow the Federal Reserve to pay interest
on required reserves seem unlikely to become effective, even if they pass,
next year. If the Committee were to decide to place more emphasis on M1 next
year, the issue might also be raised about whether the range should be narrowed
from the present 4 percentage points to the 2 to 3 percentage points that
was more characteristic of earlier periods. However, lingering questions
about the stability and structure of M1 demand--including uncertainties
about its interest-elasticity and its longer-run velocity trend-tend to
argue for retention of a relatively wide range.
(14) The debt of nonfinancial sectors in 1984 is likely to grow
in the upper half of its tentative monitoring range of 8 to 11 percent--
which would be more rapid than projected growth in nominal GNP, as is
typical of the second year of earlier recoveries. The debt of private
borrowers is projected to increase at a more than an 8 percent pace, close
to the experience of 1983, as a pick-up in the growth of business debt is
offset by some slowing in borrowing by state and local governments. The
rate of increase in federal indebtedness is anticipated to slow a little in
percent of funds raised in U.S. credit markets by domestic nonfinancial
(15) Depending in part on how aggressively financial inter-
mediaries seek to accommodate the credit needs of borrowers, M3 could
increase around the upper end of its tentative 6 to 9 percent range in
since 1974. While the Committee may wish to consider leaving that range
unaltered from 1983, letting reductions in other ranges carry the message
of continued progress toward reasonable price stability, there are reasons
to believe that some slowing in M3 growth next year from the 9-1/4 pace
estimated for 1983 may develop. Credit growth at both banks and thrifts
may moderate as institutions reduce net acquisitions of Treasury securities
following a period of liquidity rebuilding. Also, as one aspect the large
and growing U.S. current account deficit, banks may continue to find it
advantageous to fund domestic loans in the Eurodollar market as foreigners
seek to invest their dollars.
Prospective developments
(16) The table below shows alternative specifications for growth
in the monetary aggregates over the November-to-March period (the projected
December levels seem too uncertain to be taken as bases). The associated
federal funds rate ranges for the upcoming intermeeting period and implied
growth rates for each aggregate from the fourth quarter to March are also
shown. (More detailed data for these alternatives can be found on the
charts and table on the following pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from November
to March
Growth from QIV
to March 1
(17) Alternative B--which involves continuation of prevailing
bank reserve and money market conditions-contemplates growth in M2 and
M1 that would place these aggregates at around the midpoints of their
tentative longer-run ranges by March. The specified M2 growth of 8 percent
at an annual rate for the November-to-March period would be consistent with
an expected pick-up in M1 growth from the pace of recent months offset by a
slowing in expansion of nontransaction deposits; the latter may have been
boosted to a small extent in October and November by the effects of deposit
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ml
Alt. A Alt. B
Growth Rates
Monthly
Nov. '83 to Mar. '84
Dec. '83 to Mar. '84
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
Alt. C
rate deregulation. Expansion of M3 is likely to slow somewhat over the
November-to-March period from its average pace since summer, perhaps in-
creasing at a rate a bit below the top of the FOMC's tentative longer-run
range. Credit growth at banks and particularly at thrifts is likely to be
slower in the first quarter than over recent months, working to limit demands
for managed liabilities by depository institutions.
(18) With regard to Ml, it is anticipated that demands for trans-
actions balances by the public will be more in line with spending in coming
months than they have been recently, though held down to some extent by a
bit more unwinding of the earlier large build-up in cash balances. Thus,
M1 would be expected to grow at around a 6 percent average pace in the
first three months of 1984 following a projected increase of around 8 per-
cent in December. Growth of this aggregate on a quarterly average basis
would be around a 6 percent annual rate in the first quarter, implying a
smaller rise in velocity than in the fourth quarter, but a still substantial
(19) Borrowing at the discount window would be expected to aver-
age around $650 million under alternative B, with federal funds continuing
to trade in a 9-1/4 to 9-1/2 percent range, probably nearer the upper end
(and possibly a little higher around year-end). With the renewed expansion
of transactions deposits, total reserves would be expected to increase at
about a 2-1/2 percent annual rate through March, and nonborrowed reserves
would rise at a 4-1/2 percent rate.
(20) Interest rates generally would be expected to continue
fluctuating around current levels, with the 3-month Treasury bill rate in
a 9 to 9-1/4 percent range. Some upward pressures on rates could emerge in
the next few weeks owing to usual year-end churning together with large
Treasury auctions toward the end of the year--including an estimated $14.7
billion of 4- and 7-year notes and 20-year bonds to be auctioned in the so-
called "mini-refunding" in the last week of the month. Any such pressures
may ease off later, however, particularly if incoming economic information
points to a significant slowdown in economic activity in the context of
moderate growth of the monetary aggregates. While long-term market rates
may change little on balance over the intermeeting period, mortgage yields
might rise somewhat in lagged response to earlier increases in market
(21) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected
to expand in the first quarter at around a 10 percent annual rate, little
different from the fourth quarter. Borrowing by the Federal Government-
which was held down in the fourth quarter as the Treasury financed a sub-
stantial portion of its deficit by drawing on the very large cash balance
it had accumulated by the end of September--is expected to accelerate
somewhat in the months ahead. On the other hand, the growth in the debt of
private nonfinancial borrowers is projected to slow, largely because of
reduced borrowing by households and state and local governments. Corporate
demands on credit markets may pick up as capital spending outpaces the
improvement in profits and internal funds.
(22) Alternative A involves an easing of bank reserve positions-
with borrowing falling to around $400 million and federal funds dropping
to around 9 percent or a little below-that would tend to place M2 and M1 in
the upper halves of their tentative longer-run ranges by March. Over the
period from November to March, these two aggregates would be expected to
grow at annual rates of 8-3/4 and 8 percent, respectively. Growth in M3 may
exceed the upper end of its tentative longer-term range. Total and nonborrowed
reserves would grow at 4-1/2 and 8-1/2 percent annual rates, respectively,
through March.
(23) An easing in reserve positions such as contemplated by alter-
native A would likely lead to a rally in credit, and perhaps also in equity,
markets. Most recently, market participants have come to anticipate some
tightening in the stance of monetary policy as the economic expansion
continued strong, and a move in the opposite direction would cause a re-
assessment of the near-term outlook for interest rates. Treasury bill rates
might fall into an 8-1/4 to 8-3/4 percent range. Bond yields could decline
by a one-half percentage point or so, forestalling any rise in mortgage
rates and perhaps inducing further declines. The dollar would decline on
foreign exchange markets.
(24) The staff's economic forecast anticipates very little change
in interest rates over the course of 1984. In the degree that an easing
in market conditions over the month ahead contributes to additional strength
in economic activity and associated money demands as the year progresses,
a tightening of reserve provision and increases in money market rates later
next year--possibly to levels above those currently prevailing--may be neces-
sary to constrain money to the tentative long-run ranges.
(25) Under alternative C, growth in M2 would be constrained to
the lower half of its longer-run range. This would probably be associated
with M1 near the lower limit of its range, while M3 would be held comfortably
within the upper part of its range. Assuming M2 growth from November to March
of 7-1/4 percent and M1 growth of 5 percent, the tightening in money market
conditions expected under this alternative may involve discount window
borrowing rising to near $1 billion and the federal funds rate rising to 10
percent or a little above.
(26) The tightening in bank reserve positions under alter-
native C would be larger than now apparently anticipated by the market. As
a consequence interest rates would increase substantially, with Treasury
bill rates moving up into a 9-1/4 to 9-3/4 percent range, and the dollar
would move even higher on foreign exchange markets. CD rates would rise
toward 10-1/2 percent, calling into question the current 11 percent prime
rate. Rates on the CDs of some banks might come under particular upward
pressure if the general movement of interest rates intensified concerns
about international debt burdens. Any upward response of bond yields,
however, might on balance be somewhat muted, if the firming in money markets
was viewed as increasing the odds on a significant slowing in the economic
expansion. Indeed, if economic expansion slowed as the year progresses to
a pace below, say, the staff's current forecast, interest rates would
probably need to decline later to maintain money growth at a satisfactory
Directive language
(27) Given below is a suggested operational paragraph for the
directive, with proposed deletions of language adopted at the meeting on
November 14-15, 1983 shown in strike-through form. The references to
the consistency between short-run and longer-run targets are suggested
to be deleted since the ranges for 1984 are only tentative and subject
to final determination at the February meeting.
The Committee seeks in the short run to maintain /INCREASE
SLIGHTLY/DECREASE SLIGHTLY the existing degree of reserve restraint.
The action is expected to be associated with growth of M2 and M3 at
annual rates of around [DEL:8-1/2] ____ AND ____ percent RESPECTIVELY from
[DEL: September to December] NOVEMBER TO MARCH, [DEL: consistent with the
targets estabished for these aggregates for the year.] Depending
on evidence about the continuing strength of economic recovery
and other factors bearing on the business and inflation outlook,
somewhat greater restraint would be acceptable should the aggre-
gates expand more rapidly; lesser restraint might be acceptable
in the context of a significant shortfall in growth of the
aggregates from current expectations. [DEL: Given the relatively slow
growth in Qctober,] The Committee anticipates that M1 growth at
an annual rate of around [DEL: 5 to 6] ____ percent from [DEL: September to
December] NOVEMBER TO MARCH will be consistent with its [DEL: fourth
quarter] objectives for the broader aggregates, and that expansion
in total domestic nonfinancial debt would [DEL: remain within the
range established for the year] CONTINUE AT AROUND ITS RECENT
PACE. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of
the monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the
period before the next meeting is likely to be associated
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of
[DEL: 6-to 10] ____ TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
December 19, 1983
Apr.
Nay
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
fedMerl econdary markt meoondary oIm. market maturity yielde Aa utility cipal . APoed funds market aper mutual prlm rcnlly Bond Ion FHANA F
monteh I mMonth 1-yr umonth o  lund eayr 10year 30-year offered y at SAL cling 1-year
FR 1367 (1182)
Security Dealer Positions
Millions of dollars
December 19, 1983
Cash Positions Forward and Futures Positions
P jridTreasy coupon uy coupon
o Net 1  Treaury under over federal private Treasury under over ederal privato
Total bills 1 year 1 yer agency short-term bills I lyar 1 yer agency I hort-tenn
April
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
SStrictly confidential
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
December 19, 1983
Treasury Treasury coupons net purchases 3  Federal agencies net purchases
4  Net change
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
LEVEL--Dec. 14
L ______________________________ ..- I ________________
change for maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon
issues, and direct Treasury borrowing from the System.
A foltrinht trra;ncnn in m -rls nrf, f. I f- ... J- -_ 1 ..- - .*
