Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
September 30, 1983
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC September 30, 1983
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(I) Growth of M2 remained relatively low in August and September,
averaging about 5-1/2 percent at an annual rate. Its growth over the 3-month
June-to-September short-run target period was about 6 percent at an annual
rate, well below the FOMC's 8 percent specification. Growth in the nontrans-
actions component remained low throughout the summer relative to past experi-
ence and expansion in its MI component slowed markedly in August and September.
On a quarterly average basis, M2 grew at about a 7-3/4 percent annual rate
in the third quarter, implying an increase in its velocity of nearly 2-3/4
percent at an annual rate, a bit more than in the second quarter.
(2) In some contrast to M2, growth of M3 picked up in August and
September--to about an 8 percent annual rate on average--from its relatively
modest July pace, as banks increased reliance on managed liabilities while
CD issuance by thrifts remained heavy. M3 over June to September is esti-
mated to have grown at a 7-1/4 percent annual rate, somewhat below the 8
percent pace anticipated by the FOMC at the August meeting.
(3) The deceleration of M1 from the surge in the spring extended
into August and, judging from available data, growth remained low in
September--with this aggregate estimated to have expanded at an annual rate
of just over 3 percent over the two months. In both months, demand deposits
declined, following three months of substantial increases; currency growth,
on the other hand, picked up in both August and September from the reduced
July rate. Although M1 grew at only a 5 percent annual rate over the
June-to-September period--about 2 points lower than the FOMC's short-run
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Growth to September
From
Money and Credit Aggregates
Reserve Measures2
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
tinuities resulting from phased changes in reserve ratios under the Monetary
Control Act.
3. Includes special borrowing and other extended credit from the Federal Reserve.
path--quarterly average growth was at a 9-1/4 percent rate owing to strong
growth in the latter part of the preceding quarter. M1 velocity rose at
about a 1-1/2 percent annual rate, more than in the second quarter but
still well below the pace that had been common in earlier postwar recoveries.
(4) With the general slowing of growth in the monetary aggre-
gates over the past two months, all of the aggregates are rather comfort-
ably within their longer-run ranges. As shown in the last column of the
table on the preceding page, growth through September would place M1
somewhat above the midpoint, M2 in the lower portion, and M3 in the
upper portion of their respective longer-run ranges.
(5) The growth in borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors is
estimated to have moderated further in August--to about a 9 percent annual
rate--reflecting an appreciable reduction in funds raised by non-federal
sectors. Credit growth at commercial banks in August, at an 11 percent
annual rate, was somewhat faster than that of total credit, as expansion of
real estate, consumer and business loans remained strong. However, data
available for September suggest that growth in both loans and securities
at banks has decelerated; lending to consumers appears to have slowed
somewhat from the very rapid pace of the spring and summer while business
lending apparently was off sharply despite continued relatively light
financing in long-term markets. Commercial paper issuance by nonfinancial
business in September is estimated to have remained at about the August
(6) Total reserves of depository institutions contracted in
both August and September. The August decline reflected a reduction in
the demand for excess reserves and required reserves against large time
and government deposits, while in September weakness of deposits in M1
reduced required reserves. Growth of the monetary base, by contrast,
picked up a bit in August and September as currency growth accelerated.
A contraction in nonborrowed reserves plus extended credit in August was
retraced only partially in September.
(7) The level of borrowing assumed in constructing reserve paths
has been decreased in stages from $800 to $700 and then to $650 million
since the last FOMC meeting. Nonetheless, borrowing has fluctuated widely
within a range of about $650 million to the $1.6 billion figure reached in
the statement week of September 21. In that week and also in the week just
past bank reserve management and to a degree System reserve management were
complicated greatly by huge flows of funds related to the unusual and
unexpectedly large build-up in Treasury cash balances at both banks and the
Federal Reserve in the latter part of the month. Despite the fluctuations
in borrowing, the federal funds rate averaged close to 9-1/2 percent for
the first five weeks of the intermeeting period before dropping to an average
of just over 9 percent in the reserve settlement week just past. In that
week large money center banks were experiencing less than usual strain on
reserve positions owing in part to the availability of Treasury funds,
thereby contributing to lessened pressure on the federal funds market. The
federal funds rate rose substantially in the past two days, reflecting
usual end-of-quarter statement date positioning.
(8) Short-term interest rates generally have declined about 25
to 50 basis points over the intermeeting period as evidence of slower money
growth and moderation of economic activity continued to mount, and, late in
the period, as perceptions of some easing in monetary policy spread. In
the long-term markets, rates have come down about 10 to 20 basis points and
mortgage rates have decline around one-quarter of a percentage point.
(9) The dollar on a weighted average basis has shown little net
change since the last Committee meeting,
. The dollar advanced in late August,
but moved lower during September as dollar interest rates declined. Over
the period, the interest differential between U.S. and key foreign short-
term interest rates narrowed slightly.
Prospective developments
(10) The table below shows alternative specifications for the
monetary aggregates over the September-to-December period, together with
associated federal funds rate ranges for the upcoming intermeeting period.
All the alternatives keep the monetary aggregates within their long-run
target ranges through the fourth quarter, though differing money market
conditions are implied. The lower panels give the implied growth rates for
each aggregate from the base period established by the Committee for its
longer-term ranges to the fourth quarter. (More detailed data for the
alternatives are shown in the charts and table on the following pages.)
Longer-
run
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C range
Growth from Sept.
to Dec.
Implied growth
from base period
to QIV 1/
QII 1983.
(II) Money growth rates between now and year-end under alternative
B would be expected to accelerate from the relatively slow pace of recent
months, but even so M1 and M2 in the fourth quarter on average would be,
respectively, just above and just below the midpoints of their longer-run
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2
Alt. A Alt. B
October
November
December
Growth Rates
Monthly
October
November
December
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
Alt. C
M3
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. C
MI
Alt. A Alt. B
Memo:
Growth Rate
Alt. C
I. Base period is February-March
1983 average for MI.
ranges while M3 would be in the upper portion of its range. For M1, some
rebound in growth over the next three months might be expected as the
restraining effect of the higher interest rates that emerged in the spring
and early summer dissipates. Moreover, underlying transactions needs and
income growth are likely to be fairly sizable, as indicated by the staff
projection of about a 9 percent growth in nominal GNP in the fourth quarter.
Even with the acceleration in monthly growth rates under alternative B, on
a quarterly average basis M1 is projected to increase at only a 5-1/2 per-
cent annual rate in the fourth quarter. The implied increase in velocity
would not be especially large when compared to other expansion periods,
but it would represent a further quickening of M1 velocity growth rates
following the turn-around to small increases in the second and third
(12) M2 growth is also expected to accelerate under alternative
B--as well as M3 growth to a degree--as expansion in its nontransactions
component picks up from the unusually sluggish pace of recent months. The
anticipated decline in Treasury deposits from their very high end-of-
September level should be accompanied by more aggressive efforts by banks
to obtain funds from the public generally. The staff does not expect the
decontrol of most time deposits on October I to affect growth of the aggre-
gates very significantly over time, given the earlier availability of
ceiling-free MMDAs and longer-term time accounts. Active promotion of
the new accounts does not appear to be widespread, according to results
of a Reserve Bank survey, though there are reports of emerging price
competition in a few key markets. The money paths allow for only
small near-term effects--in the direction of restraining M1 and increasing
M2 growth.
(13) Federal funds under alternative B would be expected to
trade in the area of 9-1/4 to 9-1/2 percent, and adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing might average between $550 and $750 million. Nonborrowed and
total reserves would be expected to increase at 9 and 6 percent rates,
respectively. It is difficult to foresee any significant change in
market interest rates more generally under this alternative. Rates could
back up a little in the degree that some market participants are antici-
pating more of an easing in monetary policy given the recent weakness
in money supply. Any increase in rates should be quite limited, though,
as incoming data are expected to continue to show money growth well with-
in the FOMC's ranges and economic activity expanding only moderately.
(14) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to
increase in the fourth quarter at about the 9 percent annual rate of the
third quarter. This would bring growth for the year to around 10-1/4 per-
cent, in the middle of the Committee's 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent monitoring
range. Borrowing by the U.S. Government is expected to continue at about
the pace of the third quarter as an increased deficit is financed by the
Treasury drawing down its unusually large cash balance. The increase in
household mortgage indebtedness should also be roughly the same in the fourth
quarter as in the third, but consumer installment credit may pick up a
little further with the strengthening in consumer durables purchases.
Business borrowing may remain modest as a quite moderate growth in invest-
ment spending is accompanied by a further rise in profits.
(15) Alternative A contemplates that the federal funds rate
would need to fall to an area just above the current 8-1/2 percent
discount rate--with a drop in borrowing to the $200 to $400 million range--
if the Committee were to seek the more rapid growth rates in money specified
by this alternative. These specifications include a 9 percent M1 and 9-1/2
percent M2 growth from September to December; such growth rates would leave
MI in the upper part of its long-run range in the fourth quarter on average,
and M2 close to its midpoint. M3 would approach its upper limit.
(16) A substantial rally in financial markets would probably
accompany an easing in bank reserve positions of the dimensions suggested
in alternative A, with the 3-month bill rate falling to the neighborhood of
on the prime rate, which might be reduced 1/2 percentage point, or perhaps
somewhat more, given the relatively wide spread that already has developed
between the prime and short-term market rates. The easing in market
conditions would probably lead to resumption of balance sheet restructuring
by businesses through increased issuance of bonds--and also of stocks as
equity prices tended to improve along with the drop in bond yields. The
downward pressure on mortgage rates that would be generated under this
alternative would tend to limit the drop in housing starts that currently
seems in store. The foreign exchange value of the dollar would decline
(17) Whether the rate declines contemplated under alternative
A, with money market rates hovering around the current discount rate,
would be sustained into next year is, at this point, questionable.
Assuming moderate continuing strength in the economy, interest rates
might have to rise later this year or early next to begin restraining
MI and M2 growth to rates within the Committee's reduced longer-run
ranges for 1984 tentatively set at 4 to 8 percent and 6-1/2 to 9-1/2
percent, respectively.
(18) Alternative C--which calls for some tightening of money
money market conditions in the period ahead--would tend to restrain M2
growth within the lower part of its longer-run range, while bringing M1
growth to its midpoint. This alternative implies M1 growth at 5 percent
from September to December, about the same as in the previous three
months, while M2 and M3 growth would accelerate only modestly.
(19) The federal funds rate under alternative C would be
expected to rise to around 10 per cent, with discount window borrowing
rising to around $1 billion, as reserve provision is constrained relative
to demand. Other market interest rates would move up substantially.
The 3-month bill might increase to around 9-1/2 percent, and yields on
bonds and mortgages would adjust upward by perhaps 50 to 75 basis points
over the near term. Over a longer horizon, though, with higher interest
rates damping money demand and probably slowing the economic expansion
relative to staff forecasts, interest rate increases might be expected at
least to be reversed and perhaps move to levels somewhat below those
currently prevailing to sustain a moderate pace of economic recovery
next year.
Directive language
(20) Given below is a suggested operational paragraph for the
directive, with proposed deletions of language and the numerical specifi-
cations adopted at the meeting on August 23 shown in strike-through form.
The Committee seeks in the short run to (maintain/INCREASE
SLIGHTLY/DECREASE SLIGHTLY) the existing degree of reserve re-
straint. The action is expected to be associated with growth of
M2 and M3 at annual rates of around [DEL: 8] ____ AND ____ percent
RESPECTIVELY from [DEL: June-to] September TO DECEMBER, consistent
with the targets established for these aggregates for the year.
Depending on evidence about the strength of economic recovery
and other factors bearing on the business and inflation outlook,
lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context of a
significant shortfall in growth of the aggregates from current
expectations, while somewhat greater restraint would be
acceptable should the aggregates expand more rapidly. The
Committee anticipates that [DEL: a deceleration in] M1 growth to AT
an annual rate of around [DEL: 7] ____ percent from [DEL: June to] September
TO DECEMBER will be consistent with its [DEL: third] FOURTH-quarter
objectives for the broader aggregates, and that expansion in
total domestic nonfinancial debt would remain within the ranges
established for the year. The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Opera-
tions that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related
reserve paths during the period before the next meeting is
likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently
outside a range of [DEL: 6-to 10] ____ to ____ percent.
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
October 3, 1983
Treasury Treasury coupons net purchases
3
Federal agencies net purchases
4
Net change
Period bills net i 
o e r
outright
t o
Net RPs
6
change
2
May
June
July
Aug.
LEVEL--Sept. 28
change for maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon 6 Includes changes in RPs (+), matched sale-purchase transactions (-), and matched purchase-sale
issues, and direct Treasury borrowing from the System. transactions (+).
FR 1388 (7/811
Selected Interest Rates
Percent October 3, 1983
Short-Term Long-Term
Treasury bills CDs money k U.S. government constant corporate muni- home mortgagee
federal secondary market secondary comm market bank maturity yields Aaa utility cipal .
Period funds market paper mutual prime recently Bond
c
onven- FHA/VA GNMA
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Daily--Sept. 23
Security Dealer Positions
Millions of dollars
October 3, 1983
Cash Positions Forward and Futures Posltlons
ed Treasury coupons Tresury coupone
rod Net Trasury under over federal private Treasury under over federal private
Total bills 1 var 1 year *Oancy short-term bills 1 ywa 1 yer agency short-term
Occ.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
July.
Aug.
* Strictly confidential
