Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
July 8, 1983
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) July 8, 1983
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) M2 is estimated to have increased at a 10 percent annual
rate in June, bringing its growth for the March-to-June period to just
around 8½ percent at an annual rate--a bit below the objective for
these months established by the Committee in March. By June, M2 had grown
about 9 percent from its February-March '83 base, and was somewhat above
the midpoint of this year's longer-run range for the aggregate. Shifts
into MMDA balances from outside M2 appear to have slowed markedly, at
least as judged by the recent cessation of growth in MMDAs. With issuance
of CDs by banks and thrift institutions stronger than expected, M3 is
estimated to have expanded at around a 10¼ percent annual rate in June,
and at an 8 percent annual rate from March to June, somewhat above the
FOMC's 8 percent objective for these months set in March. By June, M3 was
at the upper end of the Committee's 6½ to 9½ percent range for 1983.
(2) M1 expanded at about a 10½ percent annual rate in June,
and growth from the fourth quarter to June was at about a 13¾ percent
annual rate, well above the FOMC's range of 4 to 8 percent for the year.
Although M1 velocity continued to decline substantially in the first
quarter, more recently in the second quarter M1 velocity showed only a
relatively small decline, as the upward impact on M1 demand of reductions
in interest rates in 1982 faded. In May and June, all major components of
this aggregate, including demand deposits, increased substantially,
suggesting that recent strength has in some degree reflected growing
transactions needs for money balances.
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
1983 1
Mar.
to
Apr. May June June
Money and Credit Aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve Measures2
Nonborrowed reserves3
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
Excess reserves
Longer-run
base to
Junel
discontinuities resulting from phased changes in reserve ratios under
the Monetary Control Act.
(3) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is estimated to
have grown at about a 13 percent annual rate in June. The acceleration
of growth from the 10¼ percent average rate of April and May was due to a
surge in federal borrowing, as the Treasury sought not only to cover large
continuing needs for funds but also to build up its cash balance. The
debt of private nonfinancial sectors increased at almost an 8 percent
annual rate in June, a bit above the pace of earlier this year. For the
year to date, total domestic nonfinancial debt has increased at around a
10½ percent annual rate, a little faster than GNP, but just above the
midpoint of the FOMC's 8½ to 11½ percent long-run range. Bank credit
increased at almost a 10 percent annual rate in June, close to the average
of the previous two months. Loan growth picked up somewhat in June from
the pace of April and May; real estate lending strengthened further and
business loans showed the first substantial increase since January.
(4) After declining in May, total reserves grew at a 15 percent
annual rate in June, reflecting primarily robust expansion in required
reserves needed against transactions deposits and also some growth in
excess reserves. However, nonborrowed reserves (including extended
credit 1/) increased less--rising by 8 percent--as adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing rose to an average of $679 million. The federal funds rate
traded in an 8 to 9 percent range for most of the period since the last
meeting, up only slightly from earlier weeks. Most recently, funds have
been trading around 9 to 9-1/8 percent, though higher rates have been
associated with temporary pressures related to the semi-annual statement
1/ Boosted by borrowing by Seafirst, extended credit rose from an average
of $513 million in May to $958 million in June. This borrowing was
repaid in early July.
date and long holiday weekend. The level of borrowing incorporated in the
reserve paths had been set at $350 million initially following the FOMC
meeting, and was later raised to $400-500 million. Nonetheless, the demand
for borrowing has remained unusually strong--as has the demand for excess
reserves--relative to the prevailing spread of the funds rate over the
discount rate, and borrowing has consistently exceeded these levels (and
was particularly large over the period encompassing the statement date and
long holiday weekend).
(5) Other short-term market interest rates have risen about 75
basis points further over the intermeeting period, in part reflecting the
tightening in the reserve market but also in some degree in anticipation
of a further such tightening given the strength of incoming data on money
and economic activity. Long-term taxable bond rates have also risen about
75 basis points since the May FOMC meeting, while the rate on conventional
fixed-rate mortgages has increased one-half of a percentage point.
(6) The weighted average value of the dollar has risen by 2 1/2
percent on balance since the May FOMC meeting, mainly in association with
increases in dollar interest rates. At its peak in mid-June the dollar
on a weighted average basis was slightly above its previous November 1982
. The announce-
ment of a record U.S. trade deficit for May has had little apparent effect
on dollar exchange rates.
Monetary and credit targets for 1983 and 1984
(7) A major issue in the re-evaluation of the longer-run monetary
and credit ranges earlier established for 1983 is the probable inconsistency
between the range for M1 and those for the other monetary and credit
aggregates. It would take virtually zero growth from June to December for
M1 expansion over the year 1983 to come in around the upper limit of its
current 4 to 8 percent longer-run range. The projected strength of nominal
GNP suggests considerably stronger demand for M1 than that, given something
like present interest rate levels, or even rates somewhat higher.
(8) Against that background, two alternatives are shown below
for the monetary and credit aggregates in 1983. Alternative I reproduces
the present ranges. Alternative II differs only by including an M1 range
that has greater odds of being consistent with the broader aggregates.
Upward adjustments in growth ranges are not suggested for the broader
aggregates, even though recent experience suggests the possibility that
expansion of M2 and particularly M3 over the year is more likely to be
in the upper half of their ranges rather than near their midpoints as
earlier anticipated. It is not expected that the recent decision by DIDC
to eliminate ceiling rates on time deposits (but not on regular NOW and
savings accounts) by October 1 will have any very significant impact on
growth of M2 and M3, since time deposit expansion has for some time already
been in forms either without ceiling or with ceilings indexed to market
Alt. I Alt. II
Ml 4 to 8 7 to 11
M2 1/ 7 to 10 7 to 10
M3 6½ to 9½ 6½ to 9½
Total credit 8½ to 11½ 8½ to 11½
(9) The implications of these targets for annual growth rates
of the aggregates over the second half of 1983 are shown in the last two
columns of the table below. It should be noted that a considerable slowing
in M1 growth over the balance of the year is needed if even the upper end
of the alternative II M1 range is to be achieved. Growth in the broader
monetary and credit aggregates would not need to be as different in the
second half of this year relative to the first half for growth to fall
within their present longer-run ranges. The table below shows second half
growth rates consistent with expansion of M2 and M3 for the year in the
upper half of their ranges and expansion of total credit at its midpoint.
Growth Needed in
2nd Half '83 to Attain
Actual Growth Assumed Growth for the Year
Assumed Growth QIV '82-- QII '83-- June '83--
for 1983 QII '83 QIV '83 Dec. '83
I/ For M2, the base period for growth rates is always February/March '83
instead of QIV '82.
2/ Total credit growth rates are calculated using the last month of each
(10) At this meeting the Committee will also be considering
tentative target ranges for 1984. The principal question would appear to
be whether to retain current ranges or lower them. It is not expected
that financial innovations or regulatory changes will tend to increase the
demand for the broader aggregates (given income and interest rates) next
year. Indeed, M2 may grow a little less relative to income than is expected
during the 1983 longer-run target period as residual shifts into MMDAs
become negligible next year. Against that background, and with an unusually
large and rising high employment federal deficit for the second year of an
economic recovery in prospect, and increase in monetary growth ranges would
probably raise the odds on a strengthening in inflationary pressures and
(11) The current longer-run ranges for the aggregates are wide
enough to encompass lower actual growth rates in 1984 than in 1983. Thus,
one option (Alternative I in the table below) for the Committee--in addition
to simply retaining the present ranges--would be to retain the ranges but
indicate that actual growth for 1984 was expected to be lower in the ranges
than it had been in 1983. Our staff GNP projections for 1984--which show
slower growth in nominal and real GNP--presume that expansion of M2 next
year is ½ percentage point slower than the 8½ percent or so assumed for this
year (from the February/March '83 base). Yet another option (Alternative II)
would be to lower all of the longer-run ranges for the broader aggregates
by ½ percentage point. A variant on this option (Alternative III) would be to
lower only the upper limits of the ranges by ½ point (or possibly 1 point),
on the thought that reductions in the lower limits would tend to bring
them to "unrealistic" rates in relation to the economic outlook.
Alt. I Alt. II Alt. III
M1 4 to 8 4 to 8 4 to 7½
M2 7 to 10 6½ to 9½ 7 to 9½
M3 6½ to 9½ 6 to 9 6½ to 9
Total credit 8½ to ll½ 8 to 11 8½ to 11
(12) Alternative II does not include a lower M1 range than is
currently in place. But the 4 to 8 percent range would represent a con-
siderable reduction from likely growth this year, or from this year's
range if the Committee chose to raise it. M1 demand this year was augmented
by the upward adjustment of cash balances induced by the lower level of
market rates that developed as inflation ebbed; such a lagged effect is not
anticipated next year, and the velocity of M1 may develop along lines
more consistent with earlier post-war cyclical and secular patterns. Of
course, there are still large unknowns. Super NOW accounts bearing market
rates may come increasingly to affect the behavior of M1, and we remain
uncertain about how the public's attitudes toward these accounts as well
as regular NOW accounts are being influenced by transactions needs, interest
rates, and broad considerations of wealth and liquidity. It should also
be noted that if a sizable further decline in short-term interest rates
happens to occur, a large further rise in M1 could develop, involving
growth rates higher than in the alternatives presented, as market rates
come near to the regulatory ceiling on regular NOW accounts.1/
(13) The credit aggregate next year is likely to grow a little
more slowly than this year. This moderation is consistent with the staff's
forecast of slightly slower nominal GNP growth, but as in 1983, credit
growth is likely to exceed the expansion of nominal income. The growth
in federal debt is expected to slow next year (the dollar volume of
net Treasury borrowing should remain about the same as 1983), while
private credit expansion remains close to this year's pace. Credit usage
by nonfederal sectors is expected to be moderated by a drop-off in
1/ Factors influencing the income velocity of M1--and also M2--are
analyzed in a staff memorandum accompanying this blue book.
borrowing by state and local governments, whose bond issuance in recent
quarters has been boosted by the effects of the decline in interest rates
and the anticipation of bond registration requirements. Household borrowing
is expected to expand about as rapidly as in 1983, but business borrowing
is expected to increase substantially from its depressed pace of this
year, as the rise in spending for fixed capital and inventories outpaces
a fairly strong profit performance.
Monetary strategies over the next few years
(14) To provide additional perspective for longer-run policy
decisions, the table on the next page shows projected impacts on real
GNP, prices, and interest rates of alternative approaches to the monetary
aggregates over the next several years. Strategy 1 reproduces the staff's
basic GNP forecast for this year and next (assuming 8½-percent M2 growth
this year and 8 percent next) and also shows projections through 1985 and
1986 that assume successive ½ point reductions in M2 growth. Strategy 2
assumes more rapid money growth over the period through 1986, in this
case a continued 8½ percent M2 growth. Strategies 3 and 4 represent an
effort to depict policy approaches that show contrasts in the timing of
restraint and ease over the course of economic recovery. Strategy 3 aims
at a relatively stringent policy over the balance of this year and next
while easing off in 1985 and 1986; strategy 4 aims at the reverse
approach of easing over the balance of this year and next, and tightening
in the last two years shown. Strategy 3 assumes a reduction in M2 growth
to around 7¾ percent in 1983 and 1984 and an acceleration to around 8½
percent on average over the next two years, while strategy 4 assumes an
acceleration of M2 growth to around 9 percent in 1983 and 1984 and a decel-
eration to around 7½ percent in the next two years; in both strategies M2
growth was constrained to average a little over 8 percent over the 4-year
period. Differences between GNP, prices, and interest rates in strategy 1
and those in other strategies are based largely on model results, as is
the extension of strategy 1 into 1985 and 1986.
(15) The steady ½ point reduction of M2 growth under strategy 1
is accompanied by a gradual deceleration in growth of real GNP and some
further improvement in price performance. The 3-month Treasury bill rate
Estimated Impacts of Alternative
Policy Strategies
Real GNP (% increase QIV/QIV)
Implicit deflator (% increase QIV/QIV)
Unemployment rate (QIV average)
Treasury bill rate (QIV average)
strategies, see paragraph (14) of the
1985 1986
declines over 1984, following a small rise during the second half of this
year, but shows no further decline subsequently. By contrast, the faster M2
growth of strategy 2 promotes further declines in the bill rate and faster
growth in real GNP than strategy 1 over the whole 4-year period. No
significant pick-up in inflation from the current rate is indicated, given
the structural characteristics of our model, but one may question whether
the more rapid drop in the unemployment rate and rise in plant capacity
utilization under this alternative would not induce a more prompt re-
emergence of wage and price pressures, given the degree of economic
inefficiency in much marginal plant capacity, desires by labor to make up
for recent wage concessions, and general fears of re-emerging inflation
on the part of consumers and business.
(16) Strategies 3 and 4 depict alternative courses of events
depending on whether monetary policy is front-loaded or not. The earlier
imposition of restraint under strategy 3 appears to involve no less real
growth over the 4-year period than does the front-loading of ease under
strategy 4. However, strategy 3 entails a better price performance through-
out the period. Interest rates decline under this strategy after a
substantial further rise in the latter half of 1983 and by 1985 and 1986
are lower than under strategy 4. Of course, looking beyond 1986, a slowing
in monetary growth would be needed under strategy 3 to avoid a later
acceleration in price increases.
Policy alternatives for the short run
(17) The table below shows alternative specifications for the
monetary aggregates and federal funds rate ranges for the June to
September period. (More detailed data for the alternatives, including
their relation to the current longer-run ranges, are shown in the charts
and table on the following pages. The quarterly interest rate path
consistent with the staff's GNP projection is shown in Appendix I.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from June to Sept.
M2 9 8½ 8
M3 8½ 8 7½
Federal funds rate range 6 to 10 7 to 11 8 to 12
(18) The specifications of Alternative A contemplate no further
tightening of money market conditions over the next few months. A federal
funds rate range of 6 to 10 percent is shown for this alternative, the
same as in the directive adopted at the last meeting. However, a federal
funds rate in the upper half of that range--around 9 percent or a little
higher--would be contemplated. Recent experience with borrowing at the
discount window would suggest that borrowing would tend to be in the
$450 to 600 million range. From June to September, nonborrowed and total
reserves would be expected to expand at annual rates of about 5½ and 4
percent, respectively.
(19) M2 growth under this alternative will probably slow from
the rapid May-June pace, but should remain in the upper part of the FOMC's
longer-run range for that aggregate. The small increases in interest rates
that have developed since early May may act to restrain M2 growth a little,
Chart 2 CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Actual and Targeted M3 Class FOMC
M3 Billions of dollars
2650
ACTUAL LEVEL
***SHORT-RUN ALTERNATIVES
B- 2550
SI 2300
N D J F M A M J J A S 0 N D J F M
1982 1983 1984
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
1983--April
May
June
July
August
September
Growth Rates
Monthly
1983--April
May
June
July
August
September
June to September
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
1983--Q1
Q2
Q3
Memo:
Growth QIV '82 to
September '83
1 The base for M2 is February/March 1983.
2075.1.
2097.3
2114.7
2131.2
2146.8
2162.5
3.0
12.8
10.0
9.4
8.8
8.8
20.3
10.2
9.8
2075.1
2097.3
2114.7
2130.7
2145.2
2159.8
3.0
12.8
10.0
9.1
8.2
8.2
20.3
10.2
2075.1
2097.3
2114.7
2130.2
2143.7
2157.2
3.0
12.8
10.0
8.8
7.6
7.6
20.3
10.2
496.5
507.4
511.8
516.1
517.8
519.5
-2.7
26.3
10.4
10.1
4.0
3.9
2454.5
2477.6
2498.6
2517.3
2534.5
2551.8
3.5
11.3
10.2
9.0
8.2
8.2
10.2
8.2
9.3
496.5
507.4
511.8
515.9
516.8
517.6
-2.7
26.3
10.4
9.6
2.1
1.9
2454.5
2477.6
2498.6
2516.8
2532.7
2548.7
3.5
11.3
10.2
8.7
7.6
7.6
10.2
8.2
9.0
2454.5
2477.6
2498.6
2516.3
2530.9
2545.6
3.5
11.3
10.2
8.5
7.0
7.0
10.2
8.2
8.7
496.5
507.4
511.8
516.3
518.9
521.4
-2.7
26.3
10.4
10.6
6.0
5.8
14.1
12.2
10.8
14.1
12.2
10.0
14.1
12.2
9.2
despite the projected relatively strong expansion in personal income and
nominal GNP, but in addition M2 growth may be restrained by the further
slowing of shifts into MMDA accounts that appear to be signaled by data
of recent weeks. Mainly reflecting the behavior of M2, M3 growth is
also expected to slow from the pace of the last two months. Banks and
thrift institutions may continue to rely more heavily than in the early
part of this year on issuance of large CDs, as loan demands tend to
strengthen in reflection of the more rapid pace now evident in economic
(20) Under alternative A, M1 growth is anticipated to slow much
more substantially than growth in the other aggregates. In large part,
this is because M1 demand is no longer expected to be buttressed by the
lagged impact of last year's sharp declines in interest rates. Indeed, the
recent rise in short-term rates should begin to have a restraining effect
on M1. The assumed M1 growth in this alternative would be consistent,
given our GNP projection, with about no change in its income velocity
in the third quarter,1/ in contrast to the declines in velocity that have
generally characterized the past several quarters. Such a turn-around
in velocity would not be unexpected during the course of a cyclical expan-
sion. However, as noted earlier, large uncertainties surround estimates
of M1 demand, given the change in its composition as NOW accounts have
become an increasingly important component of the aggregates. Should the
public continue to place a substantial amount of savings in components of
M1, and over the next few weeks some of the tax cut may well be lodged
in such deposits, the velocity of M1 could continue to fall--with M1
1 On a quarterly average basis M1 growth in the third quarter under
alternative A would be around 10¾ percent at an annual rate.
growth faster--at current levels of interest rates. On the other
hand, the large build-up in M1 balances of the past several quarters could
well support a rapid expansion in GNP without much further increase in M1
should confidence generated by continuing favorable economic news entail
a substantial reduction in demand for liquidity.
(21) Given recent market rate adjustments, it would seem most
likely that interest rates would generally remain near current levels
under alternative A or decline some. In large degree, market rate increases
in recent days seem to have been in anticipation of a further tightening
of monetary policy. The 3-month Treasury bill rate might be in an 8¾ to
9¼ percent range over the next several weeks. Markets will remain ex-
ceptionally sensitive, however, given the unexpected strength of the
economy, and the level of rates will be strongly influenced by assessment
of the meaning for monetary policy over the next few months of incoming
economic news and the Federal Reserve's decisions about longer-run targets.
If and as short-term interest rates tend to stabilize, long-term rates
may tend to decline from current levels.
(22) The total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is ex-
pected to increase at about a 9 percent rate over the third quarter, less
than in the second quarter. While actual Treasury offerings will be
larger in the third quarter, they are expected to slow on a seasonally
adjusted basis from the very rapid second-quarter pace, when the Treasury
built up its cash balances by a substantial amount. Tax exempt offerings
are expected to remain well below the second-quarter pace, which had been
influenced by the desire to avoid registration requirements that took
effect on July 1. Business borrowing is likely to fall more on banks
relative to bond markets than it had in the second quarter. However, some
pick-up in bond offerings from the relatively moderate June pace might
be expected, particularly if the bond market shows signs of a decline in
(23) Alternative B encompasses a further increase in pressures
on bank reserve positions in an effort to increase the-odds that growth
in the broad monetary aggregates will remain within their longer-run
target ranges and to exert even more restraint on growth of M1. This
alternative would involve borrowing from the discount window in the $850
million to $1 billion range (given the present discount rate), and the
federal funds rate might be expected to move well into the 9½ to 10 percent
area. Total reserves are likely to expand at about 2¼ percent annual rate
over the June to September period. Nonborrowed reserves would be about
flat if the level of borrowing rose to the range specified.
(24) Although market interest rates have probably to some
extent discounted the further tightening in policy envisioned by this
alternative, the 3-month Treasury bill rate would likely rise further to
the 9¼ to 9¾ percent area, and longer-term rates would move still higher,
at least in the short run. The rise in long-term rates would tend to
discourage bond market financing, diverting additional loan demand to
short-term market sectors. This, together with the rise in short-term
market rates, would put substantial upward pressure on the prime loan
rate. Mortgage loan rates would probably advance further to the neighbor-
hood of 13½ percent, which would be a new high for the year.
(25) M1 growth could be expected to slow to about 6 percent
from June to September under this approach and, assuming the market pressures
of alternative B were maintained through year-end, to expand at a somewhat
slower pace in the final months of the year. If this occurred, M1 growth
for the year (QIV '82 to QIV '83) would be in the vicinity of 10½ percent.
M2 is expected to grow at an 8½ percent annual rate from June to September
under this alternative--which would bring this aggregate back toward the
midpoint of its longer-run range. While thrift deposit flows might be
about the same as under alternative A, higher deposit costs would once
again begin to eliminate the earnings of a large number of S&Ls and MSBs,
exerting upward pressure on mortgage rates.
(26) Alternative C involves an approach that would exert
relatively strong restraint on the aggregates and credit markets over the
near-term. M1 growth might be lower than 10 percent for the year and
growth of M2 over the year would probably be somewhat below the midpoint
of its longer-run range. Under this approach, federal funds would
be expected to rise to 10½ percent or so over the near-term. With the
level of borrowing at the discount window expanding to about $1¼ billion
and market interest rates rising, the current level of the discount rate
would be called into question, as indeed it also would under alternative B.
Total reserves would change little from June to September, and nonborrowed
reserves would drop by about 5 percent at an annual rate if borrowing
rose as specified.
(27) Under this alternative, given the restraint on reserve
positions, M1 would be expected to expand at only a 4½ percent annual rate,
while M2 and M3 would both increase at 8 percent rates, over the June to
September period. The 3-month bill rate would rise substantially--to
about 10 to 10½ percent--and the bank prime rate might move up to perhaps
12 percent. Longer-term yields would also show marked increases. The
dollar would probably tend to rise substantially in foreign exchange markets,
and the viability of international debt positions of a number of major
borrowing countries would come further into question. Earnings pressures
on thrifts would be very substantial. However, the projected interest
rate levels producing these pressures would probably slow the economy and
credit demands substantially by winter, so that a drop in interest rates
would be expected at least by the early part of next year consistent with
tentative longer-run monetary and credit targets for that year.
Directive language
(28) Given below is draft directive language related to the
Committee's decisions on the longer-run ranges (draft language for the
operating paragraph is shown in paragraph (29)). Suggested deletions
of language are shown in strike-through form with suggested additions in
caps and certain alternatives bracketed.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster monetary
and financial conditions that will help to reduce inflation further,
promote [DEL: a resumption of] growth in output on a sustainable basis,
and contribute to a sustainable pattern of international trans-
actions. At its meeting in February the Committee established
growth ranges for monetary and credit aggregates for 1983 in
furtherance of these objectives. The Committee recognized that
the relationships between such ranges and ultimate economic goals
have been less predictable over the past year; that the impact of
new deposit accounts on growth ranges of monetary aggregates cannot
be determined with a high degree of confidence; and that the
availability of interest on large portions of transaction accounts,
declining inflation, and lower market rates of interest may be re-
flected in some changes in the historical trends in velocity. [DEL: A
substantial-shift of-funds-into-M2-from-market instruments, in
eluding- large-certificates of deposit not included in M2, in
association with-the-extraordinarily rapid build-up-of money
market-deposit accounts, distorted growth in that aggregate during
the-first-quarter.]
In establishing growth ranges LAST FEBRUARY for the aggregates
for 1983 against this background, the Committee felt that growth
in M2 might be more appropriately measured after the period of
highly aggressive marketing of money market deposit accounts had
subsided. The Committee also felt that a somewhat wider range was
appropriate for monitoring M1. [DEL: These growth ranges were to be
reviewed in the spring, and altered, if appropriate, in the light
of evidence at that time. The Committee reviewed the ranges at
this meeting and decided not to change them at this time, pending
further review at the July meeting.] With these understandings,
the Committee established the following growth ranges: for the
period from February-March of 1983 to the fourth quarter of 1983,
7 to 10 percent at an annual rate for M2, taking into account the
probability of some residual shifting into that aggregate from non-
M2 sources; and for the period from the fourth quarter of 1982 to
the fourth quarter of 1983, 6½ to 9½ percent for M3, which appeared
to be less distorted by the new accounts. For the same period a
tentative range of 4 to 8 percent was established for M1, assuming
that Super NOW accounts would draw only modest amounts of funds
from sources outside M1 and assuming that the authority to pay
interest on transaction balances was not extended beyond pre-
sently eligible accounts. An associated range of growth for
total domestic nonfinancial debt was estimated at 8½ to 11
percent. THESE RANGES WERE REVIEWED AT THE MAY MEETING AND
LEFT UNCHANGED, PENDING FURTHER REVIEW IN JULY.
AT THIS MEETING, THE COMMITTEE REAFFIRMED THE LONGER-RUN
RANGES ESTABLISHED EARLIER FOR GROWTH IN M2, M3, [M1?], AND TOTAL
DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEBT IN 1983 [WITH GROWTH IN THE BROADER
MONETARY AGGREGATES EXPECTED TO BE IN THE UPPER PART OF THEIR
RANGES]. [WITH REGARD TO M1, THE COMMITTEE, TAKING ACCOUNT OF
THE RAPID GROWTH IN THE FIRST HALF OF 1983 ASSOCIATED WITH THE
CONTINUED DECLINE IN VELOCITY AND ANTICIPATING A DECELERATION
IN GROWTH OVER THE SECOND HALF OF THE YEAR, ESTABLISHED A RANGE
OF ____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR THE YEAR AS A WHOLE.] THE COMMITTEE ALSO
AGREED ON TENTATIVE GROWTH RANGES FOR THE PERIOD FROM THE FOURTH
QUARTER OF 1983 TO THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1984 OF TO PERCENT
FOR M2, ____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR M3. AND ____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR M1.
THE ASSOCIATED RANGE FOR TOTAL DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEBT FOR NEXT
YEAR WAS SET AT ____ TO ____ PERCENT.
In implementing monetary policy, the Committee agreed that
substantial weight would continue to be placed on behavior of the
broader monetary aggregates, [DEL: expecting that distortions in M2
from the initial adjustment to the new deposit accounts will
abate.] The behavior of M1 will continue to be monitored, with
the degree of weight placed on that aggregate over time dependent
on evidence that velocity characteristics are resuming more
predictable patterns. [or THE COMMITTEE ALSO AGREED TO INCREASE
THE WEIGHT OF M1 IN POLICY IMPLEMENTATION WITH THE DEGREE OF
WEIGHT DEPENDENT ON THE STRENGTH OF EVIDENCE THAT THIS AGGREGATE
WAS RESUMING A MORE PREDICTABLE RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER KEY ECONOMIC
MAGNITUDES]. Debt expansion, while not directly targeted, will
be evaluated in judging responses to the monetary aggregates.
The Committee understood that policy implementation would involve
continuing appraisal of the relationships between the various
measures of money and credit and nominal GNP, including evalua-
tion of conditions in domestic credit and foreign exchange markets.
(29) Draft language for the operational paragraph is shown
below. Since the proposed language refers to alternative approaches for
a new quarter, the old language (which referred to the second quarter)
is not shown.
The Committee seeks in the short run to [increase (alt. C),
increase somewhat (alt. B), or maintain (alt. A)] the existing
degree of reserve restraint. The action is expected to be
associated with growth of M2 and M3 at annual rates of about
____ and ___ percent respectively from June to September. The
Committee anticipates that a deceleration in M1 growth to an
annual rate of around ____ percent will be consistent with its
third-quarter objectives for the broader aggregates. [Depending
in part on evidence about the strength of economic recovery,
lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context of a signi-
ficant shortfall in growth of the aggregates from current
expectations, while somewhat greater restraint would be
acceptable should the aggregates expand more rapidly.] The
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears
to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the
monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the period
before the next meeting is likely to be associated with a
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of ____ to ____
