Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
May 20, 1983
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 20, 1983
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) In April M2 grew slowly--at about a 3 percent annual rate--
held down in part by enlarged shifts to IRA and Keogh accounts in advance
of the April tax date. M2 growth is picking up in May, but expansion to
date appears still to be falling short of a pace consistent with the 9 per-
cent rate from March to June expected by the Committee. Growth in MMDAs
has slowed further in recent weeks--though not quite to the rate expected
at the time of previous FOMC meetings--and appears to have added about
generally has paralleled that of M2--with growth relatively slow in April
and picking up, though less sharply, in May--and its expansion for the
quarter to date seems to be below the 8 percent annual rate indicated by
the Committee for the second quarter.
(2) M1 declined at a 3 percent annual rate in April; however,
data for early May indicate a very sharp rebound in growth of this
aggregate. The uneven pattern of growth may be attributable in some part
to problems with seasonal factors, but examination of seasonally unadjusted
data for early May suggest unusual strength in the month in any event.
For April and May combined, M1 growth appears as if it may be running
about 4 percentage points above the 6 to 7 percent annual rate of growth
from March to June that the FOMC thought was consistent with its expecta-
tions for the broader aggregates.
(3) Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is estimated on the
basis of preliminary data to have grown at about a 9½ percent annual rate
in April, about the same as the rate of advance from December to March. The
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Estimated Growth to May
1983 From base for
Mayl, longer-run
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. Proj.- From Mar. ranges2/
Money and Credit Aggregates
resulting from phased changes in reserve ratios under the Monetary Control Act.
5/ Includes special borrowing and other extended credit from the Federal Reserve.
6/ For first three statement weeks ending in May.
latest estimate places this debt measure a bit below the midpoint of the
FOMC's 8½ to 11½ percent annual range. In addition to continued heavy
borrowing by the federal government, tax-exempt financing and mortgage
formation have been strong so far this year and consumer installment
borrowing has picked up as well. Nonfinancial businesses also have issued
a substantial volume of long-term debt, but this has been partly offset
by weakness in short-term business borrowing in the commercial paper
market and at banks. Total bank credit growth in April was at an 8¾ per-
cent annual rate, somewhat below the first quarter pace; business loans
declined in April and at large banks have remained weak in early May,
but banks have continued to acquire large amounts of Treasury securities.
(4) After the abatement of statement date pressures at the
end of the first quarter, restraint on bank reserve positions has been
associated with a federal funds rate generally in an 8½ to 8¾ percent
area. The level of borrowing since the last meeting has averaged higher
than the $250 million set for reserve path purposes at the last Committee
meeting, mainly because of distortions around the end-of-quarter statement
date and special influences in two other weeks. Excess reserves have con-
tinued to be volatile and to run relatively high on average. With demand
for required reserves slowing in lagged response to a weakness in trans-
actions deposits over much of March and through April, growth in the various
aggregate reserve measures has slowed in April and May relative to the
previous two months. The growth rate of the monetary base has, however,
accelerated in May along with renewed strengthening of currency growth.
(5) Since the last Committee meeting, short-term rates have
declined ¼ to ½ of a percentage point, while bond rates have shown mixed
changes. Rates had fallen considerably in the first few weeks of the inter-
meeting period, as the market reacted to weak money supply figures in April
and to renewed expectations of a discount rate cut in the not-too-distant
future. However, most recently rates have backed up, as strong incoming
economic data and signs of renewed rapid growth in M1 caused hopes for a
near-term discount rate cut to fade. Spurred by lower interest rates and
improved prospects for economic growth, stock prices reached new record
levels in May, although most recently they have eased off with the backup
in interest rates.
(6) The dollar is essentially unchanged on a weighted average
basis since the March FOMC meeting, despite the modest decline in U.S.
short-term interest rates relative to a weighted average of foreign rates.
The dollar depreciated substantially against sterling and by a lesser
amount against the yen, but these declines were offset by an increase
against the mark and other EMS currencies.
Long-term targets
(7) In establishing its long-term growth ranges for the
aggregates for 1983, the Committee indicated that the ranges for M1 and
M2 would be "reviewed in the spring and altered, if appropriate, in the
light of evidence at that time." Economic issues with respect to M1
would appear to involve mainly whether its velocity--or, expressed other-
wise, the demand for money--is becoming more predictable and consistent
with past history. A principal issue raised by the Committee's targeting
procedure for M2 would appear to -revolve around whether the bulk of
shifts associated with introduction of MMDAs is indeed behind us, as was
expected in establishing both the February-March base and the 7 to 10 per-
cent range covering the period from that base to QIV '83 (a range that
assumed that growth would be boosted over that period by only about 1 per-
centage point or so at an annual rate from further shifting to MMDAs from
non-M2 sources).
(8) The staff has employed a variety of econometric tests, in-
cluding experimentation with new money demand models, in an effort to
evaluate the recent behavior of Ml, particularly since late 1981--as is
explained in some detail in the paper circulated with this blue book. In
brief, the results suggest that there has been a noticeable increase in the
responsiveness of M1 to changes in open market yields, with the implica-
tion that in a period of declining short-term interest rates Ml could be
expected to grow more rapidly than had previously been the case (given
income)--as, of course, took place in the latter part of 1982 and early
to be associated at least in part with the growing importance over the
last couple of years of fixed ceiling-rate NOW accounts--which have both
savings and transaction characteristics--as a component of Ml.
(9) Thus, the most recent staff research supports the view that
the strong growth of M1 in late 1982 and early 1983 can be explained in
large measure by lagged responses to the decline in short-term market
rates that began last summer. That lagged effect is virtually dissipated
by now, and, assuming little further change in short-term interest rates,
demand for M1 over the balance of the year would therefore depend mainly
on its responsiveness (for both transaction and savings purposes) to
income growth. Our present estimates suggest that M1 growth over the
balance of the year, given projected GNP, would slow markedly from its pace
over the first five months of the year, but that the odds are fairly high
that the slowing will still leave M1 by year-end somewhat above the upper
end of its present longer-run range.
(10) A number of uncertainties make such a conclusion no more
than tentative at this point, however--and indeed make it likely that
assessment of M1 behavior may be little further advanced by July, when
the FOMC's full-scale mid-year review of monetary and credit aggregates is
scheduled. First, experience with nationwide NOW accounts has been limited,
so that estimates of interest- and income-elasticities should be construed
as having a wider-than-usual margin of error around them. Moreover, they
may be distorted by inability to allow precisely for one-time transitional
effects on money demand from the public's and depository institutions'
responses to availability of new instruments. Second, the apparent higher
interest-elasticity of recent years may, in any event, be in process of
reversing. As super-NOWs become more prevalent, and over the longer term
as regular NOWs are deregulated, deposit rates will move more closely in
line with market rates, thereby likely reducing the response of money-
holders to changes in market rates. Thus, it would seem that, while the
period of sharp decline in the income velocity of M1 may be behind us,
the behavior of M1 velocity over the balance of the year still is subject
to considerable uncertainty--as it also may well be over longer periods.
(11) With regard to the longer-run range for M2, the recent
behavior of MMDAs is consistent with the assumption used in setting the
range that the bulk of shifts from non-M2 sources into M2 would be completed
by March. The average weekly growth in MMDAs declined from $33 billion in
January to $17 billion in February and $8 billion in March. Growth since
the end of March has averaged less than $4 billion per week. Some further
deceleration from this pace can in all likelihood be expected, and thus
we would see little reason to alter the earlier assumption about the modest
impact of MMDA growth on M2 over the long-run target period. Moreover, since
March, growth in the nontransactions component of M2 as a whole has been
generally moderate, even after rough allowance for shifts in April out of
M2 deposits into IRA-Keogh accounts. In general, there is little in the
statistical evidence to date to suggest that the longer-run M2 range needs
modification--though M2 is currently running lower relative to the range
than had earlier been expected in part because of large shifts into IRA-
Keogh accounts.
Policy alternatives for the short run
(12) The table below shows, in the top two panels, alternative
specifications for the monetary aggregates and the federal funds rate for
the upcoming intermeeting period. The third panel indicates the implied
growth from March to June of these alternatives. (More detailed data for
the alternatives, including their relation to the longer-run ranges, are
shown in the charts and table on the following pages. The quarterly
interest rate path consistent with the staff's GNP projection is shown
in Appendix I).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from April to June
Implied March to June growth
(13) As may be seen from the lower panel of the table, all of
the alternatives indicate that M2 and M3 over the second quarter would run
below the annual growth rates of 9 and 8 percent, respectively, expected
by the Committee at its previous meeting. It should be pointed out, though,
that about one-half percentage point of the weakness of M2 and M3 growth over
the second quarter relative to earlier March-to-June expectations may be
attributed to unexpectedly large shifts of funds into IRA-Keogh accounts in
April prior to the tax date. There are only small differences in growth
rates shown among the alternatives because of the limited time remaining
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
April
May
June
Growth Rates
Monthly
April
May
June
March to June
April to June
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
in the second quarter, the relatively low interest-elasticity of the
broad aggregates, and the comparatively modest interest rate differences
assumed across the alternatives. With regard to M1, the alternatives
indicate a more rapid growth in that aggregate over the second quarter
than the 6 to 7 percent anticipated earlier, given the unexpected surge
in May.
(14) While estimates of the relationship between the aggregates
and bank reserve positions are subject to considerable uncertainty, the
money supply specifications of alternative B are expected to be consistent
with little change in the current degree of restraint on bank reserve
positions--that is, with borrowing at the discount window fluctuating
around $250 million, associated with a federal funds rate generally just
above the current 8½ percent discount rate. Nonborrowed reserves in June
would be expected to expand at about a 9 percent annual rate, and total
reserves by about 6 percent.
(15) Under alternative B, there is little reason to believe
that interest rates in general would change much from current levels, given
the recent back-up in interest rates. The 3-month Treasury bill rate
would probably trade in the vicinity of 8¼ percent. The bond market is
likely to remain able to absorb a large supply of corporate, tax exempt,
and Treasury offerings at around present rate levels, although those rates
could come under upward pressure should signs of more vigorous economic
recovery emerge, particularly if doubts intensified about prospects for
fiscal restraint. After edging down recently mortgage rates may tend to
stabilize. The total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to
increase at about a 9 to 9½ percent annual rate over the second quarter--
little different from the first--as federal government credit demands
remain large and private credit demands stay moderate.
(16) The staff does not expect the bulge in M1 growth in May to
presage continued rapid growth in double digits in June or the months
beyond. Both our (refurbished) quarterly and monthly money demand models
would project expansion in a 6 to 7 percent annual rate area at around
current interest rates, given projected GNP. M1 growth in June seems
likely to be in that area, or perhaps lower considering the unwinding
of special influences that may be inflating growth in May--such as seasonal
adjustment problems and possible effects from an unusually sharp decline
in the Treasury balance after the first week of May. Given the moderate
June growth expected under alternative B, M1 on a quarterly average
basis would expand at about an 11 percent annual rate, which would imply
a 2 percent decline in its income velocity--a much smaller decline than
in the first quarter but still in sharp contrast to the increases that
have usually been registered in the early stages of business cycle upturns.
(17) M2 growth under alternative B is anticipated to be around
a 9 percent annual rate over May and June on average. Growth in the non-
transactions component of that aggregate is expected to pick up, after
having been depressed in April by IRA-Keogh transfers. Growth in M3 is
likely to be held down by CD run-offs at banks, as loan demand--particu-
larly from businesses--remains soft, and by declines in the assets of
institution-only money market funds, though at a slower pace than in
recent months.
(18) Alternative A envisions an easing in bank reserve positions
that would help move the broader aggregates more in the direction of the
short-run path expected at the last Committee meeting, but at the same time
would probably cause M1 to move even further above the Committee's
previously held expectations for the second quarter. The alternative
envisions a drop in borrowing to near minimal levels--perhaps $100 million,
which would bring the federal funds rate down to around 8 percent. A
similar easing of money market conditions could be attained with a drop
in the discount rate to 8 percent, and borrowing to about $200 million.
(19) The approach of alternative A, particularly if it also
involved a cut in the discount rate, could lead to fairly sizable declines
in short-term interest rates, partly because it would tend to confirm that
the Committee was discounting the recent behavior of M1. A 3-month bill
rate around 7½-7¾ percent might be anticipated, and the prime loan rate
should come down another notch. A moderate decline in long-term rates is
also probable. There is a possibility, though, of some adverse effect on
long-run inflation expectations, given the recent strong economic and
monetary data--which would have a negative impact on bond markets. In
foreign exchange markets, a drop in short rates here would help reverse
the rise in the dollar of recent days, but it is doubtful that the dollar
would drop very substantially, given the continuing attractiveness of
dollar assets and the probability of some easing action by foreign central
(20) Over the longer run, looking toward the year as a whole,
alternative A would, with greater probability, involve M1 growth above
the FOMC's longer-run range, unless interest rates moved up again in the
second half of the year. M2 growth would be raised for the year, but the
direct effect of lower market rates on demand for M2 may be quite modest
given the relatively low interest-elasticity of that aggregate. Whether
M2 growth would be strongly affected, with some risk of overshooting the
present long-run range, would depend mainly on the degree of upward impact
on GNP growth (relative to our current forecast of 8 percent at an annual
rate over the second half) of some easing in interest rates now. Since
the contemplated interest rate declines are small,a substantial impact on
spending would seem to be contingent on whether the easing engendered a
significant improvement in business and consumer confidence.
(21) Alternative C, which contemplates an increase in the federal
funds rate to the 9 to 9½ percent area, would imply a level of adjustment
borrowing between $500 and $700 million at the current discount rate. With
an increasing amount of reserve demands met at the discount window, non-
borrowed reserves over the next month would decline at an annual rate of
around 2 percent. The 3-month bill rate would probably rise into the 8½
to 9 percent area, and the prime rate would come under upward pressure.
Bond rates, too, would rise, perhaps sharply initially, but subsequent
investor willingness to acquire long-term assets in light of improved
inflationary expectations would tend to blunt such increases.
(22) This alternative would be consistent with an effort to
ensure that M1 growth moves back closer to the Committee's longer-run tar-
get. At the same time, though, the higher interest rates involved would
work to restrain M2 growth. The direct impact on M2 of the interest rates
themselves would be relatively minor in the short run. The principal con-
straint on growth of M2 and broader aggregates generally is more likely to
come as the year progresses from any slower expansion in income that might
emerge from the higher interest rates associated with the alternative.
Directive language
(23) Given below are two suggested operational paragraphs for
the directive. Alternative I is the current directive, with quantitative
specifications adopted at the previous meeting shown in strike-through
form and with a possible language deletion shown in brackets. Given
the likelihood that the earlier specifications are not reasonably attainable,
the Committee may wish to consider either changing the specifications in
the current directive or adopting a somewhat different approach suggested
by alternative II. That alternative does not provide numerical specifica-
tions, though the possibility of including them for the broader aggregates
is indicated in bracketed language.
Alternative I
For the short run, the Committee seeks to maintain generally
the existing degree of restraint on reserve positions, anticipating
that would be consistent with a slowing from March to June in
growth of M2 and M3 to annual rates of about [DEL: 9] ____ and 8 ____ percent,
respectively. The Committee expects that M1 growth at an annual
rate of about [DEL: 6] ____ to [DEL: 7] ____ percent would be consistent with its
objectives for the broader aggregates. [Lesser restraint would be
acceptable in the context of more pronounced slowing of growth in
the monetary aggregates relative to the paths implied by the long-
term ranges (taking account of the distortions relating to the
introduction of new accounts), or indications of a weakening in the
the pace of economic recovery.] The Chairman may call for
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic
Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related
reserve paths during the period before the next meeting is likely
to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside
a range of [DEL: 6] ____ to [DEL: 10] ____ percent.
Alternative II
For the short-run, the Committee seeks to (maintain generally/
increase/decrease) the existing degree of reserve restraint, antici-
pating that growth rates of M2 and M3 over May and June will accelerate
from their reduced April pace [to annual rates of ____ and ____ per-
cent, respectively] while remaining in conformance with their
longer-run ranges. Consistent with these objectives, the Committee
anticipates that M1 would remain above its longer-run range, but
that its growth would be substantially reduced in the period
immediately ahead. The Chairman may call for Committee consulta-
tion if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that
pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths
during the period before the next meeting is likely to be associ-
ated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 6]
____ to [DEL: 10] ____ percent.
