Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
August 19, 1983
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC August 19, 1983
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) Growth of M2 and M3 slowed appreciably in July to annual
rates of about 6-1/4 and 5 per cent respectively, well below their June-
to-September path rates of 8-1/2 and 8 per cent set at the last FOMC
meeting. The slowing of growth in the broader aggregates last month
reflected reduced reliance by banks on funds borrowed through managed
liabilities-overnight RPs and Eurodollars, term RPs and large CDs-prob-
ably in response to the unusually large increase in the availability of
funds from U.S. Government balances. This led to a substantial deceler-
ation in growth of the nontransaction component of the broad aggregates,
even though growth of the total of savings and small time deposits (includ-
ing MMDAs) slowed only marginally last month. The composition of inflows
into that grouping shifted dramatically, however, as MMDAs were little
changed on balance while small time deposits, mainly 6-month MMCs, surged
with the recent rise in short-term market interest rates. By July, M2
stood at the center of its 7 to 10 per cent long-run growth cone and M3
was in the upper half of its longer-run range.
(2) A more rapid growth of the broad aggregates is anticipated
in August partly on the grounds that banks may borrow more aggressively
in the market through managed liabilities to compensate for an expected
drop in U.S. Government funds. Nonetheless, given the partial data avail-
able through the first half of the month, growth rates of M2 and M3 may
not be so strong in August as to bring these aggregates above the FOMC's
short-term target path, and they, particularly M2, might remain below.
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Longer-run
1983 base to
May June July July1
Money and Credit Aggregates
Reserve Measures2
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
(3) M1 decelerated a bit further in July, to about a 9 per
cent annual rate-which was slightly below expectations for July thought
at the time of the last meeting to be consistent with the 7 per cent
growth rate specified for the June-to-September target period. Data for
early August suggest some further deceleration in growth. Owing to rapid
expansion in the latter half of the second quarter, the level of M1 in
the first half of August remained above the upper limit of its 5 to 9 per
cent monitoring range.
(4) Borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors is estimated
to have decelerated to about an 8-3/4 per cent annual rate in July from
the 11-3/4 per cent second-quarter pace, largely reflecting reduced borrow-
ing by the Federal Government. Although July growth in bank credit-at
lending offset a marked decline in acquisitions of Treasury securities.
Lending to businesses strengthened to a 12 per cent annual rate, reflecting
the curtailment in long-term bond issuance as long-term rates backed up
further, and consumer lending accelerated to a 20 per cent rate as the
bank share of this market evidently continued to grow. Thus far in
August, data from large banks suggest that business loan demand may be
moderating, but borrowing in the commercial paper market has picked up.
(5) Growth in total reserves decelerated to a 6 per cent annual
rate in July, reflecting a slowing in growth of required reserves against
deposits in Ml. Growth in the monetary base also slowed markedly in
July, as currency expansion dropped off considerably following many
months of strong expansion. Nonborrowed reserves plus extended credit
were unchanged in July as adjustment plus seasonal borrowing rose.
Over the intermeeting period, borrowing ran somewhat in excess of the
Committee's $600 to $800 million assumed range, reflecting a tendency
for borrowing to be strong early in the statement week and for excess
reserves to run slightly higher than expected. Net borrowed reserves
have averaged about $515 million over the intermeeting period, at the
high end of expectations for the period implied in the Committee's
discussion of operating targets at the last meeting.
(6) Over the intermeeting period, the federal funds rate rose
from around 9-1/4 per cent to the 9-1/2 to 9-5/8 per cent area, with
trading in the first half of August mainly around the latter rate or a
bit higher. This rise was accompanied by fairly marked increases in
short- and particularly longer-term interest rates-which moved upward by
about 40 and 80 basis points respectively from the time of the Committee
meeting to peaks in the second week in August. Longer-term rates may
have been influenced by heightened concerns about the conflict between
federal and private credit demands in a strengthened economy--concerns
that may have been manifested in the initial lukewarm investor reception
of the record-size mid-August Treasury refunding. In recent days, both
short- and long-term interest rates have declined from earlier peaks,
reflecting slower than expected money growth, a more moderate retail
sales figure than many anticipated, and a slight easing in pressures on
the funds market. On balance, since the previous FOMC meeting, short-term
rates have risen about 10 to 20 basis points and longer-term market rates
about 20 to 25 basis points. Mortgage rates have risen about 60 basis
(7) The rise of U.S. interest rates, together with indications
that rates abroad would not be lifted, apparently spurred strong demand
for the dollar on foreign exchange markets in the first half of August,
and at its peak the dollar had risen by about 4-1/2 per cent on a weighted
average basis.
intervention by the
United States-
marked the first U.S. intervention since October 1982. More recently, as
interest rates in the U.S. have eased off, the dollar has dropped on ex-
change markets, by about 2-1/2 per cent from its peak.
Prospective developments
(8) The top panels of the table below show alternative
specifications for the monetary aggregates over the June-to-September
period, together with federal funds rate ranges for the upcoming inter-
meeting period; the bottom panel gives the implied growth rates for each
alternative for the July-to-September period. (More detailed data for
the alternatives, including their relationship to the longer-run ranges,
are shown in the charts and table on the following pages. The quarterly
interest rate path consistent with the staff's GNP projection is shown in
Appendix I.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from June to September
Implied July to September
growth
(9) The monetary aggregates of alternative B most nearly
correspond to the specifications for the third quarter adopted at the
last Committee meeting; they differ only by a slightly higher growth
for M1 balanced by a slightly lower growth for M2, a change in relation-
ship suggested by incoming data. Such growth rates are likely to be
achieved without further significant change in money market conditions.
Alternatives A and C would call for somewhat easier and tighter money
Actual and Targeted M2
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Class - FOMC
8/22/83
-ACTUAL LEVEL
© PROJECTION
*SHORT-RUN ALTERNATIVES
Billions of dollars
2220
- 2180
-- 2100
-- 1900
I FII I I J JI I J
N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M
- ACTUAL LEVEL
) PROJECTION
* SHORT-RUN ALTERNATIVES
Chat 2 CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Class n - FOMC
Actual and Targeted M3
Billions of dollars
2650
A
,s - 2550
Sc
- 2500
- 2400
- 2350
M J J A
1983
O N D J F
1984
N I
1982
Chart 3
Actual and Targeted M1
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Billions of dollars
1550
SACTUAL LEVEL
SSHORT-RUN ALTERNATIVES
N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates For Key Monetary Aggregates
M2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M3
Alt. A Alt. B
M1
Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B
July
August
September
Growth Rates
Monthly
July
August
September
June-September
July-September
September - December
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
Memo:
Growth Rate
Base period to 1983041
Alt. C
market conditions respectively. Because the bulk of the third quarter
is now behind, specified money growth rates over the June-to-September
period do not differ greatly from alternative B, but the emerging differ-
ence in money market conditions would more significantly affect develop-
ments in the fourth quarter.
(10) Under all the alternatives growth in M2 and M3 is expected
to quicken in August and September from the July pace, largely for the rea-
son noted in paragraph (2), though these aggregates are expected to remain
within the FOMC's longer-run range. M1, on the other hand, is expected
to grow more slowly in August and September than in July as the rise in
market interest rates that has already occurred contributes to moderation
in demands for this aggregate.
(11) Under alternative B, the federal funds rate would be
expected to trade around 9-1/2 per cent (the 6 to 10 per cent funds rate
range shown for that alternative retains the specification of the current
directive). Recent strength in demands at the discount window suggest
that borrowing would range between $700 and $900 million. Total and
nonborrowed reserves would be expected to show little change, on balance,
over August and September-with a small decline in August offset by a
rise in September.
(12) Other short-term market interest rates, which have declined
some in recent days partly as expectations of a further tightening in
monetary policy abated, should remain around current levels. A little
further drop in long-term rates could develop, however, particularly if
stability in the funds rate is accompanied by additional evidence of less
rapid economic expansion along with moderate money growth in or approach-
ing the Committee's longer-term ranges.
(13) The debt of nonfinancial sectors is expected to increase
over the third quarter at a considerably slower pace than in the second.
The moderation in growth reflects a sharp drop off of bond issuance by
state and local governments and a slowing of borrowing by the Treasury,
following the rapid build up of its cash balance in early summer. Even
so, the federal government's demands on credit markets remain quite large,
with its outstanding debt projected to increase at around a 16 per cent
annual rate in the third quarter. Household borrowing is expected to
continue close to the stronger pace of the second quarter. Net busi-
ness needs for external finance are expected to remain relatively small,
as the effects of a turn to inventory accumulation are about offset by
strong growth of internal funds.
(14) Looking into the fourth quarter, and assuming sane slight
further tightening of money market conditions in the fall as well as re-
duced growth of nominal GNP in line with staff projections, the expansion
of M1 may slow somewhat further. Growth in that aggregate for the year
would then be in the upper half of the Committee's longer-run range-which
would be consistent with a slight further pick-up in velocity growth
during the fourth quarter from the about 1 to 1-1/2 per cent expansion
that appears in store for the third quarter. Growth rates in M2 and M3
over the year 1983 are expected to be around the midpoint, and in the
upper half, of their longer-run ranges respectively, assuming as noted
above some slight further tightening of money markets in the fourth
quarter and also a moderation of loan demands at banks and thrifts.
(15) Alternative A contemplates some easing in money market
conditions, with federal funds in an 8-1/2 to 9 per cent area and borrow-
ing declining to the $400-$600 million range. Nonborrowed reserves would
be expected to expand at about a 6 per cent annual rate from July to
September. Market interest rates would probably decline substantially
in response to the unexpected easing of money markets, with the 3-month
Treasury bill rate falling to the 8-1/2 per cent area. A considerable
rally probably would develop in bond markets. With bond rates falling,
business issuance of long-term obligations would burgeon once again,
while borrowing from banks and in the commercial paper market receded.
In foreign exchange markets, the dollar would tend to weaken, probably
falling below levels prevailing around the time of the July FOMC meeting.
(16) While growth in the monetary aggregates in the June-to-
September period may be only a little stronger under alternative A than
alternative B, the easing in bank reserve positions, if sustained through
the fourth quarter, would involve a greater chance as the year progresses
that M1 growth would accelerate, at least a bit, from what is currently
expected to be a moderate August pace and tend to stay above its longer-run
range. An acceleration could reflect both the reduced opportunity cost
of holding NOW accounts as well as any greater than projected expansion
in nominal GNP should an easing of interest rates lead, through a favor-
able impact on attitudes among other things, to greater consumer and
business spending. Growth in M2 and M3 would tend to be somewhat higher
for the year as money market conditions remain easier than under alter-
native B, but they are likely to remain within their longer-run ranges.
(17) Alternative C contemplates a near-term tightening in
money market conditions with a view to gaining greater assurance that
all of the aggregates, including Ml, would end 1983 within their longer-
run ranges. The federal funds rate under alternative C might trade in
the 10 to 10-1/2 per cent range through the end of the quarter. Discount
window borrowing would tend toward the area of $l-1/4 billion at the
current 8-1/2 per cent discount rate, raising questions about the level
of that rate. Assuming no discount rate change, nonborrowed reserves
might decline at about a 6 per cent annual rate from July to September.
(18) The size and speed of the tightening in money market
conditions contemplated under alternative C is probably not currently
anticipated in the market. As a result, interest rates in both short-
and long-term markets would be likely to rise appreciably. Bond issuance
by corporations and state and local governments is already quite low com-
pared to earlier in the year, but it could drop off even more. In the
mortgage market rates on conventional fixed rate mortgages would climb
above 14 per cent, with pressure on these rates accentuated by effects of
rising MMDA costs on the willingness of thrifts to extend mortgage loans.
The dollar would come under considerable upward pressure on foreign ex-
change markets, especially if foreign central banks continued to demonstrate
a reluctance to raise their domestic interest rates.
(19) Under alternative C, M2 and M3 growth over the June-to-
September period might be somewhat below objectives specified at the
last Committee meeting, though M1 growth may be close to its 7 per cent
third-quarter objective. However, should the higher interest rates cause
sizable shifts of saving funds out of NOW accounts into instruments bear-
ing market-related interest rates, M1 growth could slow substantially
in September and also into the fourth quarter. Growth in M2 and M3
would also tend to slow, though perhaps not as markedly as M1, in the
fourth quarter. The probable dampening effect of these higher interest
rates on growth in money and income as the year progresses suggests the
likelihood that attaining longer-run money and credit targets for 1984
would involve a substantial easing of interest rates later this year or
early next year from the alternative C levels.
Directive Language
Given below is a suggested operational paragraph for the directive,
with the numerical specifications adopted at the meeting on July 12-13 shown
in strike-through form.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
The Committee seeks in the short run to (increase slightly further
MAINTAIN/DECREASED SLIGHTLY) the existing degree of reserve restraint. The
action is expected to be associated with growth of M2 and M3 at annual rates
of about [DEL: 8-1/2] ____ and 8 ____ per cent respectively from June to September,
consistent with the targets established for these aggregates for the year.
Depending on evidence about the strength of economic recovery and other
factors bearing on the business and inflation outlook, lesser restraint
would be acceptable in the context of a significant shortfall in growth of
the aggregates from current expectations, while somewhat greater restraint
would be acceptable should the aggregates expand more rapidly. The Committee
anticipates that a deceleration in M1 growth to an annual rate of around
[DEL: 7] ____ per cent from June to September will be consistent with its third-
quarter objectives for the broader aggregates, and that expansion in total
domestic nonfinancial debt would remain within the ranges established for
the year. The Chairman may call for Comittee consultation if it appears
to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives
and related reserve paths during the period before the next meeting is likely
to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of
[DEL: 6 to 10] ____ TO ____ per cent.
