Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
May 18, 1984
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemBy the staff
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 18, 1984
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) The average level of M1 was the same in April as it was in
March, but data thus far available for the first part of May show a con-
siderable pick-up, bringing the increase since March roughly in line with
the 6-1/2 percent annual rate growth path sought by the Committee for the
March to June period. The failure of M1 to expand in April probably re-
flected in part the inability of seasonal adjustment factors so far fully
to catch up with the effects on money holdings around the mid-April tax date
of recent shifts to alternative payment instruments and expanded flows into
IRAs. The slowing in M1 in April was concentrated in its other checkable
deposits component; growth in currency and demand deposits was at about a
(2) Despite the weakness in M1, expansion in M2 strengthened
to a 7-1/4 percent rate in April, only slightly below the 8 percent rate
specified by the Committee for March to June, as growth in the nontrans-
actions component of this aggregate accelerated markedly from its unusually
slow March pace. Growth of M2 appears to be strengthening somewhat further
this month.
(3) While M1 and M2 thus far appear to be running at rates
close to the Committee's short-run paths, M3 is expanding at a pace well
above its 8-1/2 percent March-to-June growth path. M3 accelerated to a
any, slowing from this pace thus far in May. The non-M2 components of
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV to
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. Apr.
Money and Credit Aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt1
Reserve Measures 2
Nonborrowed reserves 3
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
this aggregate have expanded quite rapidly, as both banks and thrifts
continued to rely heavily on large time deposits and term RPs to fund
credit extensions.
(3) The growth of domestic nonfinancial debt is estimated to
have accelerated in April to a 15 percent annual rate (preliminary esti-
mate) from the 12-1/4 percent pace of the first quarter. The pick-up was
attributable entirely to a faster pace of borrowing by the federal govern-
ment. Borrowing by the nonfederal sector also was rapid--at 11-1/2 per-
cent--with merger finance contributing very little to this expansion.
Business firms stepped up bond offerings in April as expectations of
near-term declines in bond rates apparently dissipated, but stock issuance
slid further with the weakness in stock prices. Although business borrow-
ing from banks slowed sharply in April, commercial paper issuance picked
up further. In the household sector, growth in consumer credit was at a
generally strong in April; mortgage borrowing also appears to have remained
(4) The level of total reserves showed little net change in
April, as a further decline in excess reserves offset continuing increases
in required reserves. With total reserves flat and borrowing rising on
average by about $265 million from March to April, nonborrowed reserves
declined at a 9 percent annual rate in April. In the three complete
reserve maintenance periods since the March FOMC meeting, adjustment plus
seasonal borrowing averaged just under $1.2 billion, declining from
almost $1.3 billion immediately following the meeting to $1 billion in
the most recent two-week period. Borrowing at the discount window thus
far in the current two-week statement period has increased considerably
because of advances to one large bank as a result of large deposit drains
caused by market uncertainties about the bank's underlying condition.
Credit advanced to this institution averaged about $3.8 billion through
the first eight days of the period, while adjustment and seasonal credit
to other institutions averaged around $850 million. The provision of
nonborrowed reserves has been reduced to offset reserves being provided
through this exceptional borrowing.
(5) The federal funds rate has risen from an average of around
count rate to 9 percent in the first week of April. Most other interest
rates have increased even more sharply since the last FOMC meeting, as
market participants have reacted with mounting concern to the strength of
economic activity and private credit demands and the lack of progress in
reducing federal deficits. Widely publicized losses by an insurance
broker, the failure of a small government securities dealer, persistent
rumors that a major bank was in serious financial difficulty, and various
statements by high officials also contributed to a somewhat heightened
sense of anxiety and unusually volatile conditions in credit markets,
particularly during the period surrounding the Treasury's large mid-quarter
refunding. In general, market interest rates--both short- and long-term--
have risen 1/2 to 1-1/4 percentage points over the intermeeting period.
The commercial bank prime rate was boosted twice, by a total of one
percentage point, to 12-1/2 percent. Treasury bill yields have advanced
by less than private short-term market yields, reflecting concerns about
credit quality, as well as a substantial temporary reduction in the out-
standing amount of bills because of the debt ceiling constraint. The
spread of CD over Treasury bill rates (3 month bill at an investment
yield) rose from about 5/8 of a percentage point in late April and early
May to a high of near 1-1/2 points a few days ago, before declining
prior to the announcement by bank regulatory agencies of a comprehensive
financial assistance program for Continental Illinois Bank. There was
little initial reaction in markets to that announcement, and the current
spread appears to be around 1 to 1-1/4 percentage points.
(6) The dollar has appreciated relatively steadily over most
of the period since the last FOMC meeting, to a level currently just one
percent below its peak for the floating rate period, reached in January.
On a weighted-average basis, the dollar has risen 5-1/4 percent since the
March FOMC. An increase in dollar interest rates relative to foreign
rates--together with industrial unrest in Europe, especially Germany, and
conflict in the Persian Gulf--apparently have contributed to the dollar's
Prospective developments
(7) The upper panel of the table below shows alternative
specifications for the monetary aggregates for the March-to-June period,
along with the specifications for this period chosen by the Committee at
its March meeting. Differences among the alternatives are fairly small,
given the relatively short time remaining in the second quarter follow-
ing the meeting; somewhat greater contrast can be seen in the lower panel,
which gives the implied growth from April to June for each alternative
and for attainment of the Committee's current short-run paths, given
actual growth in April. The middle panel of the table shows associated
federal funds rate ranges. (More detailed data can be found on the
charts and table on the following pages.)
Memo:
Adopted
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C in March
Growth from March
to June
Implied growth from
April to June
(8) The specifications of alternative B, which are expected
to be consistent with little, if any, change from the current degree of
pressure on bank reserve positions, call for growth in M1 and M2 at
rates chosen by the Committee in March. With regard to M1, this implies
a substantial rebound in growth during May and June, partly as seasonal
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2 M3
----------------------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
factor "errors" average out, but more basically reflecting underlying
demands for cash balances over the quarter as a whole from growth of
income and spending. M2 appears to be in process of expanding in
somewhat closer alignment to growth of income, following the unusual
increases in velocity in the second half of the last year and in the
first quarter. M2 velocity would still be expected to increase during
the second quarter, but at about a 2 percent annual rate, a slower pace
than it averaged over the previous three quarters. On the other hand,
M1 velocity would be expected again to increase relatively rapidly-at
around a 3-3/4 percent annual rate in the second quarter, given the
staff's GNP projection. This outlook for velocity of M1 and M2 assumes
that there is no significant increase in precautionary demands for
liquidity from uncertainties about the economic and financial outlook
that might conceivably arise from the recent problems in financial
(9) In contrast to behavior of M1 and M2, M3 over May and
June can be expected to grow above the Committee's short-run path and
also to remain above its longer-run range. Depository institutions
are likely to seek substantial amounts of funds through managed liabil-
ities. However, the rate of increase in these borrowings is expected
to diminish, partly as credit demands on institutions, though remaining
generally strong, moderate a bit from the first quarter pace. Moreover,
if the current sizable spread of CD rates over bill rates is sustained
over the next several weeks, M3 growth might be held down as depository
institutions shied away from CD issuance and became more cautious
lenders--unless they were readily able to attract an enlarged volume of
retail deposits.
(10) Total debt of nonfinancial sectors is projected to
increase in May and June at rates above the upper end of the Committee's
range, bringing growth for the first half of the year to around 12-1/2
percent at an annual rate. The federal government will remain a relatively
heavy borrower in May and June, and growth in the debt of non-federal
sectors is expected to continue brisk. Business credit demands will be
strengthening as the growth of internal funds fails to match the rise
in investment spending. The increase in household indebtedness--though
still quite substantial--is projected to moderate a bit as rising
interest rates damp demands for mortgage and consumer credit.
(11) The specifications of alternative B are expected to be
consistent with borrowing from the discount window continuing at about
$1 billion (apart from any special borrowing related to the Continental
situation), and with growth in nonborrowed and total reserves at annual
rates of 8-1/2 and 5 percent, respectively, over May and June. This
would likely be associated with a federal funds rate averaging 10-1/2
percent. Federal funds may continue to trade in a fairly wide range
around this level, reflecting in part the greater scope for expectational
and other influences in the two-week maintenance period. In addition,
banks might manage their reserve positions more cautiously (holding more
excess reserves or seeking to conserve borrowing access at the discount
window) should the banking environment become uncertain in the aftermath
of the Continental package, thereby placing upward pressure on the
funds rate unless compensating adjustments are made to reserve paths.
(12) Interest rates generally may well continue to fluctuate
around current levels under alternative B, but credit markets are in a
highly sensitive state. The behavior of quality spreads will depend in
part on the extent to which concerns about banks are allayed by the
Continental package. Long-term interest rates have been extremely
volatile recently, and they will no doubt continue to be sensitive to
incoming economic data, statements by officials, and the outlook for the
budget. Nonetheless, the severity of the decline in bond prices in
recent weeks suggests that this market--where yields have risen as much
or more than short-term rates--could have overadjusted, and, if short
rates do not rise further, some decline in long-term rates could develop.
However, even if bond rates fell, mortgage rates probably would continue
to move higher in lagged response to previous increases in market
interest rates and to emerging earnings pressures on thrift lenders.
(13) The specifications of alternative A contemplate some
easing of pressures on bank reserve positions over the coming inter-
meeting period consistent with somewhat faster growth of the aggregates
than under alternative B. M1 and M2 would be expected to grow a little
faster than the pace chosen by the Committee in March. Borrowing might
fall to around $600 to $750 million and the federal funds rate drop to
an average of around 9-3/4 to 10 percent under this alternative.
Nonborrowed reserves would be expected to increase at around a 15
percent annual rate.
(14) A considerable near-term rally would probably develop in
financial markets in response to the easing of money market conditions.
The Treasury bill rate would be likely to drop into the 9-1/4 to 9-1/2
percent area, and bond yields would also move downward. The size of the
decline in long rates might well be limited by larger corporate bond
offerings and by expectations that the lower level of money market rates
could not be sustained with economic activity still expanding rapidly and
credit growth strong relative to the Federal Reserve's range. M1 would be
in the middle of the upper half of its range by June under this alter-
native, but demand for this, and other, aggregates would be boosted in
the third quarter by the lower level of short-term interest rates that
developed as well as by a perhaps somewhat more robust expansion of economic
activity than now implied in the staff forecasts. Thus, alternative A
increases the odds that renewed tightening of money market conditions
might be necessary later in the year if the Committee wishes to hold M1
and M2 close to the midpoints of their ranges and M3 and credit to near
the upper ends of their ranges.
(15) Alternative C involves restraining growth of M1 and M2 to
rates below current FOMC short-run objectives and sets in train forces
that would work to bring M3 and credit growth back toward their longer-
run ranges. Discount window borrowing might rise toward $1-1/2 billion
under alternative C, which probably would be associated with federal
funds trading consistently somewhat above 11 percent. Nonborrowed
reserves would be expected to contract slightly on average in May and
(16) Interest rates might well rise substantially further
under this alternative, especially in an environment in which markets
were still particularly sensitive to problems of the banking system.
Private rates might rise distinctly more than Treasury rates, as quality
concerns intensify, reflecting at least in part greater worries about
the willingness of developing countries to service their debt. CD rates
could rise another percentage point or so, exerting similar upward
pressure on the prime rate. Although the higher interest rates would
have only small effects on money growth in the current quarter, such a
rise would tend to hold down growth in money, credit, and income over
the summer, thus tending to raise the odds on a decline of interest
rates later this year. The dollar would probably rise considerably
further in the near term on exchange markets as interest rates rose,
though it could be expected to decline later in response to fundamental
balance of payments forces.
Directive language
(17) Proposed language for the operational paragraph of the
directive is shown below. The bracketed phrase referring to "unusual
financial strains" is suggested should the Committee wish to give explicit
recognition, in the aftermath of the Continental package and recent market
turbulence, to the possibility that operations may need to be modified, at
least temporarily, in face of unusual financial developments.
In the short run, [WHILE TAKING ACCOUNT OF ANY UNUSUAL
FINANCIAL STRAINS,] the Committee seeks to /maintain [EXISTING /
INCREASE SOMEWHAT/DECREASE SOMEWHAT/ pressures on bank reserve
positions, [DEL: judged to be] consistent with growth in M1, M2, and
M3 at annual rates of around [DEL: 6-1/2] ____, [DEL: 8] ____, and [DEL: 8-1/2] ____
percent, respectively, during the period from March to June.
Greater reserve restraint would be acceptable in the event of
more substantial growth of the monetary aggregates, while some-
what lesser restraint might be acceptable if growth of the
monetary aggregates slowed significantly; in either case, such
a change would be considered in the context of appraisals of the
continuing strength of the business expansion, inflationary
pressures, and the rate of credit growth. The Chairman may
call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives and
related reserve paths during the period before the next meeting
is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently
outside a range of [DEL: 7-1//2 to 11-1/2] ____ TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent May 21, 1984
Short-Term LongtTrm
Trwry b CDo comm. o bank U.8. govnmment conmt corporate muni. honme mogI n e miondery - market piNnA
POW H eaprimem maturDiy yids m A utility cipal conn- V NMAkma h nd m I- - mutual recently B d lionll FHA lyu
1SnOnMft SItWh 1r Snanth f
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
of contrat nt t ratem on new commtlnmnts for conveWtlonul first mortgagM wli O0 percent loen-lO-vlue rate home mortogage having rate and paymet adjustmenls once a yor.
FR1367(44)
Security Dealer Positions
Millions of dollars
May 21, 1984
C-h Poshions 2 Forward and utures Poeltlone
o T y oupon Treaury coupons
d M Tm I er under- over fedald privte Tremuy I undr over lederel private
NOE Govermment ecuritie dealer cash polltons conist of sncurttie aready dliered, com.
mltmnts to buy (ell) securtiles on an outright best or tmmiate delivery (6 business dJay or le).
and certain "when-eisued" securtlles for delayed delivery (mor than 5 business days). Futures and for-
ward poaltione Include all other commntments Involving delayed delivery; future contracts are arrang-
ed on organled exchange.
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FF)
CLASS II-FOMC
MAY 21, 1984
Treurr Trsury coupons net purcMhases Federal agencies net purchae
4  Nt change
I-year I t l -yhr otl e
IUL-NAT 17
- - -300 - -300
- -300
- -
- -
I Cha frm a-of-wod to end-of-peod. 5 In addition to nthe pur chass of scurities, ai reflects chamges In System holdings of bankers'2 Outright trancto in market and with feign accounts, and rdemptio (-) In bill auctions. accptnces, direct Treaury borrowing from the System and redemptions (-) of agency and Tre-3 Outright tntlons in marke and with foreign aounts. nd short-ten notes acquired In ex- sury coupon issues.
change fr maturing bll Excludes redemptio, maturity hifts, rollovers of maturing coupon Includes changes In RPs (+). matched sale-purchae transactions (-), and matched purchaealeI ria. tn direct Trnsy bonrowing from the System. trnmsctons (-).p4 Ou tright tramtjom In markt and wMth foren accounte o. Excludes redermprkn and mtufty
shifts.
