Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
September 28, 1984
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) September 28, 1984
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) Preliminary data for September suggest a moderate rebound
in M1 to an annual growth rate of perhaps 7 percent after being about
unchanged on average in the previous two months, but growth of this
aggregate for the June-to-September period remains well below the path
of 5 percent or slightly less specified at the last Committee meeting.
The estimated level of M1 for September is at the center of its longer-
run target range. On a quarterly average basis M1 increased at about a
dictions of our quarterly model, given actual income (which turned out
to be lower than assumed at the time of the last FOMC meeting) and
interest rates.
(2) Growth of M2 also appears to have strengthened in September,
after expanding at a sluggish pace over the previous two months. For the
June-to-September period, M2 expanded at almost a 6 percent annual rate,
well below the 7-1/2 percent objective for that period set by the Committee,
and drifted further below the midpoint of its longer-run range. Growth of
M3 over the summer slowed to a 7 percent rate, also considerably below
Committee expectations. Growth of large CDs outstanding at banks and thrift
institutions alike has weakened appreciably since July, owing partly to
diminished credit demands on depository institutions and to actual or
potential difficulties in CD markets. In particular, a large amount of
CDs ran off at the thrift subsidiary of FCA. A sharp runup in government
deposits also reduced needs at commercial banks for issuance of large CDs
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
June to QIV to
July Aug. Sept.pe Sept.pe Sept.pe
Money and Credit Aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve Measures 1
Nonborrowed reserves 2
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
and other managed liabilities to fund credit growth. By September, M3
had fallen from a level well over its longer-run target range for the
year to a point close to the upper limit.
(4) Expansion of private credit demands is estimated to have
eased a bit in July and August from the rapid pace of earlier in the year,
but this was offset by a surge in federal debt-boosting growth in total
domestic nonfinancial debt to a 13-1/4 percent average annual rate in July
and August. In private credit markets, the pace of mortgage and consumer
borrowing diminished somewhat, and merger financing abated. However,
business borrowing remained relatively strong as the financing gap widened.
Fragmentary data for September suggest no pickup in private credit flows
and a substantial reduction in the pace of federal borrowing. Neverthe-
less, growth in total debt through the third quarter remains about one-half
percentage point above its monitoring range for 1984, after subtracting
an estimate for merger-related financing.
(5) Given the continuing shortfall in money growth relative to
the Committee's objectives., against the background of data indicating a
slowing in the pace of economic expansion in the third quarter, the Desk
aimed at a somewhat more ample provision of nonborrowed reserves than
would otherwise have been the case, with reserve paths assuming a gradually
lower level of borrowing, most recently $750 million, rather than the $1
billion initially employed. Borrowing at the discount window during the
two reserve maintenance periods ending in September in fact averaged about
$750 million. Over the three month June-to-September period, nonborrowed
reserves plus extended credit expanded by about 1-3/4 percent at an
annual rate, while total reserves contracted by about one percent.
(6) The easing in bank reserve positions has been reflected
in a decline of the federal funds rate from the 11-1/2 to 11-3/4 percent
area prevailing immediately following the August FOMC meeting to the
area of 11 percent in the most recent reserve maintenance period, with
trading on some recent days below 11 percent. It is possible that the
extent of decline in the funds rate also has reflected some waning in the
reluctance of institutions to borrow at the window or to lend in the
funds market as perceptions about the condition of banks have improved.
Rates on private money market obligations generally have declined about
over Treasury bill rates have continued to narrow. The 3-month CD rate
was recently quoted just under 11 percent; most major banks have lowered
their prime rate to 12-3/4 percent. Treasury and corporate bond yields
have declined 5 to 25 basis points further, bringing net declines in bond
yields since their highs in late June to almost 1-1/2 percentage points.
(7) Conditions in exchange markets have been quite volatile
over much of the period since the last FOMC meeting. Despite some easing
in U.S. money market conditions, the dollar rose sharply and by September 20
was up by 7 percent. Among the not altogether convincing reasons for the
dollar's strength advanced by market participants have been factors
weakening the mark in particular--including downward revisions in expecta-
tions for economic activity in Germany--the prospect for redenomination
of some of Mexico's debt, and apparent lack of concern by official
authorities as the dollar continued to rise beyond expectations. On
Friday, September 21, the dollar spiked a further two percent, but then
dipped upon release of a higher-than-expected CPI figure. The Bundesbank
then surprised the market with very large and visible intervention and the
dollar plunged 4 percent by the following Monday morning. The dollar has
since recovered somewhat and is currently 5-1/2 percent above its value
prior to the last FOMC meeting.
. ntervention by the
U.S. over this period totaled $185 million in sales of dollars against marks.
Prospective developments
(8) The table below provides three alternative specifications for
growth in the monetary aggregates for the period from September to December,
with associated federal funds rate ranges. (More detailed data, including
implied growth for the QIV 1983 to QIV 1984 period, can be found in the table
and charts on the following pages.) Alternative B--which is expected to
involve continuation of roughly the current degree of pressure on bank
reserve positions--calls for growth in M1 that would keep this aggregate
at the midpoint of the Ccmmittee's long-run range, with M2 moving a
little higher in its range, though remaining below the midpoint, and M3
continuing near the upper end of its range. Alternative A calls for
somewhat faster money growth over the September-to-December period,
consistent with an easing in reserve pressures, while alternative C
contemplates somewhat slower money growth, associated with tighter reserve
conditions. Given the proximity of the end of the year, under all the
alternatives growth in M1 for the year would not be far from the 6 per-
cent midpoint of the Committee's long-run range, M2 would be expected to
remain around 7 percent--in the lower half of its long-run range-and M3
growth would stay close to the 9 percent upper end of its long-run range.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from
September to
December
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Monthly Levels-- ---- ---- -- - - --------
Growth Rates
Monthly
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
(9) All the alternatives specify more rapid M1 growth over
the next three months relative to its sluggish behavior over the June-to-
September period. Transactions demands are expected to strengthen in
association with the projected pickup in nominal GNP growth in the
fourth quarter, while the dampening effects on money demand of earlier
increases in short-term interest rates should diminish over the quarter
and begin to be reversed by the recent moderate declines in short rates.
On a quarterly average basis, M1 in the fourth quarter would increase at
a 5-3/4 percent annual rate under alternative B, implying an increase in
velocity of around 2-3/4 percent, given the staff's GNP forecast.
(10) Alternative B, and the other alternatives as well, also
call for somewhat more rapid growth of M2 over the September-to-December
period than in the summer. Spurred by faster income growth and a more
favorable alignment of rates on deposits relative to rates on market
instruments, the nontransactions component, along with M1, is expected to
contribute to the pickup in M2 expansion in the fourth quarter. M3
growth also is expected to quicken. Despite slower credit expansion at
thrifts projected for the fourth quarter, the recent weakness in thrift
CDs and associated rapid rise in FHLB advances is unlikely to continue,
assuming the condition of FCA stabilizes and repercussions on the access
of other thrifts to wholesale money markets remain minor. Commercial
bank CD issuance is likely to pick up as Treasury deposits decline.
(11) Growth in debt of nonfinancial sectors is projected to
moderate over the fourth quarter to around a 10-1/2 percent annual rate,
reflecting mainly a slowing in borrowing by private sectors. Households'
mortgage and consumer credit usage is expected to weaken a bit further.
The financing gap of business is not expected to widen further in the
fourth quarter, and total borrowing by businesses may decrease if merger
and related activity continues to moderate as expected. Despite the
slowing of credit growth over coming months, for 1984 the debt of non-
financial sectors is projected to increase around 12-1/2 percent, compared
to the Committee's range of 8 to 11 percent, with about one percentage
point of this total attributable to credit associated with merger and
related activity.
(12) The specifications of alternative B assume borrowing at
the discount window remains around the recent $750 million level. This
degree of pressure on reserve positions is likely to involve federal
funds trading in the neighborhood of 11 percent, with trading on the low
side more likely if rates on alternative sources of funds, such as CDs,
remain relatively low, and if a calmer atmosphere in money markets encour-
ages banks to tap these sources more aggressively and to be less reticent
about use of the discount window. Nonborrowed and total reserves would
each increase at close to a one percent rate over October and November.
(13) With federal funds averaging close to 11 percent, other
interest rates are likely to fluctuate around current levels. Rates in
short-term markets already appear to have adjusted to federal funds
trading in that area, and 3-month Treasury bill rates should remain
around 10-1/4 percent, with slightly lower rates developing should funds
trade persistently below 11 percent. Further improvement, if any, in
long-term markets is expected to be quite limited, given the anticipated
strengthening of incoming economic data and the expectation that M1
growth will not fall well below the midpoint of its long-run range.
Moreover, during the intermeeting period, note and bond markets will have
to absorb a very substantial volume of Treasury issues-including both
the large end-of-quarter note and bond auctions that had to be postponed
from late September due to debt ceiling constraints, and the regular
mid-quarter .refunding scheduled for the first week of November.
(14) The somewhat more rapid money growth specifications of
alternative A would be expected to involve a further reduction in
pressures on bank reserve positions, with discount window borrowing
declining to around $500 million. Nonborrowed reserves would increase at
about a 6 percent annual rate over October and November. The federal
funds rate would drop to 10-1/4 to 10-1/2 percent, or possibly a little
lower if the pattern of discount window borrowing evident before last May
(15) Such an easing in bank reserve positions, which is not
now expected by market participants, would probably set off a considerable
rally in short- and longer-term markets. The Treasury bill rate might
decline into the 9-1/2 percent area, and CD rates would drop to around
Yields on long-term Treasury bonds might decrease initially by at least
markets might be underway. A portion of the gains in bond markets could
later be reversed, however, should incoming data on the economy and money
and credit show strength, and as bond issuance by corporations and state
and local governments rises further. The dollar would tend to decline on
foreign exchange markets, although any declines might be limited should
market participants anticipate a subsequent firming of interest rates.
(16) Alternative C, which involves some tightening of money
market conditions over the intermeeting period, would be expected to
restrain M1 growth over the balance of the year to a rate below the
midpoint of its long-run range and to exert particular restraint on
credit growth. Borrowing at the discount window under this alternative
would return to around the $1 billion level prevailing over most of the
spring and summer, with nonborrowed reserves declining by around 4 per-
cent over October and November. The federal funds rate would be expected
to return to the 11-1/2 to 11-3/4 percent area, or possibly a bit higher.
The Treasury bill rate would rise to around 10-3/4 percent, CD rates
would increase by 1/2 percentage point or perhaps more, and the dollar
would probably rise, at least for a while, on foreign exchange markets.
With upward pressures reemerging in short-term markets, longer-term
yields can be expected to retrace some of the declines since early summer,
leading to further reductions in demands for mortgage credit as well as
to shifts in borrowing by businesses back toward short-term markets--and
also possibly to reconsideration of over-all borrowing and spending
Directive language
(17) Proposed language for the operational paragraph, with
alternatives, is shown below.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy in the short run, the Committee
seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (ALT. A)/ maintain (ALT. B)/ INCREASE SOMEWHAT
(ALT. C) existing pressures on reserve positions. This action is expected
to be consistent with growth in M1, [DEL: at an annual rate of around 5 percent
or slightly less, and in] M2, and M3 at annual rates of around [DEL: 7-1/2 and 9]
____, ____, AND ____ percent respectively during the period from [DEL: June to]
September TO DECEMBER. Somewhat greater reserve restraint would be accept-
able in the event of more substantial growth of the monetary aggregates,
while somewhat lesser restraint would be acceptable in the event of signifi-
cantly slower growth. In either case, such a change would be considered
only in the context of appraisals of the continuing strength of the busi-
ness expansion, inflationary pressures, financial market conditions, and
the rate of credit growth. The Chairman may call for Ccmmittee consulta-
tion if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of
the monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the period before
the next meeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate
persistently outside a range of [DEL: 8 to 12] ____ TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
October 1, 1984
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
August I
8
Security Dealer Positions
Millions of dollars October 1, 1984
Cash Positionso Forward and Future PoelUton
P.erod Treasury coupon TrMiu coupons
eriod t Treasury under over federal privte Tresury under over federal pitwo
Total bills year 1 year agency short-term bills 1 ye 1 year Iaency Ihort4
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
July
Aug.
and certain "when-Issued" securities for delayed delivery (more than 5 business days). Futures end for-
ward positions include all other commitments Involving delayed delivery; futures contracts are arrang-
ed on organized exchanges.
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
October 1, 1984
Treasury Treasury coupons net purchases 3  Federal agencies net purchases 4  Net change_
Period bills net outright Net RPs
JULY 4 - - - - - - -- -- -- -- -- -- 904
change for maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturty shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon
issues, and direct Treasury borrowing from the System.
FR 1368 (781)
