Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
March 23, 1984
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC March 23, 1984
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) M1 expanded at an average annual rate of about 6-1/2 per-
cent during February and March, based on preliminary estimates for March.
For the December-to-March period M1 growth is estimated at around 8 per-
cent, above the 7 percent rate of expansion specified by the Committee
and placing this aggregate in March in the upper half of its long-run
target range. The pickup in M1 growth in the first quarter fell short
of the strengthening in GNP expansion, implying about a 5 percent in-
crease, at an annual rate, in M1 velocity, some 3 percentage points faster
than in the second half of last year.
(2) M2 grew at about 8-1/2 and 5 percent annual rates in
February and March, respectively, bringing growth from December to March
to an estimated 6-1/2 percent annual rate-somewhat below the 8 percent
path specified by the Committee--and leaving M2 in March in the lower
half of its long-run 6 to 9 percent range. The more liquid components
of M2 have grown relatively rapidly in early 1984, but small time deposit
expansion has slowed sharply; this deceleration may partly reflect shifts
of deposits to IRA and Keogh balances, which are not included in the
aggregates; such shifts may not yet be fully reflected in the M2 seasonal
factors. With the relatively slow growth of M2 early this year, its
velocity is estimated to have increased at an unusually rapid annual rate
of around 5-1/2 percent in the first quarter.
(3) M3 expanded at an estimated 9-1/2 percent average annual
rate during February and March, and growth of this aggregate since
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Dec. to QIV to
Jan. Feb. Mar.e Mar.e Mar.e
Money and Credit Aggregates
Reserve Measures1
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
December is estimated at 8-1/2 percent, somewhat above the rate sought
by the FOMC. M3 in March is at the upper end of its long-run range.
Issuance of large time deposits by both banks and thrifts picked up in
the first quarter reflecting strong credit growth at these institutions;
net inflows of funds to U.S. banks from their overseas offices were
relatively small through the first two months of the year.
(4) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors increased at an
average annual rate of 12-3/4 percent in January and February (as esti-
mated from latest available data), up from around a 10-3/4 percent pace
in the fourth quarter as federal government borrowing surged (with an
associated large build-up in Treasury cash balances). Nonfederal debt
expanded, on average, at about a 10 percent rate, close to the pace of
the fourth quarter, as business firms have stepped up both short- and
long-term borrowings and credit demands to finance housing and consumer
durables have remained strong. In February, growth in nonfederal debt
is estimated to have been boosted by nearly a percentage point by borrow-
ing associated with the Texaco-Getty merger. Nonetheless, even after
allowance for borrowing related to the merger, debt of domestic nonfinan-
cial sectors appears to be running above the FOMC's 8 to 11 percent band
set for 1984.
(5) A somewhat more cautious approach to reserve management
by depository institutions has been evident in the period following the
advent of contemporaneous reserve requirements. Excess reserves were
very high in the first full maintenance period under CRR, when the final
phasedown to lower reserve requirements also occurred, but they have
since dropped toward average levels prevailing prior to CRR. Moreover,
at least until recently, depository institutions also appeared to have
been somewhat more reluctant to turn to the discount window particularly
over the first part of the two-week reserve period. The nonborrowed
reserve paths during the intermeeting period were constructed assuming
$650 million of borrowing at the discount window. Through mid-March
borrowing averaged around $600 million, but has risen to about $1 bil-
lion in the first part of the current reserve maintenance period, as
large banks appeared to show somewhat more willingness to borrow early
in a period, perhaps reflecting the tendency for federal funds to trade
at somewhat higher rates than previously. Owing to the high volume of
excess reserves in February, and to strength in required reserves
accompanying growth in transaction deposits, total and nonborrowed
reserves expanded rapidly in February, but appear to be decreasing in
March as excess reserves have declined.
(6) Market interest rates have moved sharply higher over the
intermeeting period, generally by about 3/4 to 1 percentage point in
both short- and long-term sectors, in light of incoming data indicating
strong economic expansion and credit demands, little concrete evidence
that federal deficits will be substantially reduced, and growing expec-
tation of a tightening in monetary policy. Federal funds traded in a
However, most recently, they have tended to trade around 10 percent or
over, partly in reflection of mid-March tax date pressures but also
partly in anticipation of monetary policy adjustments. With business
loan demand strong and CD rates up around 3/4 of a point over the past
six weeks, the prime rate was increased from 11 to 11-1/2 percent.
Broad stock price indexes have declined 3 to 7 percent since the January
FOMC meeting, and are down 9 to 25 percent compared with record highs
set over the past year.
(7) After dropping by 7 percent from the end of January
through early March, the weighted average exchange value of the dollar
has rebounded by 3 percent in recent weeks. Factors contributing to
the dollar's decline included an improved outlook for the German and
other European economies, some concern over a possible rise in U.S.
inflation in the face of stronger-than-expected growth in U.S. economic
activity, and questions about the sustainability of huge foreign capital
inflows to the United States at current exchange rates. Later in the
intermeeting period the dollar benefited from market participants'
perceptions that the Federal Reserve had or would soon begin to tighten
monetary policy to forestall a rekindling of inflation.
Prospective developments
(8) The upper panel of the table below shows alternative
specifications for the monetary aggregates for the March-to-June period.
The associated federal funds rate ranges are shown in the middle panel,
and the implied growth of money from the fourth quarter base period to
June in the lower panel. (More detailed data are given in the table
and charts on the following pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from March to June
Implied growth from
QIV to June
(9) The specifications of alternative B, which are those
considered most consistent with the staff's GNP outlook, call for some
slowing of M1 growth from the pace of the December-to-March period,
although this aggregate would remain above the midpoint of its longer-
run range in June. Growth of M2 would be expected to accelerate, how-
ever, placing this aggregate near the middle of its range by mid-year,
while M3 growth would continue near the upper end of its range. Given
the continuing strength of money and credit demands implicit in the
these specifications may involve some further firming of interest rates
over the intermeeting period and a relatively strong rise in velocity.
M1 velocity in the second quarter would probably expand at about a
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
to what is typical in the second year of a recovery. While M1 would
still be well in the upper part of its range by June, its expansion
would be expected to moderate further toward the middle of the range
over the second half of the year partly in lagged response to further
interest rate increases and also reflecting a slowdown in GNP growth.
(10) The expansion of M2 is expected to accelerate from its
unusually slow pace of recent months under alternative B--and the other
alternatives as well--after the extraordinary 5-1/2 percent rise in
its velocity in the first quarter. Even with the pickup in M2 growth
and slowing in the rate of increase in GNP, V2 would be expected to rise
at around a 2-1/2 percent annual rate in the second quarter, a little
less than its average increase over the past four quarters. There had
been a marked drop in M2 velocity during the recession, and also in early
may reflect some unwinding of balances that had been moved into M2 for
precautionary reasons or because of the initial attractiveness of MMDAs.
M3 under this alternative is not expected to slow much, if at all, from
its recent pace, with this aggregate remaining around the top of its
long-term range. While CD issuance at banks and thrifts may moderate
somewhat as growth of core deposits picks up, the need for the managed
liabilities in M3 should remain sizable given projected strength in
demands on these institutions for credit by households and businesses
(including additional financing that may be associated with merger
(11) Borrowing at the discount window of around $1 billion,
or perhaps a bit more, probably would be associated with the monetary
aggregate specifications of alternative B, and nonborrowed and total re-
serves could be expected to increase at annual rates of 3 and 6 percent,
respectively. Given the current discount rate, the federal funds rate
would probably be in the neighborhood of 10-1/2 percent, although it
could be even higher in the next several days around the quarter-ending
statement date and also around the mid-April tax date. While immediate
transitional adjustments to CRR seem to be behind us, it should be
lasting impact of CRR and the lengthening of the reserve period on bank
reserve management policies.
(12) The market has probably not entirely discounted the
degree of reserve restraint implied by alternative B, and interest rates
generally would be expected to increase somewhat further, with the Trea-
sury bill rate possibly moving up about 1/4 percentage point to around
discount rate. Longer-term market rates should also rise a little fur-
ther, particularly as the market absorbs the recently announced $15 bil-
lion package of Treasury coupon issues (to be auctioned in the week of
the FOMC meeting). The prime rate would again come under pressure as
the spread over 3-month CDs narrowed to less than one percentage point
after allowance for reserve requirements. With thrift institution
earnings deteriorating as rates rose, the spread of mortgage rates over
bond rates might begin to widen. The dollar may continue to hold its
recent gains, and perhaps even rise somewhat further, for a time, as
investors react not only to the higher returns on dollar assets but
also to the signal of determination to combat inflation. However,
over time the dollar is expected to resume declining in light of the
large and growing current account deficit.
(13) The debt of nonfinancial sectors is projected to grow
over the second quarter at close to the advanced pace of the first
quarter, remaining somewhat above the FOMC's longer-run range. Private
borrowing likely will continue robust, augmented to a degree by merger-
related financing, but reflecting as well strength in underlying credit
demands as the economy continues to expand. Businesses' financing gap
is projected to rise, as investment spending grows rapidly in the face
of moderating profit growth, but the amount of borrowing by this sector
may not increase if the accumulation of liquid assets slows as expected.
Growth in domestic nonfinancial debt for the year as a whole is current-
ly projected to be at, or slightly above, its 8 to 11 percent long-run
range, assuming a slowdown in debt formation over the second half of
the year as economic expansion slows.
(14) The specifications of alternative A contemplate more
rapid growth of the aggregates, with M1 coming closer to the upper limit
of its longer-run range by June and M2 moving above its midpoint. M3
would probably tend to remain around the upper limit of its long-run
range. The near-term growth rates of this alternative-8 and 8-3/4 per-
cent for M1 and M2 respectively over the March-to-June period--would
probably involve a little less pressure on reserve positions over the
intermeeting period than has been evident most recently.
(15) Borrowing at the discount window under alternative A
would be around $550 to $650 million, and nonborrowed reserves would
increase at about a 10 percent annual rate. The federal funds rate
would probably drop to around 9-3/4 percent. Other interest rates
also would be expected to decline from current levels, at least to the
degree that some of the recent rate increases may have anticipated
firmer monetary conditions than contemplated under this alternative.
The extent of any such rally could be quite limited, however, in the
absence of substantive progress in reducing the budget deficit and
evidence of a slowing in the pace of economic activity. Moreover, a
tendency for growth in the monetary aggregates to be relatively strong,
as is anticipated in this alternative, particularly for M1 and M3, would
probably lead to market expectations that any moderation in the degree
of pressure on bank reserve positions was not sustainable.
(16) The approach of alternative A would probably lead to
more rapid GNP growth over the spring and summer than in the staff's
current forecast. In such a case, this alternative increases the odds
that a substantial rise of interest rates later this year and into 1985
may be needed to keep money growth rates within their long-run target
bands and/or to forestall greater upward pressures than currently
projected on the average price level.
(17) Alternative C involves a more restrictive policy than
either A or B--slowing M1 growth, for example, over the March-to-June
period to about 5 percent at an annual rate, which would place it at
about the middle of its longer-run range by mid-year. M2 growth would
remain relatively restrained and this aggregate would stay in the lower
part of its long-run range. Discount window borrowing might rise to
around $1-1/2 billion over the intermeeting period, with nonborrowed
reserves falling at a 4 percent annual rate.
(18) The federal funds rate would probably rise to over 11
percent under this alternative, and other market interest rates would
be expected to advance sharply further. It is probable that growth in
economic activity would be more restrained as the year progresses than
in the current Greenbook forecast, and total domestic nonfinancial debt
would be more likely to grow within the Committee's long-run range for
that aggregate over the year. There would be less risk of an increase
in inflationary pressures under this approach, though at the same time
there would be greater risk of provoking an undesired weakening in de-
mand for goods and services. Thrift institutions would come under
substantial earnings pressures. Borrowers and creditors involved in
international lending would find their problems intensified as dollar
interest rates rose and the dollar remained under upward pressure in
exchange markets for a time. Given the degree of restraint on the
economy and on credit growth that may develop, interest rates could be-
gin to decline later in the year as needed to maintain monetary growth
around the mid-point of the long-run ranges and to sustain a reasonable
rate of economic growth.
Directive language
(19) Proposed language for the operational paragraphs of the
directive, with alternatives, is shown below. Two variants for the
first sentence are given. The first variant is based on the present
directive and presents alternative language with regard to instructions
concerning the degree of pressure on reserve positions--whether to "main-
tain", "increase somewhat", or simply "increase". Alternative A would be
consistent with language to "maintain" the existing degree of reserve
restraint (interpreted as borrowing averaging over time on the order of
$650 million). Alternatives B and C would be consistent with language
"to increase somewhat" or "to increase" reserve restraint, respectively.
Variant II differs from the first by focusing on the degree
of pressure on reserve positions that has recently emerged. Maintenance
of such pressure could be construed as consistent with the approach of
alternative B or an approach between A and B.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPHS
First Sentence: Variant I
In the short run, the Committee seeks to maintain /INCREASE
SOMEWHAT/INCREASE the existing degree of pressure on [DEL: bank] reserve positions,
anticipating that approach will be consistent with growth of M2 and M3
[DEL: each] at annual rates of about [DEL: 8] ____ percent and ____ PERCENT RESPECTIVELY
AND WITH GROWTH OF M1 at an annual rate of about [DEL: 7] ____ percent during
the period from [DEL: December to] March TO JUNE.
First Sentence: Variant II
In the short run, the Committee seeks to maintain the [DEL: exist-
ing] degree of pressure on [DEL: bank] reserve positions THAT HAS RECENTLY
EMERGED, anticipating that approach will be consistent with growth of
M2 and M3 [DEL: each] at annual rates of about [DEL: 8] ____ percent and ____ PERCENT
RESPECTIVELY AND WITH GROWTH OF M1 at an annual rate of about [DEL: 7] ____
percent during the period from [DEL: December to] March TO JUNE.
Remaining language for either alternative
[DEL: Growth in] Nonfinancial debt is expected to GROW AT A RATE [DEL: be within]
AROUND THE UPPER LIMIT OF the MONITORING range established for the
year. Lesser restraint would be acceptable in the context of a shortfall
in monetary and credit growth from current expectations, while somewhat
greater restraint might be acceptable with more rapid expansion of the
aggregates, both viewed in the context of the strength of the business
expansion and inflationary pressures. [Possible alternative: SOMEWHAT
GREATER OR LESSER RESTRAINT WOULD BE ACCEPTABLE IN THE EVENT OF A
SIGNIFICANT DEVIATION IN GROWTH OF THE MONETARY AGGREGATES FROM CURRENT
EXPECTATIONS, viewed in the context of the strength of the business
expansion and inflationary pressures.]
[DEL: implementing policy in the weeks ahead, the Manager was
instructed to take account of the uncertainties associated with the
introduction of the system of more contemperaneous reserve requirements,
particularly including the possibility that depository institutions,
during a transition period may desire to hold more excess reserves.]
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears
to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary
objectives and related reserve paths during the period before the next
meeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently
outside a range of [DEL: 6 to 10] ____ TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
n.a. 11.00
an average of contract interest rates on new commltments for conventional first mortgages with 80 percent loan-to-value ratios at a sample of savings and
loan associations on the Friday lollowing the end of the statement week. After November 30, 1983, column 15 refers only to VA-guaranteed loans. Column 16
is the initial gross yield posted by FNMA. on the Friday followinx the end of the uatement week, in its purchase program tor adjustable-rate home
mortgages having rate and payment adjustments once a year.
FR 1387 (1/82)
March 26, 1984
Security Dealer Positions
Millions of dollars
Casn -rosmlons -
Treasury coupon
Treasury under over
bills 1 year 1 year
Apr.
Hay
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
federal
agency
private
short-term
rorwara ana rutures roanlons
S TreasMury coupons
Treasury under over
bills 1 year 1 year
federal private
agency slort-term
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
March 26, 1984
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Feb. 1
Mar. 7
LEVEL--Mar. 22
Treasury
bills net
change
Treasury coupons net purchases
3 Federal agencies net purchases 4
---- -300
Net change
outright Net RPs
holdings
-. 7
change for maturing bills. Exclude redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon 6 Includes changes in RPt (+), matched sale-purchase transactions (-), and matched purchase-sale
issues, nd dirensc Treasury borrowing from the System. transactions 1+).4 Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts only. Excludes redemptions and maturity
shifts
