Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
November 1, 1985
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemBy the staff
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) November 1, 1985
CLASS I - FCMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Averaging through unusually volatile week-to-week fluctuations,
M1 was about unchanged in October, following growth of 11-1/2 percent (annual
rate) in September. Even so, M1 by October had grown about 11-3/4 percent
at an annual rate from its second-quarter base, well above the upper bound of
its 3 to 8 percent longer-run range. The effects of Hurricane Gloria may have
added 2 to 3 percentage points to M1 growth in September and lowered M1
growth by a corresponding amount in October. It resulted in unscheduled
closings of businesses and banks in the New York and Boston districts on
Friday, September 27, and some depositors were unable to move funds out of
demand deposit accounts to make either disbursements or investments over the
weekend. Judging from the weekly pattern, NOW accounts do not appear to have
been similarly affected; this component slowed further in October from an
already reduced September pace. Some of the apparent weakness of M1 in
October also may reflect a changing seasonal pattern for transactions de-
posits not yet captured in the official seasonal factors. M1 also was very
weak in October 1984, and both the Board's experimental and concurrent
seasonal adjustment methods show about 2 to 3 percentage points greater
growth in October of this year than the official series.
(2) M2 and M3 in October both grew substantially more slowly than
the 6 to 7 percent rate established by the Committee for the September-to-
December period, owing to a moderation of their nontransactions components as
well as weak M1. Among the core deposit components of M2, inflows to MMDAs and
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV to
July Aug. Sept. Oct.pe Oct.pe
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures 2
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
pe--preliminary estimate.
NOTE: Monthly reserves measures, including excess reserves and borrowing, are
calculated by prorating averages for 2-week reserves maintenance periods
that overlap months.
savings deposits were, like NOW accounts, much lower in September and
October compared with the preceding months; less funds appeared to be shift-
ing into these accounts from small time deposits, whose rate of decline
moderated considerably. The non-M2 cmponent of M3 also slowed in October,
although issuance of large CDs remained very strong as commercial banks
compensated for a sharp decline in Treasury deposits. By October M2 had
moved a little below the upper end of its annual target range, while M3
remained around the middle of its long-run range.
(3) Growth of domestic nonfinancial debt has been affected by
offsetting, and in some cases transient, forces in the recent period. Trea-
sury cash borrowing has been delayed by the extended Congressional inaction
on the debt ceiling; an unprecedented disinvestment of trust funds permitted
a sizable financing to be paid on November 1 and 4, however. Very heavy tax-
exempt bond issuance has continued unabated, as interest rates have remained
favorable for advance refunding and fears of new tax law constraints after
year-end encouraged both refunding and private-purpose issuance. Based on
partial data, consumer credit appeared to surge in September, as auto sales
were sparked by special incentives at captive finance companies, but prelimi-
nary bank data for October suggest a moderating underlying trend. Mortgage
debt growth, on the other hand, appears to be continuing at the stronger pace
seen since spring. In the nonfinancial business sector, short-term credit
demands remain weak, but bond issuance picked up again in late October after
a dip in September. On balance, partial data suggest growth of total non-
financial sector debt of around 11 percent over the past two months. From
the fourth quarter of last year to October, debt is estimated to have risen
at a 12-1/2 percent annual rate, somewhat above the upper end of its annual
monitoring range.
(4) Growth of total reserves slowed in October to a 4-1/2 percent
pace in association with the marked deceleration in transactions accounts.
Nonborrowed reserves, however, rose somewhat more rapidly than total reserves
as discount window borrowing fell off following a temporary bulge at the end
of September. Subsequent to the FOMC meeting, the nonborrowed reserves path
was constructed with an allowance for $500 million of adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing, and over the intermeeting period borrowing has averaged very close
to this level, though fluctuating from week to week.
(5) The federal funds rate has varied around 8 percent over the
intermeeting period, a little higher than its average in September. With the
Treasury replenishing the supply of bills early in the intermeeting period,
short-term bill rates are about 10 to 20 basis points above their levels at
the time of the last FOMC meeting. Private short-term rates, on the other
hand, have declined somewhat on balance over the intermeeting period, and
yields on long-term bonds are down about 1/4 of a percentage point, helped by
favorable inflation news, weakness in some economic indicators, and latterly
by expectations of an easier stance of monetary policy. Continuing concerns
about the financial condition of the Federal Farm Credit System have resulted
in a moderate further widening of the spreads between Farm Credit and compar-
able-maturity Treasury securities over the intermeeting period; a 6-month
issue sold this week was trading at a premium of nearly 100 basis points over
Treasury securities, about 15 to 20 basis points more than on a similar issue
in late September.
(6) The trade-weighted average value of the dollar has declined
about 1-1/2 percent further on balance since the day of the last FOMC meeting,
for a total drop of 8 percent since the G-5 announcement on September 22.
The dollar's value held fairly firm over most of the intermeeting period
. Toward the end of the period,
the dollar eased further, especially relative to the yen, bringing its decline
against that currency to about 12-1/2 percent since the G-5 announcement. The
Bank of Japan announced that it would not accomodate year-end demands for
liquidity, whereupon interest rates on yen instruments rose sharply. The
Desk has sold $2.8 billion since the last meeting, $1.7 billion for marks and
$1.1 billion for yen. Desk activity since the G-5 announcement has totaled
sales of $3.2 billion, $1.8 billion for marks and $1.4 billion for yen,
divided equally between the accounts of the System and the Treasury.
Policy alternatives
(7) The table below gives three alternative specifications
for growth in the monetary aggregates from September to December and
associated federal funds rate ranges. (More detailed data can be found
on the charts and table on the following pages. The detailed table
includes growth rates implied by each alternative from October to December
and from the base of the long-term ranges to the fourth-quarter average.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from September
to December
(8) Under all three alternatives, M1 growth over November and
December would be expected to pick up following the flat October. Al-
though M1 expansion would be expected to remain considerably slower than
the pace of this summer, all of the alternatives would leave that aggre-
gate by year-end well above the Committee's long-run range of 3 to 8
percent. Given growth through October, M1 would have to decline at a
upper bound of the long-run range by December. While such an outcome is
possible, especially if the weakness in demand deposits in October were
the first stage of a reversal of last summer's unexpected bulge in these
deposits, it seems unlikely absent a very sharp tightening in money
market conditions. M2 and M3, however, are expected to remain within
their long-run ranges for the year under all three alternatives.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2 M3
------------------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
Growth Rates
(9) Alternative B contemplates maintenance of about the current
degree of pressure on reserve positions, indexed by discount window borrow-
ing of $450 to $550 million, with federal funds continuing to trade around
roughly a 4 percent annual rate over the last two months of the year. M1
under these conditions would probably increase at about an 8 percent annual
rate over November and December, bringing growth over the last three months
of the year to 5 percent and growth from the second quarter through December
to 11 percent.1 Demand deposits are projected to increase only slightly on
balance over the remainder of the year, while NOW account growth should
remain below the unusually rapid advance of the summer. On a quarterly
average basis, M1 would increase at a 7-1/4 percent annual rate in the
fourth quarter. Given the greenbook GNP forecast, this implies a further
drop in velocity, though at only about a one percent annual rate. This
behavior of velocity would still be a bit weaker than predicted by most
models of money demand, although the disparity would be considerably narrower
than in the third quarter.
(10) Growth of the broader aggregates under alternative B
would be at the lower end of, or somewhat below, the 6 to 7 percent annual
rate for September to December adopted at the previous meeting. M2 would
be expected to grow by 5-1/4 percent over the period, with its nontransac-
tions as well as M1 components picking up in November and December from
their relatively sluggish pace in October. Stronger expansion of core
deposits in the nontransactions component than in recent months is
anticipated, partly in association with somewhat greater household saving
in the fourth quarter. M3 would be expected to increase at a 6 percent
annual rate from September to December. Issuance of the managed liabili-
ties in M3 over the balance of the year should decline from the rapid
pace in September and October, as asset expansion at banks remains fairly
moderate and Treasury deposits rebound once the debt ceiling is lifted.
For the year as a whole, M2 growth under this alternative would be around
M3 growth of 7-3/4 percent would be at the midpoint of its long-run range.
(11) With federal funds continuing to trade around 8 percent
under alternative B, other short-term interest rates would probably show
little net change over the intermeeting period. The foreign exchange
value of the dollar also might tend to remain around recent levels, or
edge off particularly if incoming data suggest a relatively sluggish
economy. Under the latter circumstances, long-term rates might decline
somewhat further on balance despite relatively strong credit demand. The
Treasury will be in the market in volume to replenish its cash balance,
depleted by debt ceiling problems, and to finance the large fourth-quarter
deficit. Private borrowing meanwhile is expected to continue at near the
third-quarter pace. Business credit usage is likely to strengthen as
inventories are rebuilt and in response to enlarged merger activity.
Household borrowing, however, should moderate, reflecting a drop-off in
consumer durable spending. All in all, the debt of nonfinancial sectors
is projected to increase at an annual rate of a little more than 13 per-
cent over the fourth quarter, bringing growth for the year on a quarterly
average basis to nearly 13 percent.
(12) Alternative A contemplates an easing of reserve pres-
sures, with discount window borrowing falling to $200 to $300 million
and the federal funds rate dropping to around the 7-1/2 percent discount
rate. Growth of the monetary aggregates under this alternative would be
expected to be consistent with the 6 to 7 percent range for the September-
December period adopted for all three aggregates at the last meeting. M1
would increase at a 9-1/2 percent annual rate over the last two months of
the year, and growth from the second quarter base of its long-run range
would remain above 11 percent through December. A somewhat larger increase
cannot be ruled out, though, as the spread of market rates over NOW
account rates narrows further into a range where we have had limited
experience with saver response in the NOW account era. M2 growth would
also be stronger, bringing this aggregate closer to, though still a
little below, the upper end of its range; flows into MMDAs and money
market funds would accelerate as rates on these instruments lagged the
decline in market rates. The pickup in M3, on the other hand, might be
restrained as business loan demand at banks was held down by a greater
issuance of bonds.
(13) The drop in market interest rates under alternative A may
be appreciable. The 3-onth Treasury bill rate could fall to 6-3/4
percent, or perhaps somewhat lower if expectations of a discount rate cut
became widespread. The large volume of Treasury coupon issues expected
over the next few weeks would be easily absorbed by strong investor
demand to lock in relatively high yields. The dollar would probably drop
noticeably further on foreign exchange markets.
(14) Alternative C assumes an increase in borrowing at the
discount window to the $700 to $800 million area, which would be expected
to involve federal funds trading around 8-1/2 percent. The tightening of
reserve conditions under this alternative would be expected to constrain
M1 growth to a 4 percent annual rate from September to December, bringing
this aggregate closer to, though still well above, its longer-term range.
In addition there would be greater assurance that M2 would be within
its long-run range for the year. An increase in the federal funds rate
in the near term is not now expected by the market, and consequently other
interest rates would move sharply higher under this alternative, particu-
larly in the short run as the market works through the large volume of
Treasury issues. The dollar could come under considerable upward pressure
in foreign exchange markets. Both long-term interest rates and the
dollar could retrace some of their immediate rise, however, if incoming
data suggested weakness in the economy.
Directive language
(15) Proposed language is shown below not only for the
operational paragraph of the directive but also for a special paragraph
dealing with the long-run ranges for this year. The Committee indicated
at its October 1 meeting that it might wish to review the M1 long-run
range in November. The added paragraph in that connection, shown immedi-
ately below, could be placed in the directive just before the operational
paragraph. Should the Committee add this paragraph, it may wish to consider
deletion in the operating paragraph of the qualifying language in brackets
that relates to Ml alone; with the new paragraph there may be less reason
or need for indicating that the response to unexpectedly slow growth of M1
in the fourth quarter would be conditioned by the rapid growth last summer.
PROPOSED ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH ON 1985 RANGES
AT THIS MEETING THE COMMITTEE REVIEWED THE LONG-RUN RANGES FOR
THE MONETARY AGGREGATES FOR 1985, PARTICULARLY THE RANGE FOR M1
ESTABLISHED IN JULY. TAKING ACCOUNT OF THE FURTHER SHARP DROP IN
Ml VELOCITY IN THE THIRD QUARTER, EVIDENCE OF A SHIFT IN PREFERENCES
BY THE PUBLIC TOWARD HIGHLY LIQUID ASSETS, AND EXPANSION OF THE
BROADER AGGREGATES WITHIN THEIR RANGES, THE COMMITTEE AGREED THAT
GROWTH OF M1 ABOVE THE 3 TO 8 PERCENT RANGE COVERING THE PERIOD
FROM THE SECOND QUARTER TO THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1985 WOULD BE
ACCEPTABLE (APPROPRIATE). THE COMMITTEE REAFFIRMED ITS EARLIER
VIEWS WITH RESPECT TO THE RANGES FOR THE OTHER AGGREGATES.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future,
the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/ maintain
(Alt. B)/ INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the EXISTING degree of
pressure on reserve positions [DEL: sought in recent weeks].
This action is expected to be consistent with growth in M2
and M3 over the period from September to December at annual
rates of about [DEL: 6-to 7] ____ AND ____ percent RESPECTIVELY.
A marked slowing of M1 growth over the period to an annual
rate of around [DEL: 6-to-7] ____ percent is also anticipated;
[slower growth [DEL: over the next three months] would be acceptable
in the context of satisfactory economic performance, given
[DEL: recent] very rapid growth in M1 OVER THE SUMMER.] Somewhat
greater or lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable
depending on behavior of the aggregates, taking account of
appraisals of the strength of the business expansion,
developments in foreign exchange markets, progress against
inflation, and conditions in domestic and international
credit markets. The Chairman may call for Committee con-
sultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic
Operations that reserve conditions during the period before
the next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal
funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 6 to 10] ____
TO percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
November 4, 1985
Short-Tenm Long-Term
Treasury bills CDs comm bank U.S. govm ent constant copw te mun- home mortgages
S federal eonday market secondary market prim maturity yields A utility cipal conven V S&L
Aptr.
Kay
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Nov. 1
-- 9.50
- 9.50
- 9.50
FR 1367 (I/85)
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
Seasonally adjusted Nov. 4, 1985
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonllnancial debt
nontrsnsectlons total loans U.S.
Perlod M1 M2 components M3 L and goernment2 other
2
totalh
In M2 in M3 only i_ Invesltment '
PERCENT ANNUAL GIOIH:
AIUALLY (0U1 TO UI0)
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted NOV. 4, 1985
Small Money market Large
Other Ovrnlght denoml- mutual funds, NSA denoml- Tem Term Short-
Demnd checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings natlon genrral Institu- nation RPS Eurodollar Savings term Commr- Bankers
Period Cunrency deotlls depoall Eurodollar NSA deposits time purpose lions llme NSA NSA bonds 1T asury cll paper accep-
NSA deposits ' d brokel only deposits' securities lances
dealer
IONTHLI
1984-OCT.
HAT
JUNE
JULt
AUG.
SEPT.
OCT. PB
LEVELS (SBILLIOIS)
1985-10LU.
EEKLY
1985-SEPI. 2
INCLUDES RETAIL BEPUNCHASE AGBEEHENTS. ALL IRB AND KEOGH ACCOUMIS AT CO8BEICIAL EANKS AND 21IErI J
PFRO SIALL lINE DEPOSitS.
EXCLUDES IRA AND KEGGH ACCOUNIS.
NEI OF LARGE DENOMILAIION TIME DEPOSITS HELD UI HOMET MARKET MUTUAL FUNDS IAC IHBIFT ISIiSUlICMS.
P-PRELIHINARB
PE-PRELLaNAiT E51IIMAl
NS1JIUIlJQS ABI SULIALY2CI
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMCNet Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
November 4, 1985
TrTreasury coupons net purchases Federal agencies net purchases' Net change
Penwodithin within outright holdings Net RPs'
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
LEVEL--Oct. 31
- - -- -350
maturing bills Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury
borrowing from the System
