Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
December 13, 1985
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 13, 1985
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) M1 resumed a rapid pace of expansion in November, with demand
deposits and other checkable deposits each showing substantial growth.1 Data
for early December suggest continued strength this month also. As a result,
growth over the September-to-December period is likely to exceed appreciably
the 6 percent pace specified by the Committee. By contrast, the broader
aggregates expanded moderately in November, and are expected to grow close to
the 6 percent rate sought by the Committee over the September-to-December
period. The quite moderate rate of increase of M2 thus far this fall appears
attributable in part to shifts of funds by households from such M2 components
as small time deposits and money market funds to the stock and bond markets.
Commercial banks experienced a sharp inflow of Treasury deposits in November,
following Congressional approval of temporary debt ceiling legislation, and
held down issuance of managed liabilities in M3.
(2) The table below shows preliminary results for the year for
growth in the monetary aggregates relative to their long-run ranges. As
may be seen, growth in M1 has been well above the 8 percent upper limit of its
range, but growth rates in M2 and M3 were, respectively, just below the upper
limit and around the middle of their ranges.
Growth in the Monetary Aggregates in 1985 From
the Base of Their Long-run Range to QIV '851
(percent, annual rate)
M1 M2 M3
p-preliminary estimate.
1. Base is QII '85 for M1, and QIV '84 for the broader aggregates.
(3) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors apparently expanded
at a rapid pace in November. Business loans and nonfinancial commercial
paper were bolstered by financing needs related to mergers, and the bond
market rally prompted further strong issuance of corporate bonds. The tor-
rent of tax-exempt debt continued as issues were brought to market before
year-end when proposed restrictions would take effect. The pace of mortgage
debt expansion in October was rapid, and available information suggests
that mortgage growth continued strong last month. Treasury debt issuance
also increased in November, with much of the rise following the temporary
debt ceiling increase. For the year as a whole, growth of total debt of
domestic nonfinancial sectors is tentatively estimated at 13-1/2 percent,
above its 9 to 12 percent range. Perhaps a little over a percentage point
of the increase in debt can be traced to the unusual volume of mergers,
leveraged buyouts, and stock repurchases; up to another percentage point
may reflect issuance of tax-exempt bonds prompted by concerns about possible
tax law changes.
(4) Growth of total reserves picked up to a 20 percent annual rate
in November, reflecting an increase in required reserves against transactions
deposits and a considerably higher level of excess reserves. Nonborrowed
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Sept. Oct. Nov.
Money and Credit Aggregates
Reserve Measures 1
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
for 2-week reserves maintenance
e -- Estimated.
1. Growth rates of reserve measures are adjusted to remove the effect of
discontinuities resulting from phased changes in reserve ratios under the
Monetary Control Act.
2. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
3. Figure in parentheses excludes borrowing by Bank of New York on November 21.
reserve paths during the intermeeting period were constructed on the basis of
$450 million of adjustment and seasonal borrowing. Excluding the $22.6 billion
of overnight borrowing because of computer problems at the Bank of New York
(BONY), seasonal plus adjustment credit averaged $734 million during the two
complete maintenance periods since the November FOMC meeting. Excess reserves
have been unusually strong, especially in the reserve period ending December 4
when there was evidently some maldistribution of reserves as a result of the
BONY disruption. So far in the most recent maintenance period, borrowing has
averaged only $162 million.
(5) The federal funds rate averaged about 8 percent during the
intermeeting period, though exhibiting considerable day-to-day and week-to-
week volatility in the wake of the BONY borrowing and concentrated settlements
of large Treasury security issues that were delayed by debt ceiling problems.
Most recently, funds have been trading a little under 8 percent. Private
short-term rates have generally shown little net change over the intermeeting
period, while bill rates have declined about 25 to 35 basis points. Long-
term rate declines have been more substantial, reflecting improved prospects
for reductions in the federal deficit, more favorable attitudes about infla-
tion stemming from the situation in oil and certain other commodity markets,
and changing sentiments about the outlook for monetary policy. Bond rates
have generally dropped 40 to 65 basis points, bringing long-term yields to
point. Broad stock price measures have risen substantially since the last
(6) The weighted average foreign exchange value of the dollar
depreciated a further 2-1/2 percent during the intermeeting period, bringing
its total decline since the G-5 announcement to about 10 percent. In contrast
to earlier in the post-G-5 period, the dollar has dropped more against
European currencies than against the yen. Most recently, the market seems
to have perceived that monetary authorities are satisfied with current levels
for the dollar, and this perception appears to have helped to stabilize
dollar exchange rates.
Policy alternatives
(7) The table below gives three alternative specifications
for growth in the monetary aggregates from November to March, along with
associated federal funds rate ranges. Growth implied by each alternative
for the December-to-March period is shown in the lower panel of the table.
(Detailed data are shown on the table and charts on the ensuing pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from November
to March
Implied growth from
December to March
(8) The specifications of alternative B assume borrowing at
the discount window around $400 to $450 million, with federal funds likely
to average just below 8 percent. Alternative A conteplates a decline in
borrowing to a range of $200 to $250 million and an associated drop in the
federal funds rate to near the current 7-1/2 percent discount rate. A
slight firming of money market conditions is assumed under alternative C,
involving an increase in discount window borrowing to around $550 to $600
million, with federal funds likely to trade in the neighborhood of 8-1/8
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
ACTUAL AND TARGETED M3
Bill ione of do II ars
I 3600
-ACTUAL LEVEL
* SHORT-RUN ALTERNATIVES
ONDJFMAM J J AS NDJ FMAMJ J AS ND
(9) Growth of M1 is expected to slow in the early months of next
year under all of the alternatives, following rapid expansion in December,
with growth decelerating to around 6 to 7 percent under alternative B.
Relationships in the first quarter among M1, interest rates, and income are
more than usually difficult to predict, however, largely because of uncer-
tainties about when the unusual weakness of M1 velocity in recent quarters
will wane or be reversed. In addition, the minimum balance requirements on
super NOW accounts and MMDAs will be eliminated on January 1. Given the
already advanced state of deposit deregulation, and present indications
that depository institutions intend to take a conservative approach to
setting rates and terms on super NOW and MMDA accounts, the staff does not
expect this deregulatory step to have any appreciable immediate impact on
Ml. All things considered, the velocity of M1 would be expected to decline
further in the first quarter under all three alternatives, given the green-
book GNP forecast, but this is largely attributable to the boost to quarterly
average growth from the recent rapid expansion of M1. The more restrained
growth in M1 over the December-to-March period implied by the alternatives
is roughly consistent with the results of available money demand models,
and presumes an abatement of outsized inflows into demand deposits and NOW
accounts but no reversal of the recent bulge.
(10) Given the relatively high level of M1 expected for December,
the more moderate growth of this aggregate through the first months of next
year would still leave it in March, under all three alternatives, above the
upper end of its tentative 4 to 7 percent growth range for 1986, as seen on
the M1 chart. Specifically, under alternative B, M1 growth from the fourth-
quarter 1985 base to March would be around 8-1/2 percent at an annual
rate--above the upper end but within the parallel band associated with its
tentative 1986 range. The modest firming of money market conditions
associated with alternative C would be expected to bring M1 closer to the
upper end of the tentative long-run range, while the easier reserve conditions
of alternative A are likely to put M1 near the upper edge of its band. In
the latter case, though, an even more sizable boost to M1 could develop as
the decline in market rates relative to the return on NOW accounts, which
would be expected to continue to react sluggishly to changes in money market
conditions, brought to quite low levels the opportunity costs of holding a
substantial portion of M1 balances.
(11) Growth of M2 and M3 early next year is expected to continue
at rates close to, or even a little below, the moderate pace that now appears
in train for the last three months of 1985, influenced in part by the pro-
jected slowing in M1 growth. The nontransactions component of M2 is
anticipated to grow somewhat faster over coming months, paced by a resumption
of growth in small time deposits as outflows to NOW accounts and market
instruments diminish, especially if interest rates stabilize. The elimina-
tion of the minium balance requirement on MMDAs and super NOWs is expected
to have little, if any, impact on M2, with shifts that might occur being
predominantly within the aggregate. Under all three alternatives M2 growth
from the fourth quarter of 1985 to March would be within the Committee's
tentative longer-run range of 6 to 9 percent for 1986. For M3, on the other
hand, expansion is expected to be relatively slow early in the year, and M3
may be at or below the lower end of its tentative range by March. Issuance
of large CDs at banks could drop off substantially in the winter, in part
because of sharply reduced acquisitions of tax-exempt debt after year-end
and weakness in business loans as corporations emphasize long-term borrowing
in view of the more favorable market environment that has recently emerged.
(12) Growth of the total debt of nonfinancial sectors is pro-
jected to slow considerably in the first quarter to a rate near the upper
end of the Committee's tentative 8 to 11 percent monitoring range for
this variable for 1986. Most of the expected moderation in credit growth
reflects an end to the special factors affecting tax-exempt and Treasury
debt in the latter part of this year. Businesses' net need for external
funds should be little changed from the fourth-quarter pace as the financ-
ing gap-though widening a little--remains relatively low. Households
are likely to step up their instalment borrowing to support the projected
first-quarter rise in purchases of durables, particularly autos following
sluggish sales in the fourth quarter. The rate of increase of mortgage
indebtedness is anticipated to continue relatively strong, as the recent
drop in mortgage rates works to sustain homebuilding.
(13) Assuming little change in reserve market conditions as
under alternative B, long-term interest rates are likely to stabilize
around their recently reduced levels, or perhaps back up somewhat. Some
further decline could develop if incoming economic data are weak, but the
recent drop in bond yields seems already to have incorporated the near-
term impact of deficit reduction measures and weakness in certain commodity
prices. Short-term rates under alternative B could reverse much of their
very recent declines, which appear to have been influenced by anticipation
of some easing in monetary policy by early next year. The 3-month Treasury
bill rate might be expected to rise to near 7-1/4 percent. Should reserve
conditions ease, as contemplated under alternative A, long-term interest
rates would probably continue to drop, though probably not as rapidly as
in recent weeks because further rate declines may begin to foster an
actual or anticipated increase in longer-term borrowing. The 3-month
bill rate might fall toward 6-3/4 percent, and the dollar is likely to come
under renewed downward pressure on foreign exchange markets. The firming
of reserve conditions contemplated under alternative C, although slight,
would be quite unexpected and would prompt a substantial back up in
short-term and long-term rates, at least for a time. Significant upward
pressure on the dollar would probably emerge.
Directive language
(14) Proposed language is shown below in the usual form. The
proposed language contains a reference to the further deposit deregulation
scheduled for the start of next year which adds a bit to the uncertainty
about prospective monetary growth.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks [DEL: generally] to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/ maintain
(Alt. B)/ [DEL: about] INCREASE SLIGHTLY (Alt. C) the existing degree of
pressure on reserve positions. This action is expected to be con-
sistent with growth in M1, M2, and M3 over the period from [DEL: September
to December] NOVEMBER TO MARCH at annual rates of about ____, ____,
AND ____ 6 percent, RESPECTIVELY, ASSUMING LITTLE NET IMPACT
ON THE AGGREGATES FROM THE FURTHER DEPOSIT DEREGULATION AT THE
START OF 1986. [DEL: M1 growth over the period at an annual rate of
around 6 percent is also anticipated, slower growth for that
aggregate would be acceptable in the context of satisfactory
economic performance, given the very rapid growth in M1 over the
summer.] Somewhat greater reserve restraint might (WOULD), and
somewhat lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT), be acceptable
depending on behavior of the aggregates, taking account of
appraisals of the strength of the business expansion, developments
in foreign exchange markets, progress against inflation, and
conditions in domestic and international credit markets. The
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the
period before the next meeting are likely to be associated with
a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL:6 to 10]
____ TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
-- Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Aug. 28
Donoghue's Money Fund Report Columns 12 and 13 are 1-day quotes for Friday and Thursday, respectively, Initial contract rate on new commitments for one-year, adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) at S&Ls offering both
December 16, 1985
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted DEC. 16, 1985
y tock measure and liquid asets Bank credit DomnetIc nonfinancial d
nontran actlons total loans U.
Prowd M1 M2 components M3 L and goenment 2 other
2  totai
PERCENT AUNOUA GROITH:
ANNUALLI (QIV TO QiV)
DEC. 2P 626.1
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted DEC. 16, 1985
Other Ovmnght . denomi- mutual funds, NSA denomi- bim Tkm Short-
Demand checkable RPS and MMOAs Savings nation gineal Institu- nation RPa Eurodollar Svings term Commer- Senker
Period Curency deposits deposits Eurodollar NSA depoits time purpose, tions time NSA NSA bonds leasury cllt paper ccep
NSA deposits' ind broker only deposits securltils tfnce
dealerf
AWNnALLT(4Tf QTR):
APR.
NAT
JOLT
AUG.
SEPT.
OCT.
NOT. P
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMCNet Changes in System Holdings of Securities
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
LEVEL--Dec. 12
Treasury bills
net change'
Treasury coupons net purchases'
within
1-vear
- 300
-- - 184
Federal agencies net purchases'
weinin
1-year S 5-10 over 10 total
December 16, 1985
Net change
outright holdings Net RPs'
maturing bills Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury
borrowing from the System
-- 1 -- -
= I 1-5
