Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
August 15, 1986
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC August 15, 1986
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) Growth of all the monetary aggregates accelerated in July.
M2 and M3 expanded at 12-3/4 and 13 percent annual rates last month, well
above the Committee's 7 to 9 percent paths for these aggregates for the
June-to-Septeber period.1/ The rapid growth in the broader aggregates
lifted them into the upper portions of their longer-run ranges. Expansion
in M1 was at around a 17 percent rate last month, somewhat faster than in
June and about in line with its average pace over the second quarter.
(2) The acceleration in the broader aggregates in July was
associated in part with strengthening credit growth at banks and thrifts.
A sharp rebound in overnight RPs, used to finance record bank acquisitions
of government securities, accounted for most of the pickup in M2 growth.
In addition, the remainder of M2--essentially core deposits and money
market funds--continued to expand rapidly in July, as it has since spring,
apparently bolstered by declines in market interest rates. Reflecting the
sluggish adjustment of offering rates on OCDs, MMDAs and savings accounts,
as well as a relatively flat yield curve, flows into liquid instruments
continued heavy in July while small time deposits once again contracted.
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'85
to
May June July July
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
p--preliminary
1. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
M3 growth also was boosted by a resumption in issuance of large time deposits
by thrift institutions, which may be building up their balance sheets in
anticipation of more stringent capital requirements on growth; assets of
institution-only money funds also increased sharply, owing to relative rate
movements. Strength in M1 reflected continued rapid expansion of demand
deposits as well as OCDs.
(3) The growth of the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors in
July is estimated to have remained near the 10 to 11 percent pace of recent
months, with expansion from its fourth-quarter base at a 12-1/2 percent
annual rate, above the 11 percent upper end of its long-run range. Treasury
borrowing remained brisk in July, before being constrained by debt ceiling
limitations in August. The Treasury was able to raise a substantial amount
of new money at its mid-quarter refunding auctions settling in mid-August,
but only by utilizing the borrowing authority of the Federal Financing Bank
and paying down bills. Overall borrowing by nonfinancial businesses appears
to have slowed somewhat from earlier in the year, despite continued heavy
share retirements associated with mergers and financial restructurings; the
sum of bank loans and commercial paper contracted a bit in July and bond
sales, while still strong, were near the slowest pace of the year. Fragmen-
tary information on household borrowing in July suggests that mortgage debt
growth remained sizable while consumer credit slackened. Bond issuance in
the tax-exempt market surged in advance of a tax reform deadline scheduled
for September 1.
(4) Nonborrowed and total reserves increased in July at about
required reserves against transactions deposits. With the decline in the
discount rate, reserve paths continued to be constructed assuming $300
million of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing. In the two complete reserve
maintenance periods since the last meeting, such borrowing has averaged just
under $400 million. In the conduct of open market operations over the inter-
meeting period, the Desk recognized that a substantial portion of this total
represented borrowing by institutions facing special situations.
(5) Federal funds have traded generally in the 6-1/4 to 6-3/8
percent area since the cut in the discount rate announced shortly after
the last FOMC meeting, down from the 6-7/8 percent level prevailing around
the time of the last meeting. With the discount rate reduction already
widely expected by the time of the July FOMC meeting, other short-term
rates declined by somewhat less. In long-term credit markets, rates in-
creased in the first part of the intermeeting period as economic develop-
ments and the absence of policy moves abroad were seen as reducing the
scope for further Federal Reserve ease; in addition, weakness in bond
markets reflected anxieties near the time of the Treasury refunding about
foreign demand for dollar-denominated securities in circumstances of a
weakening dollar. More recently, with the completion of the Treasury
refunding and a rekindling of some expectations of a coordinated discount
rate cut in key industrial countries in response to disappointing economic
growth, bond rates have retraced much of their earlier rise and short-term
rates have declined an additional 1/8 of a percentage point or so.
(6) The dollar has fallen a further 3-1/4 percent on a weighted-
average basis since the last Committee meeting. Declines of 5 percent
against the mark and 3-3/4 percent against the yen were partly offset by a
would not follow, at least immediately, the Federal Reserve's discount rate
cut in July and various statements by U.S. officials suggesting the
possibility that additional dollar declines might be needed to correct
massive trade deficits contributed to the dollar's weakness.
Policy alternatives
(7) The table below presents three alternative specifications for
the monetary aggregates for the June-to-September period and associated
federal funds rate ranges. (More detailed data, including implied growth
for the July-to-September period and from the fourth quarter of 1985 to
September, are given on the table and charts on the following pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from
June to September
(8) Growth in all the monetary aggregates is expected to slow
over August and September from the very rapid pace of July. Even so, with
reserve conditions about unchanged as assumed for alternative B, growth of
the broader aggregates would be expected to come in around the upper end
or a bit above the Committee's 7 to 9 percent range for June to September.
Growth within that range would seem to require a moderate increase in pres-
sures on reserve positions, as embodied in alternative C. Should pressures
be eased as under alternative A, M2 in particular would be expected to be
more noticeably above the short-run range, though likely remaining just
within its long-run range through September. M1 growth would be anticipated
to remain quite rapid under any of the alternatives, though below the extra-
ordinary pace of the second quarter.
(9) Alternative B assumes adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at
the discount window averaging around $300 million (abstracting from any
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
special situation credit). Federal funds would probably continue to trade
in the 6-1/4 to 6-3/8 percent area. M2 growth would be expected to slow to
around 8 percent over August and September, reflecting in large measure a
leveling off in overnight RPs as banks stop adding aggressively to their
holdings of U.S. government securities in a more stable interest rate environ-
ment. In addition, growth of retail deposits and money market funds is likely
to moderate as offering yields come more in line with market rates around cur-
rent levels. Fragmentary data for early August suggest that expansion of M2
is indeed slowing from its rapid July pace. Even with the anticipated moder-
ation in M2, growth would average 9-1/2 percent fran June to September and
an unusually large drop in its velocity (given the greenbook forecast for
GNP) of 5-1/2 percent at an annual rate. The projected moderation in M3
growth from its July bulge reflects less rapid expansion in its non-M2 compon-
ent as well as in M2. Inflows to institution-only money funds should abate
in response to the realignment of fund yields with market rates, and the
expected deceleration in bank credit would act to reduce issuance of managed
(10) Growth of M1, while diminishing over August and September
under alternative B, is likely to remain quite strong at around 13 percent.
Both its demand deposit and NOW account components should still grow fairly
rapidly in the near term, given recent declines in open market rates and, in
the case of OCDs, sluggish adjustment of deposit offering rates, which imply
extremely thin opportunity costs at least for a while. The decline in the
velocity of M1 would be at an 11 percent rate in the third quarter, nearly as
large as the 12 percent drop in the second quarter.
(11) The money growth specifications of alternative B imply
increases in both M2 and M3 from their fourth-quarter base to September of
around 8-1/2 percent at an annual rate, with growth in M1 at nearly a 14 per-
cent annual rate through September. Expansion in all the monetary aggregates
would be expected to moderate a little further in the fourth quarter, should
interest rates remain close to current levels as in the staff's greenbook
forecast. In that forecast, nominal GNP is projected to strengthen only
moderately in the fourth quarter, while the effects of earlier declines in
interest rates on money demand should continue to diminish. Under these
circumstances, both M2 and M3 are likely to remain fairly high in their
long-run ranges, growing perhaps around 8-1/2 percent from QIV 1985 to QIV
registering a record postwar decline.
(12) Total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is likely to ex-
pand a little more rapidly over August and September than in recent months.
Boosting debt growth this month is the surge in bond issuance by state and
local governments. We anticipate some rebound in borrowing by the Treasury
in coming weeks, assuming some action on the debt ceiling, to cover its
considerable financing needs and rebuild its cash balance. Business credit
needs probably will continue to be bolstered by heavy share retirements
associated with mergers and financial restructurings, although the financing
gap should remain relatively small, reflecting flat capital spending and
internal funds. Household mortgage borrowing should remain substantial,
given the continued strength of the single-family home market, while consumer
credit expansion is expected to moderate further. From its fourth-quarter
base, debt is projected to stay well above the upper end of its monitoring
range through the third quarter and to remain above the upper end of its
range for the year, despite sane further moderation expected in the fourth
(13) Short- and long-term interest rates are expected to remain
around their current levels under alternative B, at least initially, though
with federal funds continuing to trade in a 6-1/4 to 6-3/8 area some modest
upward pressures on interest rates could emerge as market participants begin
to reassess the odds on a near-term easing in policy. Nevertheless, the
dollar could continue to drift lower on foreign exchange markets. In addi-
tion to the usual economic news, financial markets may be confronted with
important developments in tax reform and federal budget policy that could
significantly affect investor sentiment during the weeks ahead.
(14) Alternative A involves an easing of pressures on reserve
positions, either through a reduction in regular adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing to a frictional level of perhaps $150 million or so, or a cut in
the discount rate by 1/2 percentage point with discount borrowing maintained
at the current specification of $300 million. The federal funds rate would
probably decline to 5-3/4 percent or a little above. The associated decrease
in market interest rates would be expected to boost M2 growth to a little
over a 10 percent annual rate over the June-to-September period, moving this
aggregate to just below the upper end of its long-run range. There is a risk
that M2 growth could be even more rapid if institutions prove especially
reluctant to reduce offering rates on conventional NOW and savings accounts
as market rates drop closer to the previous regulatory ceilings of 5-1/4 and
any near-term easing in market conditions, M2 growth in the fourth quarter
could continue at a fairly rapid pace, absent a subsequent move toward more
reserve restraint; this would leave the aggregate around the upper end or
even somewhat above its long-run range for the year. M3 would grow at around
a 9-1/2 percent annual rate over the June-to-September period under this
alternative, entering the fourth quarter near the upper end of its annual
range. The risks of M3 running significantly above the upper end of its
annual range, even in the event of a surge in OCDs and savings deposits,
would be limited by offsetting reductions in issuance of managed liabilities
by banks and thrifts. M1 would be expected to increase at a 16 percent rate
between June and September under this alternative, moving even further above
the upper end of its range by the end of the quarter.
(15) Short-term rates would decline appreciably, with the 3-month
Treasury bill rate falling toward 5-1/4 percent under alternative A. Bond
yields probably would also decline, but any sustained sizable drop likely
would require signs of continuing sluggishness in the economy and lack of
price pressures, as well as the absence of substantial weakness in the dollar.
The dollar could come under heavy selling pressure with this alternative,
unless key foreign central banks were also to take easing steps.
(16) Alternative C assumes a tightening of reserve positions,
with borrowing from the discount window rising to around $500 million and the
federal funds rate backing up to the 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent area. Under this
alternative, the slowing in M2 and M3 likely would be sufficient to move growth
of these aggregates to within the 7 to 9 percent three-month range established
at the last meeting. In addition, the tighter reserve conditions of this
alternative would place these aggregates on a trajectory that would better
assure that they would remain well within their annual ranges for the year.
Growth in M1 also would slow substantially by September and into the fourth
quarter as market interest rates backed up. Growth for the year still would
be considerably above the upper end of its range, however, perhaps in the
vicinity of 12 percent.
(17) Treasury bill rates could rise by more than 50 basis points
to around 6-1/4 percent as reserve conditions tightened unexpectedly. Rates
on CDs could jump by even more if such a move were viewed as aggravating re-
payment difficulties of bank borrowers, especially if the rise in rates were
seen as likely to restrain economic activity substantially. The slide of the
dollar on foreign exchange markets would, at least temporarily, be slowed or
halted. A firmer tone to the dollar and a reassessment of the inflation out-
look could act to limit somewhat the accompanying rise in long-term interest
Directive language
(18) Draft language for the operational paragraph, with the
usual options for alternative specifications of reserve pressures, is
shown below. This draft follows the format used at the July meeting
in specifying expected growth rates for M2 and M3 but not for M1. With
respect to M1, the draft retains language referring to the expectation of
a reduction in M1 growth from the second-quarter pace. Under all three
bluebook alternatives, the staff is projecting some slowing in the rate
of M1 growth for June to September relative to the previous three months,
although the degree of slowing is not very marked, especially under alter-
native A. Should the Committee choose this alternative, it may wish to
delete the language referring to the expected moderation in M1 growth,
leaving the statement that M1 will be judged in light of the broader aggre-
gates and other factors. With regard to possible intermeeting adjustments
in the degree of reserve pressures, the draft provides for symmetry in
either direction, as in the July directive, but could be adapted to an
asymmetric approach (with the appropriate use of "might" and "would")
as in a number of earlier directives.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to decrease somewhat (Alt. A)/MAINTAIN (Alt. B)/INCREASE
SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions-
[DEL: taking account of the possibility of a change in the discount rate.]
This action is expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over
the period from June to September at annual rates of about ____ TO ____
[DEL: 7 to 9] percent. While growth in M1 is expected to moderate from
the exceptionally large increase during the second quarter, that
growth will continue to be judged in the light of the behavior of
M2 and M3 and other factors. Somewhat greater or lesser reserve
restraint might (WOULD) be acceptable depending on the behavior of
the aggregates, the strength of the business expansion, developments
in foreign exchange markets, progress against inflation, and condi-
tions in domestic and international credit markets. The Chairman
may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the period before
the next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds
rate persistently outside a range of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 4 to 8] percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
August 18, 1986
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
- 8.00
- .00
- 8.00
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
Seasonally adjusted
AUG. 18, 1986
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt 2
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government2 other total!2
PERCENT AINUAL GROVWTH
ANNUALLT (Ul0 TO QI1)
AOG. 4P 679.6
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted AUG. 18, 1986
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denoml mutual funds. NSA denomi- Term Term Short.
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation general Institu- nation RPs Eurodollar@ Savings term Commer. Banker
Period Currency deposits depoits Eurodollars NSA deposits time purpose, tions time NSA NSA bonds Treasury clat paper accep-
NSA deposlts' and brokerl only deposilts securities tances
dealer
ANNUALLI(4TB QTE):
JOL P
JOLI P
P-PRBLII NARY
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities4 CLASS II-FOMC
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
August 18, 1986
Treasury coupons not purchases Federal agencies net purchases' Net change
Treasury bills T r or outright holdings Nt RPs'Period net change' within within 1N
Apr.
May
June
LEVEL-Aug. 13
(S billions)
-~ ________________________________ j i __________________
maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon Issues, and direct Treasury
borrowing from the System.
