Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
July 3, 1986
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC July 3, 1986
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) M1 continued to expand rapidly over the last two months, with
growth surging to a 23-1/4 percent annual rate in May before decelerating to
around 15 percent in June. As a result, the increase in narrow money from
March to June, at an annual rate of almost 18 percent, substantially exceeded
the Committee's short-run objective, and lifted growth from the fourth
quarter of 1985 through June to 13 percent--far above its 3 to 8 percent
long-run target cone. Given the second-quarter GNP forecast, M1 velocity
is estimated to have declined at about an 11-1/2 percent annual rate last
quarter. While there is considerable uncertainty about the cause of the
extraordinary strength in both OCD and demand deposits, in large measure it
appears to be related to the earlier declines in market interest rates and
flattening of the yield curve. The growth in OCDs is part of a more general
shift towards liquid forms of saving, given the marked narrowing of the
opportunity cost of holding such instruments. Lower interest rates also
have spurred demand deposit growth by raising compensating balance require-
ments for busineses and reducing incentives to manage cash as carefully.
It may also be that the increased volume of financial transactions--especially
heightened mortgage market activity-has contributed to increases in demand
(2) Growth of M2, while slowing in both May and June, was still
somewhat above the FOMC's 8 to 10 percent short-run March-to-June objective,
and brought this aggregate up to around the midpoint of its range for the
year. Strength in its more liquid components-including savings, MMDAs,
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
March QIV'85 QIV '85
to to to
April May JuneP JuneP JuneP QII '86
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
p - preliminary
NOTE: Monthly reserve measures, including excess reserves and borrowing, are cal-
culated by prorating averages for 2-week reserve maintenance periods that overlap
months. Data incorporate adjustments for discontinuities associated with implementa-
tion of the Monetary Control Act and other regulatory changes to reserve requirements.
and MMMFs as well as M1--apparently represented in part shifts from small
time deposits, which fell on balance over the quarter. M3 continued to
increase at rates around the middle of its range in May and June. Banks
ran off large CDs and other managed liabilities as loan demand remained
weak while inflows to core deposits were substantial.
(3) The total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is estimated
to have grown at a 10 percent annual rate in May and June, bringing growth
from its fourth-quarter base to June to 12-3/4 percent at an annual rate,
above the upper end of its 8 to 11 percent long-run range. Tax-exempt
bond issuance by state and local entities has continued strong relative to
its light first-quarter pace, as refinancing activity picked up and as
legislative developments on proposed tax reform relieved some of the uncer-
tainty about the eligibility of borrowing for certain types of projects.
Partly reflecting sales of nonmarketable debt to state and local governments,
Treasury borrowing was sizable over the second quarter relative to the
usual seasonal pattern. Gross bond offerings by nonfinancial corporations,
though tapering off over the course of the quarter, remained substantial,
while business loans at banks and commercial paper outstanding contracted
on balance. Issuance of equities picked up, but owing to mergers and
restructurings, net share retirements were about the same as in the first
quarter. Net mortgage borrowing is estimated to have rebounded sharply in
the second quarter, reflecting strong residential construction and a higher
volume of existing home sales.
(4) Both total and nonborrowed reserves increased at around a
required reserves behind transactions deposits. Excess reserves averaged
around $830 million in the first two maintenance periods following the May
FOMC meeting, before rising to $1.3 billion in the most recent period
encompassing the quarter-end statement date. Throughout the intermeeting
period the nonborrowed reserves path was constructed assuming $300 million
in adjustment and seasonal borrowing. In the three complete maintenance
periods since the last FOMC meeting borrowing averaged $285 million.
(5) Apart from some firming around the quarter-end, federal
funds generally have traded in a narrow range around 6-7/8 percent since
the last FOMC meeting. In other markets, interest rates rose early in the
period, but subsequently backed off amidst indications of weakness in the
economies of the United States and of some major trading partners, which
rekindled expectations of a discount rate cut in the near future. On
balance, most shortterm market rates have declined 10 to 45 basis points
over the intermeeting period. In long-term markets, Treasury yields are
down 3/8 to 5/8 of a percentage point, while rates on corporate bonds are
about unchanged and those on fixed-rate mortgages have risen about one-half
percentage point. The widening spread between rates on long-term private
and Treasury instruments appears to reflect not so much quality concerns as
strong foreign demands for recently issued long-term Treasuries, heavy
issuance activity in private markets, and increased focus on the value of
the greater call protection for Treasury issues.
(6) Since the last FOMC meeting, the weighted-average foreign
exchange value of the dollar has declined 2-3/4 percent on balance, almost
reaching its low of early May. A temporary rise of the dollar's value gave
way in June to depreciation as German and Japanese officials expressed
reluctance to foster lower interest rates and as U.S. economic data disap-
pointed market expectations. On a bilateral basis, the dollar depreciated
on balance by 3 percent in terms of the mark and by 4-1/2 percent vis-a-vis
the yen as the persistence of large U.S. trade deficits drew market attention
particularly to the dollar/yen exchange rate.
Long-term targets
(7) The table below presents the current objectives for growth
in money and credit from the fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter
of 1986, along with two alternatives. The alternatives specify more rapid
growth for M1 and, in alternative II, for the debt of nonfinancial sectors
as well. M1 and debt have expanded through midyear at rates well above
their current long-run ranges and a slowing in the second half sufficient
to bring them within their current ranges is not likely to be consistent
with expansion of the broad monetary aggregates within their ranges this
year or with the moderately stronger GNP growth projected by the staff in
the second half of this year and 1987.
Alternatives for 1986 Ranges
Current Ranges Alt. I Alt. II
(8) Projections of the behavior of M1 are, of course, highly
conjectural, given the uncertainties about the outlook for income and
interest rates, as well as the relationship of M1 to these variables. The
staff does expect M1 to slow in the second half of the year relative to the
first. This would be consistent with the greenbook GNP forecast, which is
expected to involve little change in short-term interest rates over the
balance of the year. Despite the pickup in nominal income growth, flows
into M1 could moderate as deposit holdings become more fully adjusted to
the lower opportunity costs that now prevail, and as the unusual volume of
mortgage refinancing and other financial transactions tapers off in a more
stable interest rate environment. However, should interest rates decline
further, M1 growth could well remain quite rapid, considering its apparently
considerable sensitivity to changes in market rates. In any case, it seems
highly unlikely that M1 would decelerate enough to come within its current
range by year-end, absent a sharp firming of money markets. As can be seen
in the table below, the 8 percent upper end of that range implies growth at
only a 4 percent annual rate from the second to the fourth quarters and at a
little over a 1 percent annual rate from June to December.
Ml Growth Rates
Implied for Implied for
1985:QIV 1986:QII June 1986
to to to
1986: QIV 1986: QIV Dec. 1986
(9) In light of the behavior of M1 so far this year and uncer-
tainties surrounding the outlook for velocity over the second half of the
year, the Committee could simply indicate that M1 growth is expected to
exceed the current range, though by an unknown amount, with the outcome
depending on the behavior of the econcmy, financial markets and the public's
deposit preferences. In this context a large overshoot might be considered
acceptable as long as the broad aggregates stayed within their ranges and
inflation seemed to be remaining subdued. The current M1 range could be
retained as a "benchmark" that would be expected to receive little, if any,
weight in policy implementation.
(10) Alternatively, the Committee could choose a new range for
Ml that it thought would encompass growth consistent with its objectives
for the broader aggregates in 1986 and for the economy and inflation in
The 10 percent upper end of the alternative I range would allow around
December), implying a further decline in velocity of around 2-1/2 percent
at an annual rate, given the staff's GNP forecast. While such a slowing in
M1, or even somewhat lower growth, seems quite possible at around current
interest rates--especially if some of the unusual factors recently boosting
M1 growth abate--the 11 percent upper end of the alternative II range would
seem to offer better odds of encompassing M1 growth over the second half of
the year. M1 expansion would be required to decelerate to a 9-1/2 percent
annual rate over the second half (7-3/4 percent from June to December) to
come within the upper end of this alternative, generating a 4 percentage
point decline in velocity at an annual rate. Such a decline in velocity
might be consistent with some small further easing in money markets, but
even the higher upper end of the alternative II range might well not be
adequate to support economic expansion along the lines of the staff forecast
should interest rates need to drop substantially further. Under these
circumstances very little M1 deceleration would be expected, and growth for
the year could be around 12 percent.
(11) Specification of a revised target range, as in alternatives
I or II, would tend to suggest somewhat less uncertainty about the behavior
of M1 over the second half of the year and perhaps a greater willingness
on the part of the Committee FOMC to react to growth outside that range.
This possibility could be downplayed somewhat if the new range were
designated a "monitoring" range. The base for a new range could be kept as
the fourth quarter of 1985, as in the alternatives presented above, or
shifted forward to the second quarter of 1986. A rebasing would essentially
"forgive" the growth of the first half of the year on the thought that it
represented relatively permanent additions to cash balances as interest
rates fell to levels more consistent with reduced inflation and sustainable
economic growth. Rebasing might also be considered appropriate if the
period of unusual M1 growth were thought to be past and more normal velocity
relationships were expected to re-emerge. All the alternatives assume
slower growth over the second half, and therefore imply lower growth rates
from a second-quarter base than from a fourth-quarter base. For example,
the 10 and 11 percent upper ends of the alternative I and II ranges imply
quarters of 1986.1
(12) The current ranges for M2 and M3 of 6 to 9 percent for 1986
would be retained under all the alternatives. Both M2 and M3 are now around
the middle of their ranges, and would be expected to remain well within
these ranges over the balance of the year. Growth of M2 around the midpoint
of the range for the second half (and therefore for the year) implies that
its velocity would continue to decline, although at a rate slightly below
the 2-1/2 percent pace of the first half of the year. M2 growth in the
upper portion of the range would be more likely if interest rates were to
drop substantially or, if interest rates remain near current levels, shifts
of assets to bond and stock mutual funds slow substantially. M3 is expected
to continue to grow around the midpoint of its range. Bank credit growth
should continue near the reduced pace of the first half of the year, as
businesses continue to concentrate borrowing in bond markets and consumer
credit demands remain subdued.
(13) Debt growth in the second half of the year is expected to
run around the pace of recent months, buoyed by large federal deficits and
strong net flows into home mortgages. Borrowing by business is projected to
moderate a bit; the pace of share retirements is expected to slow, while
underlying business needs for external funds may rise somewhat in the second
half. 1 In the aggregate, debt is expected to remain above the upper end of
its current range in 1986. In recognition of this, alternative II incorpo-
rates a one point increase in this range, though debt expansion may still run
around the top of, or even a bit above, this higher range.
(14) The table below presents for Committee consideration two
alternatives for tentative growth ranges for money and credit for 1987.
Under alternative I the current 1986 ranges would be carried over into
point in both the upper and lower bounds of the ranges for the broad money
aggregates and debt. The current M1 range, which already embodies a con-
siderable slowing from growth anticipated this year, would also be retained
in alternative II. The approach to the M1 range and its tentative place in
policy implementation in 1987 might depend in part on the Committee's deci-
sion concerning the treatment of this aggregate over the balance of 1986.
Alternatives for 1987 Ranges
Alt. I Alt. II
(15) Both alternatives encompass growth rates in money and
credit that appear consistent with the staff's GNP projection of a pickup
in nominal GNP growth to 6-1/2 percent in 1987. Interest rates are not
expected to change much from current levels in this forecast. M2 is likely
to grow roughly in line with income, as it has historically. M3 velocity
also might remain around recent levels or drop only slightly; asset expansion
at depository institutions is expected to remain quite moderate, reflecting
the effects of capital guidelines and relatively subdued loan demands at
banks. Overall, growth of the debt of nonfinancial sectors is expected to
decelerate substantially in 1987 to about a 9-1/2 percent rate, owing
importantly to reductions in federal budget deficits. Growth in the debt
of nonfederal sectors also is projected to slow, although continuing to
outpace the expansion of income. The behavior of M1 velocity, of course,
is especially difficult to predict. The long-run trend in M1 velocity,
abstracting from interest rate effects, may be on the order of one percent,
or perhaps less, now that a larger portion of this aggregate pays returns
close to market yields, reducing incentives to innovate. If this trend
should begin to emerge over 1987, with interest rates moving in a relatively
narrow band and given the staff's GNP forecast, M1 growth could be around
retain the current wide, 5 percentage point range for M1.
(16) The choice between the two alternatives in these circum-
stances depends on an assessment of the risks to velocity behavior and to
the outlook for the economy and inflation. The higher upper limits of the
alternative I ranges allow some greater scope for the possibility of con-
tinued declines in the velocities of the monetary aggregates. This could
occur should interest rates need to move lower to maintain satisfactory
economic growth, owing for example to unanticipated effects of tax reform
on investment or on the stance of fiscal policy, or weaker than expected
performance of net exports, perhaps as economic expansion abroad remained
sluggish. M1 velocity, in particular, might continue to fall sharply under
these circumstances, and growth of this aggregate well in excess of the
proposed 8 percent upper limit might be needed to support satisfactory
economic expansion. With a decline in interest rates, the associated
growth of M2 might be in the upper part of its range. 1 While the long-run
interest elasticity of this aggregate probably is now small, M2 remains
sensitive in the shorter run to rate movements, owing in part to the lags
in adjustment of deposit offering rates. Growth close to the upper limits
of the alternative I ranges also might be appropriate if the Committee
wished to foster somewhat faster economic growth than in the staff forecast,
on the view that the risks to inflation would not be excessive.
(17) Alternative II enbodies a reduction in the ranges for
growth in the broad aggregates and credit, more clearly indicating the
Ccmittee's intention to achieve a gradual reduction in money growth in
the process of promoting a return to price stability. In the event that
income growth is considerably more rapid than expected--for example, if the
risk of a more substantial acceleration of inflation is realized--this
alternative would imply a somewhat less accommodative stance of monetary
policy. The restraint on money growth under this alternative in the face
of upward price pressures would be more likely to entail some rise in
interest rates, and perhaps slower growth in the economy over the short
term, but the odds would be reduced that price increases in 1987 would
affect longer-run inflation expectations and get built into the under-
lying wage and price process. The greater interest rate pressures that
might be felt under this alternative should prices or the economy tend to
surge would have a particularly restraining effect on M1; in these circum-
stances M1 might tend to grow in the lower part of its range even as M2
and M3 were expanding near the upper bounds of their respective ranges.
Near-term policy alternatives
(18) The table below gives three alternative specifications for
the monetary aggregates for the June-to-September period along with associ-
ated federal funds rate ranges. (More detailed data, including implied
growth from the fourth quarter of 1985 to September, are given on the table
and charts on the following pages.) All the alternatives specify a consid-
erable slowing of M1 growth from the second quarter, though this aggregate
in September would remain far above the upper bound of its 1986 range set
in February. M2 and M3 would remain reasonably near the center of their
annual ranges under all the alternatives.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from
June to September
(19) M1 growth under alternative B, which assumes reserve pres-
sures remain unchanged, would average 8 percent at an annual rate over the
next three months. Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount
window would continue around $300 million and federal funds trading would
stay in an area around 6-7/8 percent. Demand deposit expansion would be
expected slow markedly, as the effects of lower interest rates on growth in
corporate compensating balances and of heavy refinancing activity begin
to ebb. Even if depository institutions do not reduce NOW account offering
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Chart 1
ACTUAL AND TARGETED M1
-- ACTUAL LEVEL
-- PROJECTED LEVEL
* SHORT RUN ALTERNATIVES
- 620
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
D J F M A M J J
rates further, inflows to other checkable deposits should tail off toward
more normal levels as adjustments to the current structure of interest
rates and opportunity costs wind down. M1 growth on a quarterly average
basis, though, would drop only to 11-1/2 percent in the third quarter
under alternative B, owing to the arithmetic carryover effect of the
rapid buildup of cash balances in recent months. Such an increase in M1,
given the 4-3/4 percent growth in nominal GNP projected in the third
quarter, implies a decline in M1 velocity somewhat in excess of 6 percent--
about the same as the average pace over the past year and a half.
(20) M2 growth under alternative B would slow further from
June, remaining close to the midpoint of its longer-run range through
September. Within the nontransactions component of M2, a moderation of
inflows to liquid retail deposits and money fund shares is expected to
about offset reduced outflows from small time deposits. M3 would grow at
around its pace of both May and June under alternative B, also keeping it
close to the midpoint of its longer-run range. CD issuance at banks and
thrifts is expected to pick up in the face of slower core deposit growth
and some modest quickening in loan demand. Overall debt growth, however,
is likely to remain in line with the pace of recent months.
(21) The current market optimism regarding the likelihood of
a decline in the discount rate presumably would not be validated under
alternative B, and some edging up of rates from their most recent lows
could be expected, especially should economic activity begin to show signs
of the moderate strengthening as anticipated in the greenbook forecast.
The 3-month Treasury bill rate might well end the quarter closer to 6-1/4
percent than to its current quote of a little below 6 percent, and the
most recent level around 7-1/4 percent. Given the unusually wide spread
between Treasury and private long-term rates, the latter might increase
by somewhat less, especially if volume in bond and mortgage markets drops
off. Despite the slight firming of interest rates, the downward trend of
the dollar on foreign exchange markets is likely to persist in light of
the continued large external deficit.
(22) Alternative A contemplates an easing of reserve conditions,
characterized by frictional discount window borrowing of around $150
million and the federal funds rate averaging a little below 6-1/2 percent.
(Alternative A would also be consistent with a combination of a 6 percent
discount rate and maintenance of borrowing at the current $300 million
level.) M1 growth is projected to average around 10 percent over the
three months under these circumstances. M2 growth would be likely to
remain near its June pace, ending the quarter somewhat above the midpoint
of its range. With short-term rates drawing even closer to rates custom-
arily paid on savings deposits and regular NOWs, there could be some risk
of even faster M1 and M2 growth than specified over the summer months,
especially if depository institutions are reluctant to reduce offering
rates on these accounts. M3 growth, though, would not be expected to
accelerate as much since some of the pickup in core deposits would be
offset by reduced issuance of managed liabilities.
(23) The 3-month bill rate could drop to around 5-3/4 percent,
and bond yields would also move lower, perhaps substantially if market
participants interpret the easing of reserve conditions as signaling
Federal Reserve concern about prospective weakness of economic activity.
However, any such move could well be reversed subsequently, at least in
part, if the economic strengthening and rising inflation rates projected
by the staff become evident. The value of the dollar on foreign exchange
markets could initially come under substantial downward pressure. If key
foreign authorities similarly adjust their monetary policies, however,
pressure on the dollar would be lessened.
(24) Alternative C contemplates a tightening of reserve condi-
tions and a more sizable slowing of growth in the monetary aggregates
from their pace of recent months. M1 growth over June to September, at 6
percent, would be restrained to only about one-third of its March-to-June
pace, cutting into sane of the present overshoot of this aggregate relative
to the upper bound of its current annual range. Both M2 and M3 would
grow more slowly over the next three months than the midpoint of their
ranges for the year, and the levels of these broader aggregates would
edge a bit below the middle of their ranges by September. Discount
window borrowing would rise to around $500 million, with the federal
funds rate backing up into the 7-1/4 to 7-3/8 percent area.
(25) Choice of this alternative would surprise market partici-
pants who are currently speculating on the possibility of some near-term
monetary easing, and market interest rates could register a marked upward
adjustment. The 3-month Treasury bill rate could rise to nearly 6-3/4
percent, and long-term yields would back up substantially. Such a reversal
of the recent credit market rally likely would cause the dollar to firm on
international exchange markets. As the year progressed, this alternative
would act to restrain inflationary pressures, but probably at the expense
of a softening of economic activity relative to the staff forecast.
Under those conditions, a decline in interest rates later in the year
probably would be required to sustain the economic expansion, and a
reversal of the near-term dollar strengthening could then occur.
Directive language
(26) Presented below for Committee consideration are alter-
natives for directive language dealing with the long-run ranges for 1986
and 1987, as well as with the operational paragraph. Two variants for
the language describing the 1986 ranges are presented. Variant I embodies
an approach in which the Committee would not specify a new range for M1,
but would indicate its willingness to accept growth in excess of the cur-
rent range. Variant II might be more appropriate should the Committee
wish to specify a new range for M1 for 1986. In this variant, one
sentence in brackets would accommodate a rebasing to the second quarter
while another would allow for designation of the M1 range as a monitoring
range. The two variants also give alternative language in brackets
should the Committee decide to raise the debt range. Both retain language
from the current directive to describe the uncertainties associated with
M1 behavior and the various financial and economic conditions in light of
which Ml would be evaluated. The language of the present directive is
shown after Variant II.
(27) The proposed language for 1987 follows closely that used
in the latter part of 1985 to describe the 1986 ranges. It presumes that
the Committee will be setting an M1 range for next year and does not address
the possibility of a formal downgrading of that range; however, as indi-
cated, the M1 range would be regarded as more provisional than the other
(28) Proposed language for the operational paragraph is shown
using the usual strike-through and capitalization techniques to indicate
changes from the current directive. The directive adopted at the May
meeting was keyed closely to the particular circumstances obtaining at
the time of the meeting--especially the rapid money growth early in the
second quarter and expectations that it would slow over the balance of
the quarter. With regard to possible intermeeting adjustments to reserve
pressures, two alternatives are presented in brackets; the first adapts
the language used in May, while the second is similar to that used in
earlier directives. Should the Committee choose to designate the M1
range as a monitoring range or not to set a new long-run objective for
M1, it may wish to delete the sentence in the operating paragraph speci-
fying expected M1 growth.
Proposed language for 1986
VARIANT I
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster reasonable price stability
over time, promote growth in output on a sustainable basis, and
contribute to an improved pattern of international transactions.
In furtherance of these objectives the Committee agreed at this
meeting to reaffirm the ranges established in February for growth
of 6 to 9 percent for both M2 and M3, measured from the fourth
quarter of 1985 to the fourth quarter of 1986. The associated
range for growth in total domestic nonfinancial debt was also
retained at 8 to 11 percent for the year [was raised to ____ to ____
percent in light of its ongoing strength relative to income].
With respect to M1, the Committee recognized that, based on the
experience of recent years, the behavior of that aggregate is
subject to substantial uncertainties in relation to economic
activity and prices, depending among other things on the respon-
siveness of M1 growth to changes in interest rates. In light
of these uncertainties and of the substantial decline in velocity
in the first half of the year, the Committee decided that growth
of M1 in excess of the previously established 3-to-8 percent range
for 1986 could be acceptable, depending on the behavior of velocity
over the balance of the year growth in the other monetary aggregates,
developments in the economy and financial markets, and potential
inflationary pressures.
VARIANT II
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster reasonable price stability over time,
promote growth in output on a sustainable basis, and contribute to
an improved pattern of international transactions. In furtherance
of these objectives the Committee agreed at this meeting to re-
affirm the ranges established in February for growth of 6 to 9 per-
cent for both M2 and M3, measured from the fourth quarter of 1985
to the fourth quarter of 1986. The associated range for growth in
total domestic nonfinancial debt was also retained at 8 to 11 per-
cent for the year [was raised to ____ to ____ percent in light of its
ongoing strength relative to income]. With respect to Ml, given the
decline in its velocity in the first half of the year, the range
initially set in February for 1986 was raised to ____ to ____ percent,
which was considered more consistent with the ranges for the
broader monetary aggregates. [The base for the M1 range was moved
forward to the second quarter of 1986 and a range at an annual rate
of ____ to ____ percent was established for the second half of the
year.] The Committee recognized that, based on the experience of
recent years, the behavior of that aggregate is subject to substantial
uncertainties in relation to economic activity and prices, depending
among other things on the responsiveness of M1 growth to changes in
interest rates. [Considering these uncertainties, the Committee
agreed that in the implementation of policy, growth of M1 would
(only) be monitored relative to its range.] M1 would be evaluated
in light of its consistency with the other monetary aggregates,
developments in the economy and financial markets, and potential
inflationary pressures.
CURRENT LANGUAGE
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster reasonable price stability
over time, promote growth in output on a sustainable basis, and
contribute to an improved pattern of international transactions.
In furtherance of these objectives the Committee agreed at its
February meeting to establish the following ranges for monetary
growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 1985 to the fourth
quarter of 1986. With respect to M1, the Committee recognized
that, based on the experience of recent years, the behavior of
that aggregate was subject to substantial uncertainties in rela-
tionship to economic activity and prices, depending among other
things on its responsiveness to changes in interest rates. It
agreed that an appropriate target range under existing circum-
stances would be 3 to 8 percent, but it intends to evaluate
movements in M1 in the light of its consistency with the other
monetary aggregates, developments in the economy and financial
markets, and potential inflationary pressures. It adopted a
range of 6 to 9 percent for M2 and 6 to 9 percent for M3. The
associated range for growth in total domestic nonfinancial debt
was set at 8 to 11 percent for the year 1986.
Proposed language for 1987
For 1987 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges of monetary
growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 1986 to the fourth
quarter of 1987, of ____ to ____ percent for M1, ____ to ____ percent
for M2, and ____ to ____ percent for M3. The associated range for
growth in total domestic nonfinancial debt was provisionally set at
to percent for 1987. With respect to M1 particularly, the
Committee recognized that uncertainties surrounding the behavior of
its velocity would require careful reappraisal of the target range
at the beginning of 1987.
Proposed operational paragraph
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain (Alt. B)/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. This action is expected to be consistent with [DEL: a decelera-
tion in money growth over the balance of the quarter. However, in
view of the rapid money growth thus far in the quarter and the
apparent weakness in velocity, the Committee anticipates faster
growth for the monetary aggregates, particularly M1, than expected
at the last meeting.] GROWTH IN M2 and M3 [DEL: are expected to expand]
over the period from [DEL: March to] June TO SEPTEMBER at annual rates of
about [DEL: 8 to 10] ____ AND ____ percent RESPECTIVELY. While the
behavior of M1 continues to be subject to unusual uncertainty,
growth at an annual rate of about [DEL: 12 to 14] ____ percent over
the period is now anticipated. [DEL: If the anticipated slowing in mone-
tary growth does not develop.] [Somewhat greater reserve restraint
would (MIGHT) be acceptable in the context of (MORE RAPID GROWTH IN
THE MONETARY AGGREGATES AND) a pickup in growth of the economy,
taking account of conditions in domestic and international financial
markets and the behavior of the dollar in foreign exchange markets.
Somewhat lesser reserve restraint might (WOULD) be acceptable in the
context of a marked slowing in money growth and pronounced sluggish-
ness in economic performance.] [SOMEWHAT GREATER RESERVE RESTRAINT
(WOULD) (MIGHT), AND SOMEWHAT LESSER RESTRAINT (WOULD) (MIGHT), BE
ACCEPTABLE DEPENDING ON THE BEHAVIOR OF THE AGGREGATES, THE STRENGTH
OF THE BUSINESS EXPANSION, DEVELOPMENTS IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS,
PROGRESS AGAINST INFLATION, AND CONDITIONS IN DOMESTIC AND INTER-
NATIONAL CREDIT MARKETS.] The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations
that reserve conditions during the period before the next meeting
are likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently
outside a range of 5 to 9 ____ TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
July 7, 1986
Short-term Long-Term
CDs m ey corporate conventional home mortgages
Treasury bills CDs comm. money bank U.S. government constant corporate municipal entional home mortgages
federal secondary market A utility secondaryPeriod fdsecondary market ar paper mtu prime maturity yields A ullly Bond secndary primary market
funds market paper mutual recently market
i-month loan
3-month I month I-year 3-month lund 3-year I -year 30-year offered fixed-rate fixed-rate ARM
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
July 2
tlly--June 27
July 3
p
0 S E D
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted
JULY 7, 1986
Money stock measures and liquid assets SBnk credit Domestc nonfinanclal debit
nontransctlons total loans U.S.
Perlod M1 M2 components M3 L and govrnment' 2  other 2 total 2
n M2 I in M3 ogny I nvetment _
PIUCEIT ANIAL GROT8:
AiNUALLI (0QI To 0lr)
I/ AMIUAL RATES FrO BANK CBED1T ABt AbJO390SI FU a T ISFBR OF LOI6 S Fno8 COBtlIri TIA ILLINOIS NATIONAL BANK TO THE FDIC
BEGINNING SEPTEBBER db, 1984.
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted JULY 7, 1986
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi. mutual funds, NSA denomi- Term Term Short-
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation gineral Instilu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Commer- Bankers
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars NSA deposits time purpose, lions time NSA NSA bonds Treasury clal paper accep-
NSA deposits' nd brokerl only deposits3  securities tances
dealer'
ANOUALLI (4T QTR):
JOLTJULI
AUG.
SEPT.
APR.
NAI
I/ INCLUDES RETAIL REPDBCBASE AGREEBEITS. ALL IRA AND KEOGH ACCOUNTS AT COMMERCIAL BANKS AND THRIFT IISTITUTIOS ARE SUBTRACTED
FRO SMALL TIB DEPOSITS.
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities'
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
July 7, 1986
y bs Treasury coupons net purchases' Federal agencies net purchases' Net change
Period Treasury bills outright holdings Net RPs'
Apr.
May
June
July 2
LEVEL--July 2
maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon Issues, and direct Treasury
borrowing from the System.
