Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
December 12, 1986
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 12, 1986
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) M2 growth slowed substantially in November to a 6-1/2 percent
annual rate and M3 growth moderated further to a 5-1/2 percent annual rate;
since September, growth in M2 has been in the upper part of and M3 a little
below the 7 to 9 percent growth ranges established by the Committee for the
September-to-December period. Based on preliminary data through early Decem-
ber, the staff estimates that annual growth in 1986 on a fourth-quarter to
fourth-quarter basis will be just under 9 percent for M2 and about 8-3/4 per-
cent for M3 (see table below), implying declines in velocity of around 4 per-
cent. M1 accelerated again in November, reaching a 21 percent rate, as
demand deposit growth surged. Growth in M1 likely will reach 14-3/4 percent
for 1986 as a whole and its velocity will fall almost 9 percent--a postwar
Monetary and Credit Aggregates and Ranges for 19861
(percent)
M1 M2 M3 Debt
p--preliminary estimate.
1. Fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter basis.
(2) In November, a marked deceleration in the nontransactions
portion of M2 reflected in part weakness in overnight RPs and Eurodollars--
offset in M3 by some strength in their term counterparts. In addition, the
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
September QIV'85
to to
September October November November November
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
retail portion of nontransactions M2 slowed, perhaps owing to a small
extent to heavy purchases of U.S. savings bonds at the end of October, just
before their minimum yield was lowered from 7-1/2 to 6 percent. Retail
money market funds were especially weak and small time deposits continued
to show large outflows, while flows into savings deposits continued rapid.
NOW account growth also remained very strong, contributing to the rapid
growth in M1. Opportunity costs of holding NOW and savings accounts remained
quite low as offering rates edged down only slightly. The non-M2 component
of M3 rose a little in November. Bank credit expanded rapidly, but a large
increase in Treasury deposits reduced the need to issue managed liabilities
included in M3.
(3) Growth of debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors picked up
to an 11-1/2 percent pace in November. Federal borrowing increased sharply,
following the lifting of debt ceiling constraints. Business borrowing also
was brisk last month, in both short- and long-term markets; a heavy pace of
equity retirements, in part in advance of year-end tax changes affecting
mergers, accounted for much of the strength. Although the announcement of
a widening SEC investigation of insider trading had a pronounced effect on
trading of low-grade debt, issuance of such debt remained strong and activ-
ity in investment-grade corporate bonds was not adversely affected. Issu-
ance of tax-exempt bonds increased, but the pace was well below that of the
spring and summer. Borrowing likely remained robust in mortgage markets,
while the growth of consumer debt probably dropped off after the expiration
of most auto financing incentives in early October. For the year, nonfinan-
cial debt is expected to expand around 12-3/4 percent, well in excess of
the 11 percent upper bound of the Committee's monitoring range.
(4) Reserve paths were constructed throughout the intermeeting
period assuming $300 million of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing. Growth
of total reserves picked up sharply to a 33 percent rate owing to the surge
in required reserves against transactions deposits and an advance in excess
reserves from almost $750 million in the previous three months to around
$1 billion on average in November. In large measure, the increase in excess
reserves seemed to reflect the usual patterns around holidays and social
security payment dates, and in conducting open market operations the Desk
made informal allowance for higher demands for excess reserves. Consequently,
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing in the two complete maintenance periods
since the last FOMC meeting averaged close to the $300 million path allowance.
Even so, the funds rate firmed from around 5-7/8 percent at the time of the
last meeting to well above 6 percent towards the end of the last complete
statement period. Both seasonal and adjustment borrowing by smaller banks,
where reserves and liquidity apparently have been ample, have been unusually
light recently. In addition, larger banks may have been managing reserve
positions especially cautiously, perhaps because of frequent discount window
borrowings earlier in the fall and a desire not to constrain access to the
window should the usual seasonal pressures arise over the year-end. In the
current statement period, borrowing has averaged only $77 million through the
first 8 days, and the federal funds rate has averaged close to 6 percent.
(5) With the federal funds and RP financing rates a little
firmer through much of the intermeeting period, other short-term market
rates have risen by 10 to 35 basis points. However, bond yields generally
have declined about 15 to 25 basis points, as market participants appear
to have interpreted incoming economic data as pointing on balance to a
moderate course for activity and prices next year, which might provide some
scope for an easing of policy in the first half of the year. Rates on
commitments for fixed-rate home mortgages dropped one-half percentage
point, moving toward a more normal alignment with Treasury bond yields.
Although stock prices fell initially on the announcement of insider trading
violations related to takeover activity, on balance they showed little net
change over the period.
(6) The dollar generally declined through November, but has since
retraced a portion of that decline, ending the period about 1-3/4 percent
lower on a weighted-average basis than at the time of the last FOMC meeting.
Short-term interest rates rose moderately abroad, about in line with move-
ments in U.S. rates, while long-term differentials moved slightly against
dollar assets. The relative strength of the mark has increased pressures
in the EMS,
Policy alternatives
(7) The table below presents three alternative specifications
for growth in the monetary aggregates from November to March, along with
associated federal funds rate ranges. More detailed data, including implied
growth from December to March and from the fourth quarter of this year to
March, are shown on the table and charts on the following pages. Given the
pattern of money growth expected through the fourth quarter, expansion from
the fourth quarter base for the 1987 ranges through March would be at rates
very close to the November-to-March growth rates shown below. Thus, under
the reserve conditions assumed for any of the alternatives, both M2 and M3
would be expected to be within their 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent tentative long-
run ranges in March. However, growth in M1 would be expected to continue
at historically rapid rates, well in excess of its very tentative 3 to 8 per-
cent range.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from
November to March
(8) The specifications of alternative B assume borrowing at the
discount window of $300 million. Federal funds would be expected to trade
around 5-7/8 percent, though perhaps more often above than below this level
through year-end. The three-month Treasury bill is likely to edge back to
the 5-3/8 percent level, especially as federal funds trading comes to center
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in billions
1986-October
November
December
Monthly Growth Rates
1986-October
November
December
Quarterly Ave. Growth
1986-Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Sept.86 to Dec. 86
Nov. 86 to Mar. 87
Dec. 86 to Mar. 87
Rates
4.3
more evenly around 5-7/8 percent after year-end pressures abate. Bond
rates are expected to vary around current levels; consistent with the staff
forecast, incoming indicators of domestic output growth and inflation
should not provide the basis for a major shift in sentiment. However, mar-
kets are likely to remain sensitive to developments in oil markets--especi-
ally given the current OPEC meeting--and in foreign exchange markets. Down-
ward pressures on the dollar could re-emerge in light of continued large
current account deficits, especially absent evidence of a greater willing-
ness of foreign authorities to lower interest rates.
(9) M2, under alternative B, is expected to slow further from
its average growth over October and November, expanding at a 7 percent pace
over the November-to-March period--in the middle of its tentative range.
The boost to M2 growth from previous market rate declines is likely to
diminish further over this period, reinforced by additional reductions in
offering rates on passbook accounts and other liquid deposits. The degree
of moderation, though, probably will be limited by a continuation of slow
adjustment of offering rates on these accounts. In addition, nominal in-
come growth is projected to pick up in the first quarter, bolstering demands
for M2. Adding to uncertainty about M2 growth in 1987 are tighter restric-
tions on IRA deductions imposed by tax reform, which will tend to reduce the
appeal of this non-M2 investment. While this could act to boost inflows to
M2 accounts over time, its effects are less certain early in the year, when
flows are dominated by contributions for the previous tax year. 1 Under
alternative B, M2 would outpace nominal GNP, given the staff forecast, and
its velocity thus would decline further in the first quarter, though by
considerably less than in the fourth quarter or the year 1986.
(10) Under the specifications of alternative B, M3 would expand
at a 6 percent rate from November to March, near the reduced pace of recent
months and in the lower half of its tentative range. Credit growth at
banks is expected to moderate in early 1987 as business and household loan
demands slacken, and stiffer capital requirements for thrifts should further
restrain their asset growth. Under these circumstances depository institu-
tions will be under little pressure to issue CDs and other managed liabili-
ties in M3. The margin of growth of M3 over GNP would narrow and the con-
traction of M3 velocity in the first quarter would be small--about in line
with its long-term trend.
(11) The outlook for M1 remains quite uncertain, given the extra-
ordinarily low opportunity costs of holding OCDs and the erratic behavior
of demand deposits. However, underlying conditions would seem to continue
to point to some moderation in M1 growth under alternative B from the
exceptional pace of recent quarters. With market rates fairly stable for
some months now, interest rate effects on OCDs are likely to diminish as
offering rates are reduced further and as the public's portfolio becomes
more fully adjusted to earlier rate declines. Demand deposit growth also
should subside, in part as compensating balances are brought into line with
lower interest rates. Nevertheless, M1 would be expected to grow in the
first quarter at a rate well in excess of GNP and its velocity would register
another sharp decline, on the order of an 8 percent annual rate.
(12) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is likely to
decelerate in early 1987, with slower growth coming from both the government
and private sectors. However, the decline in borrowing by some key sectors
would be greater than is indicated by their underlying financing needs.
Federal borrowing, for example, is expected to moderate considerably (sea-
sonally adjusted), but much of this would result from a drawdown of the
Treasury's cash balance, rather than a substantial decrease in the fiscal
deficit. Borrowing by state and local governments is likely to edge lower
from the already reduced levels of recent months in part as advance refund-
ing activity slackens. Business needs for external funds in the first
quarter should remain at about the level of the fourth quarter, but with
a slowing of equity retirements after the current surge, businesses are
expected to tap the credit market for smaller amounts in early 1987. In
the household sector, a moderation in underlying demands for consumer
credit will be exaggerated by efforts to substitute mortgage for consumer
debt to retain full deductibility of interest payments; abstracting from
such shifting, household mortgage demands would be expected to remain
around the enlarged amounts of recent quarters. Total domestic nonfinancial
debt is expected to grow at about a 10 percent annual rate over the first
quarter of 1987, within the Committee's tentative annual monitoring range
of 8 to 11 percent.
(13) Alternative A assumes a reduction in discount window borrow-
ing to a near-frictional level of $150 million or a reduction in the dis-
count rate of one-half percentage point with borrowing maintained at $300
million. The federal funds rate, in either event, would decline to the
with the three-month bill likely dropping to 5 percent or a little below.
The dollar could come under greater downward pressure on foreign exchange
markets, unless other major central banks were similarly to ease. A weaker
dollar and possibly heightened concerns about inflation could limit the scope
for bond rate declines. That scope could widen, though, should incoming
indicators on the economy point to more softness early in the year than is
now generally expected and to subdued price pressures.
(14) Under alternative A, growth in M2 would slow only a little
from its average pace of recent months, and by March this aggregate would
be in the upper portion of its tentative long-run range. Growth in M3 would
strengthen a bit, but still would be below the midpoint of its tentative
range in March. M1 would be expected to expand at about the very rapid
pace of 1986. Unless greater interest cost pressures break the resistance
of banks and thrifts to lowering offering rates on savings deposits and
other liquid accounts, opportunity costs on these accounts would remain
very low--or even decline further--drawing funds from small time deposits
and the open market. M3 would tend to be boosted by inflows to money mar-
ket funds, as their yields lagged the decrease in market interest rates.
In addition, bank funding needs might be enlarged by more lending to busi-
nesses, especially if long-term rates did not similarly decline.
(15) Under alternative C, reserve paths would be drawn with an
assumed $500 million of discount window borrowing. The federal funds rate
would rise to the 6-1/4 to 6-1/2 percent area. The tighter reserve condi-
tions of this alternative would act to damp growth in M2 and M3; M2 would
be in the lower half and M3 close to the lower end of their tentative ranges
in March. Opportunity costs of the more liquid components of M2, in parti-
cular, would widen appreciably, restraining inflows to retail accounts, and
reduced overall funding needs of banks and thrifts associated with slower
asset growth would limit expansion of managed liabilities in M3. Growth in
Ml also would be damped by tighter reserve market conditions and accompany-
ing larger opportunity costs, although it probably would continue to advance
considerably more rapidly than GNP.
(16) The three-month bill likely would rise by around 50 basis
points, and other short-term rates could rise by even more should the debt
servicing difficulties of some businesses and other borrowers seem to have
worsened. The dollar might firm, at least for a while, on foreign exchange
markets. Bond rates also would back up, although reduced pressure on the
dollar and a reassessment of inflation prospects could limit the extent of
any rise.
Directive language
(17) Draft language for the operational paragraph, with the
usual alternatives for indicating the degree of reserve pressure, is shown
below. In keeping with the Committee's practice since the July meeting,
the draft provides for the specification of numerical growth rates for M2
and M3 but not for M1. With regard to M1, the staff is projecting some
slowdown over the November-to-March period relative to growth over the
summer and fall months, and the Committee could retain the wording of the
current directive if it wished to indicate a similar expectation. If, on
the other hand, the Committee preferred not to express any expectation
about M1 growth over the months ahead, it could delete the language in the
first set of brackets, referring to an expected moderation, perhaps sub-
stituting wording, like that shown in the second set of brackets, which
emphasizes the uncertain outlook for M1. With regard to possible intermeet-
ing adjustments in the degree of reserve pressure, the draft retains the
symmetrical language of the latest directive but that language could be
adapted to an asymmetrical approach (with the appropriate use of "might"
and "would") as in a number of earlier directives. The draft also retains
the reference to the possibility of "slight" adjustments to reserve pres-
sures; the more usual terminology of "somewhat" as well as the standard
option with respect to the use of "would" are given in parentheses.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain (Alt. B)/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. This action is expected to be consistent with
growth in M2 and M3 over the period from [DEL: September to December]
NOVEMBER TO MARCH at annual rates of [DEL: 7 to 9] ____ and ____ percent,
RESPECTIVELY. [While growth in M1 over the same period is expected
to moderate from its exceptional pace during the previous several
months,] [THE OUTLOOK FOR M1 REMAINS SUBJECT TO A GREAT DEAL OF
UNCERTAINTY, AND] growth in this aggregate will continue to be
judged in the light of the behavior of M2 and M3 and other factors.
Slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint or slightly (SOMEWHAT)
lesser reserve restraint might (WOULD) be acceptable depending on
the behavior of the aggregates, taking into account the strength of
the business expansion, developments in foreign exchange markets,
progress against inflation, and conditions in domestic and inter-
national credit markets. The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations
that reserve conditions during the period before the next meeting
are likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently
outside a range of [DEL: 4 to 8] ____ TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
December 15, 1986
July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
- 7.50
- 7.50
- 7.50
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
Seasonally adjusted
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
DEC. 15, 1986
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government 2 other 2 total
In M2 In M3 only Investments
1
PERCENT ANNUAL GRBOTH:
ANNUALLY (QIV TO QIV)
MONTHLY
1985--V01.
HONTHLI LEVELS (SBILLIONS)
1986-JULY
AUG.
SEPT.
OCT.
NOV. P
VEEKLY LEVELS (SBILLIONS)
1986-NOV. 3
DEC. 1P
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
DEC. 15, 1986
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds, NSA denomi- Term Term Short-
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation general Inatltu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Commer- Bankers
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollare NSA deposits time purpose, tlons time NSA NSA bonds lTeasury clea paper accep-
NSA depositsa and brokerl only depositsI securities tancee
dealer
ANNUALLT (4T QT) :
APR.
NAr
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEPT.
OCT.
NOV. P
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMCNet Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
December 15, 1986
-QTR. I
II
III
-Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec. 10
Lions)
Federal agencies ne
t purchases'
over 10 total
I ________________ ______________________________________________________________ J ________________________________________________________________
maturing bills Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury
borrowing from the System
Period
Treasury bills
net change'
LEVEL--
($ bill
Net change
outright holdings
Net RPs"
I I
