Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
May 16, 1986
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOC May 16, 1986
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) M1 grew 14-1/2 percent at an annual rate in April, continuing
at around its rapid March pace, and data for the first part of May indicate
further strong expansion. This growth, which substantially exceeded the
the Committee's 7-to-8 percent March-to-June range, left M1 in April well
above the upper end of its long-term range. M2 and M3 expanded in April at
short-run paths. Even so, M2 in April moved only into the lower part of its
long-run target cone, while M3 rose slightly above the middle of its long-
run range. Data for early May suggest some slowing in growth of the broader
aggregates from their pace in April, though expansion of M2 seems to be
still relatively strong.
(2) The continued decline in interest rates during the spring
appears to account for much of the recent strengthening in M1 and M2. This
is especially true of their liquid retail components, whose offering rates
in typical fashion have fallen less rapidly than market rates.1 In April,
inflows to OCDs, MMDAs, savings accounts and the money market funds in M2
all spurted to new highs for the year, while small time deposits, whose own
yields have adjusted downward more rapidly, were about flat. In addition,
demand deposits registered unusually sizable increases through early May.
Exceptionally heavy personal tax refunds in April and early May also may
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV' 85
to
March April April
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve measures
Nonborrowed reserves 1
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
e -- estimated
p -- preliminary
have added a little to growth in M1 and M2. In M3, expansion of institution-
only money funds was quite strong, also reflecting lags in yield adjustments,
but with bank credit growth weak, banks ran off large CDs in April.
(3) The expansion of total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors
is estimated to have picked up a bit in April from the 9 percent pace of
March. Gross bond issuance by nonfinancial corporations in April again was
at a record pace, with much of the proceeds used to pay down short-term
debt and to retire outstanding higher-coupon bond issues; equity retirements,
though continuing, appear to be slowing. Partial data suggest a step-up in
net mortgage lending so far in the second quarter as well as very heavy
refinancing activity; consumer credit flows at banks slowed further in
April, but lending at auto finance companies may have increased in associa-
tion with stronger sales and renewed rate concessions. Issuance of tax-
exempt bonds, which had been extremely light earlier in the year, surged in
April after some of the uncertainties of potential tax-law changes were
alleviated. Marketable borrowing by the Treasury has remained substantial,
even as sales of special issues to state and local governments engaging in
advanced refundings have increased, resulting in an especially sizable build-
up in the Treasury's cash balance.
(4) Both total and nonborrowed reserves expanded at a little
more than a 10 percent annual rate in April. Throughout the intermeeting
period, the nonborrowed reserve path was constructed on the assumption of
$300 million of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing. In the three complete
reserve maintenance periods since the last meeting, borrowing has averaged
$277 million. Borrowing was exceptionally light in the days immediately
preceding the cut in the discount rate from 7 to 6-1/2 percent in mid
April, but has averaged a little more than $300 million since then.
(5) Federal funds generally have traded in a 6-3/4 to 7 percent
range since just prior to the discount rate action, down half a point over
the intermeeting period. Most other short-term market rates have shown
smaller net declines, while longer-term market rates are somewhat higher
on balance since the last FOMC meeting. Interest rates generally moved
lower early in the intermeeting period, but subsequently reversed direction
as oil prices turned up, the money supply strengthened further, and the
dollar depreciated substantially--raising concerns about the strength of
foreign demands for dollar assets and the scope for further easing in
monetary policy. Most stock price indexes reached new record highs in
April, but have since retreated.
(6) Although firming a bit in the last week, the dollar has
declined on balance since the last FOMC meeting, dropping by about 4-1/4
percent on a weighted average basis, including decreases of 6-1/2 percent
against the yen and 5-1/2 percent against the mark. Downward pressure on
the dollar arose from market perceptions that further declines would be
needed over time to bring about better balance in U.S. international
transactions--particularly in the absence of substantially more stimulative
policies abroad--at a time when many U.S. officials were seen to be little
concerned about the dollar's weakness. The more recent firming has been
associated with the back-up in interest rates in the U.S. and some change
in the tone of statements by U.S. officials.
Policy alternatives
(7) All of the alternatives shown in the table below specify
faster growth in each of the monetary aggregates over March to June than
the paths selected by the Committee at the April meeting. A slowing in
money growth over the balance of the quarter is enbodied in all these
alternatives, but given the substantial expansion in April and early May,
achieving the Committee's existing specifications for the 3-month period
would require some contraction in M1 and M2. None of the alternatives
presented below assumes the extreme tightening in reserve conditions that
might be associated with an attempt to achieve such an outcome. Alterna-
tive B assumes maintenance of about current pressures on reserve positions,
while alternative A and alternative C contemplate a moderate easing and
tightening of reserve pressures, respectively. As shown in the more
detailed data on the table and charts on the following pages, under all the
alternatives M1 in June would be expected to be considerably above the
upper end of its parallel band, but M2 would stay in the lower portion and
M3 around the middle of their respective cones.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from
March to June
i. The funds rate range of 5 to 9 percent suggested for alternative B-
one percentage point lower than the range now in the directive-is about
centered on the area of federal funds trading that has prevailed under
existing reserve conditions since the discount rate was cut to 6-1/2
percent.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in billions
1986-January
February
March
April
May
June
Monthly Growth Rates
1986-January
February
March
April
May
June
Mar. 86 to June 86
Apr. 86 to June 86
(8) Under alternative B discount window borrowing would continue
around $300 million, with the federal funds rate remaining generally between
considerably in June, though still increasing at a 13 percent rate over the
March-to-June period. The effects of earlier market rate declines on
demands for transactions balances should be abating in June, and incentives
to shift into NOWs should diminish as their offering rates decrease further
in lagged response to the previous drop in market rates. Moreover, growth
in demand deposits could moderate in coming weeks following their recent
bulge. Even with its slowing in June, on a quarterly average basis M1
would grow at a 13-1/2 percent annual rate in the second quarter, implying
an extraordinary 9 percent decline in velocity, assuming the staff's GNP
forecast. Over the last two quarters of the year, M1 growth would have to
slow to a 5 percent annual rate to hit the upper end of its annual range.
This could entail some rise in interest rates over the second half,
especially if economic activity strengthens as expected.
(9) M2 growth under alternative B also would slow over the rest
of the second quarter--though still recording a much faster advance than
during the first three months of the year. Inflows to liquid retail accounts,
while remaining sizable, would moderate compared with April and early May as
yields on MMDAs and MMMFs move into closer alignment with market rates. As
growth of core deposits ebbs, banks should resume issuance of large CDs to
help finance some pickup in bank credit growth from its recent depressed
pace, and thus M3 is expected to slow relatively little in June.
(10) Under alternative B market interest rates are likely to
fluctuate near recent levels in coming weeks, with the 3-month Treasury
bill rate between 6 and 6-1/4 percent. The dollar could continue to drift
lower in foreign exchange markets. With long-term rates remaining around
current relatively low levels, credit demands are likely to continue to be
focused on long-term markets. Bond issuance by businesses should remain
heavy and mortgage borrowing very strong. However, weakness in investment
spending and some further slowing in equity retirements are projected to
restrain overall business credit needs, and, in the aggregate, growth of
the debt of private nonfinancial borrowers from March to June should be
only a bit above its first-quarter pace. Federal government debt issuance,
on the other hand, is projected to be stronger in the current quarter,
contributing to an appreciable pickup in total debt growth. This growth
would leave the debt aggregate in June well above its long-run range.
(11) Under alternative A, which entails discount window borrowing
falling to frictional levels of $100 to $150 million, the funds rate would
tend to move below the current 6-1/2 percent discount rate. An easing in
reserve pressures at this time would probably be taken by the market as
signaling Federal Reserve willingness to tolerate a substantial overshoot
of M1 in the context of moderate economic growth and favorable price
developments. The 3-month Treasury bill rate likely would decline to
around 5-3/4 percent, or perhaps lower, and bond yields could reverse
much, if not all, of their recent increases. In the absence of similar
interest rate reductions abroad, the dollar could cane under considerable
downward pressure in foreign exchange markets. Concerns about the future
attractiveness of dollar assets could possibly intensify under these cir-
cumstances, tempering declines in long-term interest rates.
(12) The specifications of alternative A contemplate a less
marked deceleration of M over the rest of the quarter, with growth in
June close to 9 percent. Indeed, even this degree of slowing might not
emerge by midyear, given the possibility of a very substantial interest
sensitivity of this aggregate as opportunity costs narrow even further.
Growth of the more liquid components of nontransactions M2 also would
remain quite strong, limiting the slowing in M2 growth, and this aggregate
would be boosted to near the middle of its long-run range. With the
strength in core deposits holding down needs for managed liabilities, M3
would be expected to grow around 7-1/2 percent over the last two months
of the quarter, remaining a bit above the midpoint of its range.
(13) Alternative C encopasses an increase in discount window
borrowing to between $450 and $550 million. The federal funds rate prob-
ably would move back into the 7-1/4 to 7-3/8 percent neighborhood. M1
growth in June would be expected to be reduced to around 5 percent under
these circumstances. Although this aggregate would still be above its
parallel band in June, the near-term tightening of market conditions
would raise the odds that M1 would move to within its longer-run range
later in the year as the increase in rates and its effects on spending
tended to damp demands for transactions balances in the second half. M2
would remain in the lower portion of its range through midyear, though
well above the lower end, while M3 would be at about the middle of its
(14) Market rates would back up considerably under alter-
native C, at least initially, given the absence of market sentiment that
such a move is imminent. The three-month bill rate would rise to around
be moderated a bit to the extent that this action was viewed as reducing
the potential for a reemergence of price pressures later this year. The
current wide spreads between long-term private and Treasury rates might
tend to narrow if the back-up in rates led potential borrowers to defer
long-term financing. With U.S. interest rates rising relative to foreign
rates, the dollar would be likely to strengthen on foreign exchange
Directive language
(15) Draft language for the operational paragraph is shown
below, with three variants proposed for Committee consideration. The
first follows the format used at the April 1 meeting. However, it does
not address the sizable disparity between the growth rates for money now
expected for the second quarter and those specified at the last meeting.
The second and third variants acknowledge the rapid money growth, but
focus on the expected slowing over the balance of the quarter. The
second variant generally follows the existing format. It provides for
specific numerical expectations for money growth over March to June, but
in addition gives some indication of why expected growth is higher than
previously specified. In light of the rapid money growth, the second
variant indicates somewhat more explicitly than the existing directive
the conditions under which lesser reserve restraint over the intermeeting
period could be acceptable. The third variant represents a more sub-
stantial departure from the language of the existing format (and for this
reason the usual caps and strike-throughs are not used to show changes
from the existing directive). It omits numerical expectations for money
growth over the second quarter, given the likelihood of marked strength
relative to previous expectations, with growth of M1 in particular well
in excess of its long-run range. It is somewhat more explicit than the
other variants in calling for a tightening of reserve pressures should
the expected slowing in money growth not develop.
Alternative Draft Operational Paragraphs
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain (Alt. B)/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. This action is expected to be consistent with
growth in M2 and M3 over the period from March to June at annual rates
of about [DEL: 7] ____ percent AND ____ PERCENT, RESPECTIVELY; while the
behavior of M1 continues to be subject to unusual uncertainty, growth
at an annual rate of about [DEL: 7 to 8] ____ TO ____(OR ) percent
over the period is anticipated. Somewhat lesser reserve restraint
or somewhat greater reserve restraint might (WOULD) be acceptable
depending on behavior of the aggregates, the strength of the business
expansion, developments in foreign exchange markets, progress against
inflation, and conditions in domestic and international credit markets.
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to
the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during
the period before the next meeting are likely to be associated with
a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 6 to 10] ____
TO ____ percent.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain (Alt. B)/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. This action is expected to be consistent with
A DECELERATION IN MONEY growth [DEL:in] OVER THE BALANCE OF THE QUARTER.
HOWEVER, IN VIEW OF THE RAPID MONEY GROWTH THUS FAR IN THE
QUARTER AND THE APPARENT WEAKNESS IN VELOCITY, THE COMMITTEE
ANTICIPATES FASTER GROWTH FOR ALL THE MONETARY AGGREGATES THAN
EXPECTED AT THE LAST MEETING. M2 AND M3 ARE EXPECTED TO EXPAND
over the period from March to June at annual rates of about [DEL: 7]
____ AND ____ percent, RESPECTIVELY. While the behavior of M1
continues to be subject to unusual uncertainty, growth at an
annual rate of about [DEL: 7 to 8] ____ to ____ (or ) percent over the
period is anticipated. [DEL: Somewhat lesser reserve restraint or]
Somewhat greater reserve restraint might (WOULD) be acceptable
depending on behavior of the aggregates, the strength of the
business expansion, developments in foreign exchange markets,
progress against inflation, and conditions in domestic and inter-
national credit markets. SOMEWHAT LESSER RESERVE RESTRAINT MIGHT
(WOULD) BE ACCEPTABLE IN THE CONTEXT OF SLOWER MONETARY GROWTH THAN
EXPECTED, ESPECIALLY OF THE BROADER AGGREGATES, AND SLUGGISH ECONOMIC
PERFORMANCE, TAKING ACCOUNT OF DEVELOPMENTS IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE MAR-
KETS, WAGE AND PRICE BEHAVIOR, AND CONDITIONS IN DOMESTIC AND
INTERNATIONAL CREDIT MARKETS. The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations
that reserve conditions during the period before the next meeting
are likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently
outside a range of [DEL: 6 to 10] ____ TO ____ percent.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future,
the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain
(Alt. B)/INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the existing degree of
pressure on reserve positions. This action is expected to be
consistent with substantial slowing over the balance of the quarter
in the rates of growth of the monetary aggregates--especially Ml
and M2--from their recent rapid pace. If such a slowing does not
develop, somewhat greater reserve restraint would/might be
acceptable in the context of continuing growth of the economy,
taking account of conditions in domestic and international financial
markets, and the behavior of the dollar in foreign exchange markets.
Somewhat lesser reserve restraint would/might be acceptable should
there be a very marked slowing in money growth, especially of the
broader aggregates, along with sluggish economic performance, taking
account of developments in foreign exchange markets. The Chairman
may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the period before
the next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds
rate persistently outside a range of [DEL:6 to 10] ____ to ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates May 19, 1986
Percent
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Hov.
Dec.
-- 8.50
- 8.50
-- 8.50
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
Seasonally adjusted
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
MAY 19, 1986
Money stock measures and liquid assets _Bank cedit Domestic nonflnancial debtT
nontransactions total loan U.S.
kPriod Ml M2 components M3 L and government other
2
I total
In M2 in M3 only n_ _tmentl_
PNICT ANNUAL GRO8TH:
AIHNALLI (9Ul TO U1T)
N88K
1986
RAI 5P 654.7
ANNUAL bATES FOR BAlK CMEUIT ARE ADJUSTED FOB A TRANSFR OF LO AS FRO8 CONTLIITAL ILLINOIS NATIONAL MANK TO T Hr FDIC
BEGLCMINiG SEPTEMBER 26, 1984.
DEBT' UA'A ARI ON A HONTUILI AVERAGB BASIS, DEtIVotu BI ABVINAGIG IP-OP-ORTHIM LEVELS Of ADJACBEN IvflulTiS AN HAFI BE8N APJUSTED
TO REMOVE DISCONMTNUITIES.
p-PaILiHINIA
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted MAY 19, 1986
Other Ovemight dfeoml- mutual funds. NSA denonmi Tnerm bI Short-
Demand checkable RtP and MMDAs Savings nation gMnl a Intltu- nation i P Eurodollar Savings term Commer- Banker
Friod Cunency deposits depoits Eurodollr NSA deposits time purpose, tlons time NSA NSA bonds Iteasur clll paper ccep-
NSA deposits' and bokMl only depo te' securitles lances
ANNUALLY (4TH 1 UT):
JOUL
AOG.
SEPT.
APa. P
I/ IBCLUDES BETAIL REPURCHASE AGREEMHETS. ILL IA ANDU KR0GH ACCOUNTS AT COMMEICIAL BANMS AMD THRIFT INSTlTUTIONS ARE SUBTZACTED
FRO SHALL .1 DEPOSITS.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 CLASS II-FOMC
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
May 19, 1986
bills Treasury coupons net purchases* Federal agencies net purchases' Net change
Period Treasury bils I outright holdings Net RPs*
LEVEL--May 14
maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury
borrowing from the System.
