Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
September 19, 1986
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) September 19, 1986
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) Growth in the broader monetary aggregates slowed in August.
However, with expansion at annual rates of around 10-3/4 percent for M2 and
July and August than their 7 to 9 percent paths for the June-to-September
period. In August M2 and M3 were close to the upper limits of their respec-
tive longer-run ranges. Data for early September suggest a further slowing
of M2, while M3 seems to be expanding at around its August pace. In contrast
to the broader aggregates, M1 accelerated in August, to a 20-3/4 percent
annual rate, and growth over July and August was at about the advanced pace
recorded over the second quarter. M1 growth appears to have slackened
considerably in the early weeks of September.
(2) The slowing of M2 in August mainly reflected smaller in-
flows into money market funds and less rapid issuance of overnight RPs by
commercial banks--the latter associated with reduced purchases of government
securities. Growth of deposits in M2 remained near the robust pace that
has prevailed throughout the summer, as reductions in average deposit
offering rates have continued to lag declines in market yields, especially
for the most liquid components of M2. Although more institutions have
reduced offering rates on NOW and savings deposits below their former
regulatory ceilings, most still appear to be reluctant to do so. The
overall flow into OCDs, savings deposits, and MMDAs strengthened in August,
while runoffs from small time deposits accelerated. Expansion in other
checkable deposits, at nearly a 40 percent annual rate, was especially
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
June
to
June July August August
QIV'85
to
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve measures
Nonborrowed reserves1
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal borrowing
Excess reserves
robust, as their opportunity costs reached unprecedented lows. Expansion in
demand deposits also remained brisk in August, and currency growth strengthened.
Commercial banks supplemented strong inflows to core deposits with increased
issuance of managed liabilities. Bank CDs expanded for the first time in
six months, helping to fund sizable acquisitions of tax-exempt securities
and a pickup in loan growth.
(3) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors accelerated to
nearly a 14 percent annual rate in August, bringing growth since the fourth
quarter of 1985 to 13 percent, well above the 8 to 11 percent range for
units rushed to market in advance of restrictions included in proposed
tax-reform legislation, which would take effect September 1; subsequently,
tax-exempt borrowing has dropped off sharply. Business borrowing in shorter-
term markets picked up appreciably in August, while corporate bond issuance
remained fairly strong; borrowing in long-term markets has decreased markedly
in September, however, following a back up in bond yields. A robust pace
of equity retirements has continued to boost overall business borrowing.
And household debt appears to be expanding at a strong clip, with net
mortgage formation proceeding rapidly and consumer credit receiving a boost
from the latest round of low-rate automobile finance programs.
(4) Growth of nonborrowed and total reserves in August continued
at annual rates approaching 20 percent, reflecting the strength in trans-
actions deposits. Reserve paths were constructed throughout the intermeet-
ing period assuming $300 million of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing.
Borrowing (after allowance for special situation credit) was close to
this level in the maintenance period ending in the week following the last
Committee meeting. However, such borrowing averaged $519 million in the
subsequent maintenance period. There was a substantial upward revision
in estimates of required reserves on the final day of that period, but
with the money market suggesting ample reserve availability, the Desk
met only a portion of the projected need; the reserve shortfall did not
show through until late in the day. In the first eight days of the
current period, borrowing has dropped back to around $380 million.
(5) Federal funds generally have traded around or a little
below 5-7/8 percent since the one-half percentage point reduction in the
discount rate that took effect shortly after the August 19 FOMC meeting.
Shorter-term interest rates declined 30 basis points or so following the
discount rate cut, and the prime rate was reduced one-half percentage
point. In bond markets, rates were little changed immediately after the
discount rate action, but subsequently have backed up by as much as 65
basis points. Concerns about inflation apparently began to emerge among
market participants, associated in part with signs that OPEC was succeeding
in restraining output. At the same time, evidence of greater economic
strength and rapid money growth both domestically and abroad, along with
various statements by foreign authorities, seemed to make near-term
monetary easing in the United States and other major industrial countries
unlikely. In recent days, further increases in bond yields have accompanied
an appreciable decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar, which
raised market concerns about demands for dollar assets. Spurred in part
by the rise in bond yields, major stock price indexes fell 4 to 8 percent
over the intermeeting period.
(6) The dollar fell 1-3/4 percent on balance against major foreign
currencies since the last Committee meeting. The dollar remained steady
after the August discount rate cut and even firmed in early September.
The significant decline in the past week followed strong statements by
German and Japanese officials ruling out further monetary easing in their
countries as well as statements here and abroad recognizing the potential
for a weaker dollar under these circumstances.
. Precious metals prices continued to
rise over the intermeeting period, bringing their total increases since late
July to 15 to 30 percent. Political developments relating to South Africa
and threatening supply disruptions apparently accounted for a significant
portion of these price rises, but the decline in the dollar and emerging
inflation concerns in the U.S. seem to have contributed as well.
Policy alternatives
(7) The table below presents three alternative specifications
for growth of the monetary aggregates from August to December together with
associated federal funds rate ranges. 1  (More detailed data, including im-
plied growth for each alternative from last year's fourth-quarter base of
the annual ranges to the fourth quarter of this year, and from September to
December, are shown on the table and charts on the following pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from
August to December
(8) Under Alternative B, which assumes continuation of the cur-
rent degree of pressure on reserve positions, growth in M2 and M3 expected
over the next four months would leave these aggregates at the 9 percent
upper ends of their annual ranges. With the moderate easing or tightening
of reserve pressures assumed for alternatives A and C, respectively, the
broader aggregates would be expected to move above or below the upper bounds
of their annual ranges, with the gap widening as the year comes to a close.
However, even under these alternatives, given the lateness in the year,
annual growth of the broad aggregates on a fourth-quarter average basis
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
would not be anticipated to diverge greatly from the upper limits of their
long-run annual ranges. M1 growth for the year under all the alternatives
is projected to be not far from the 14-1/2 pace registered so far this year.
(9) Under alternative B, reserve paths would continue to be
constructed assuming $300 million of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at
the discount window. Federal funds would be expected to continue to trade
around 5-7/8 percent, confirming expectations of no near-term policy change,
and the Treasury bill rate would remain near 5-1/4 percent. Bond yields
should fluctuate around recent higher levels, with financial markets continuing
to be unusually sensitive to developments affecting the economic and policy
outlook. While forthcoming inflation indicators may suggest only a moderate
uptick in price pressures, as in the staff forecast, strength in near-term
data on economic activity, expansion of broad money measures along the upper
bounds of their ranges, and the continued downtrend in the dollar in foreign
exchange markets expected under this alternative would tend to limit the
potential for retracing the recent climb in bond yields.
(10) M2 growth under alternative B is expected to average around
below its average pace in July and August, but still well in excess of in-
come growth. Based on the staff greenbook forecast, M2 velocity would
decline further--at a 3 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter. With
money market rates staying around current levels under alternative B, in-
flows from market instruments to liquid retail accounts should continue to
be stimulated by their relatively attractive returns, though flows would
tend to be somewhat smaller than in recent months, reflecting the diminishing
impacts of earlier declines in market rates. In addition, opportunity costs
may widen a bit as offering rates adjust down a little more. The expectation
of a moderate slowing of inflows to retail M2 accounts is based on an
assessment that rates on savings and regular NOW accounts will continue to
be reduced very sluggishly over the balance of the year, despite unusually
low spreads to market rates; should depository institutions show more
willingness to cut offering rates, M2 growth could slow somewhat more.
Growth in M2 also may be restrained by further ebbing in the expansion in
overnight RPs as net purchases of Treasury securities by banks continue to
abate as interest rates stabilize.
(11) M3 also is expected to decelerate from August to December
in the specifications of alternative B--to an 8 percent annual rate. This
slowing would be accounted for entirely by the reduced growth in M2; the
non-M2 component of M3 is projected to continue expanding at the average
pace of recent months. Bank credit growth should slow substantially over
the balance of the year as loan demand remains moderate and acquisitions
of tax-exempt as well as Treasury securities drop off. Thrifts' asset
expansion, meanwhile, is expected to pick up only marginally in coming
(12) M1 growth, though expected to moderate somewhat from its
July-August pace, is still likely to be quite rapid over the rest of the
year under alternative B. With offering rates on NOW accounts adjusting
only slowly, inflows to other checkable deposits would continue to be
boosted by funds shifting from small time deposits as well as from market
instruments, though abating from their recent extraordinary pace. Growth
in demand deposits should taper off, as holdings become more fully adjusted
to the earlier declines in short-term market rates. Based on the staff's
GNP projection, transactions needs are likely to increase in the fourth
quarter at around the third-quarter pace. Reflecting the influence of the
previous narrowing in opportunity costs of M1 balances, M1 velocity is
expected to contract at a 7 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter,
after a 12 percent decline in the current quarter.
(13) Debt growth also may moderate in coming months, though re-
maining much faster than GNP through the fourth quarter. A marked slowdown
from the elevated August pace already is in process, concentrated in state
and local government borrowing. In addition, once current rate concessions
expire, the decline anticipated in car sales in the fourth quarter is likely
to be associated with reduced consumer installment borrowing. Household
mortgage borrowing should be well maintained over the rest of the year with
continued strong single-family housing activity. Federal credit demands
will remain heavy in coming months, especially in the coupon area, once the
debt ceiling is raised. Nonfinancial business borrowing could pick up with
some widening of the financing gap and possibly an increase in corporate
financial restructuring activity in advance of tax reform. Overall, debt
of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to expand at a 12 percent
rate from August through year end, implying growth for the year on a fourth-
quarter average basis of 13 percent, cmpared with the 11 percent upper
bound of the Committee's monitoring range.
(14) Alternative A assumes either a reduction in discount borrow-
ings to a near-frictional level of $150 million or a one-half percentage
point cut in the discount rate with borrowings kept at $300 million. In
either case, the funds rate would gravitate into the 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent
area. Short-term market rates would adjust downwards, with the 3-month bill
rate likely moving below 5 percent. While bond yields might come down
initially, they would probably remain above the low points reached in
the spring; indeed, recent experience suggests some risk that long-term
yields could even back up in the face of a decline in short-term rates if
the easing in policy taken together with signs of strength in the economy
and prices exacerbated fears of inflation. Absent monetary easing abroad,
lower short-term rates would tend to lessen the attractiveness of dollar
assets, and any heightening of inflationary concerns in this environment
could place the foreign exchange value of the dollar under considerable down-
ward pressure.
(15) Under alternative A, growth in M2 and M3 of around 9-1/2
and 8-1/2 percent, respectively, would be anticipated from August through
December. Such growth would leave these aggregates a little above the upper
band of their annual ranges. Offering rates on retail deposits and money
market mutual funds would become even more favorable, at least for a while,
fostering heavy inflows into these instruments. Absent a policy reversal
in coming months, deposit flows are likely to remain strong into early 1987
supported in part by the emergence of somewhat more robust economic activity
than in the staff projection. M1 growth from August to December would be
expected to continue near its rapid pace for the year to date, bringing
growth for the year to 14-3/4 percent.
(16) Alternative C assumes an increase in discount borrowing to
$500 million. Federal funds might return to the 6-1/4 to 6-1/2 percent area.
This tightening of reserve conditions would enhance the odds that M2 and M3
would come in within their ranges for this year. Growth in these aggregates
would be expected to slow to a 7-1/2 percent rate over the rest of the year.
M1 might decelerate significantly, as rates on small time deposits rose
relative to those on NOW accounts. Even so, with the opportunity costs of
holding NOW accounts remaining quite low, growth of M1 over the August-to-
December period might still average around 10 percent at an annual rate,
resulting in growth for the year of nearly 14 percent.
(17) Since a near-term tightening action is not currently built
into money market rates, 3-month bills could back up to around 5-3/4 percent.
Private short-term rates could rise by more than Treasuries if concerns in-
tensify about the prospects of certain borrowers and lending institutions.
Bond rates also would tend to back up, though the reaction in long-term
markets might tend to be muted to the extent that concerns about inflationary
Orospects were eased. The dollar could tend to strengthen, at least for a
time, on foreign exchange markets.
Directive language
(18) Draft language for the operational paragraph, with the
usual alternatives, is shown below. The draft follows the format used at
the July and August meetings in specifying numerical growth rates for M2
and M3 but not for Ml. As noted on page 6, August is suggested as the base
for the money growth specifications. With regard to the issue of inter-
meeting adjustments in the degree of reserve pressure, the draft retains
the symmetrical language of the last directive but could be adapted to an
asymmetrical approach (with the appropriate use of "might" and "would") as
in a number of earlier directives.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to decrease slightly (SOMEWHAT) (Alt. A)/MAINTAIN
(Alt. B)/INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions, [DEL: taking account of the possiblity of a
change in the discount rate.] This action is expected to be consistent
with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from [DEL: June to September]
AUGUST TO DECEMBER at annual rates of about ____ AND ____ [DEL: 7 to 9]
percent, RESPECTIVELY. While growth in M1 is expected to moderate
from the exceptionally large increase during the [DEL: second quarter]
PAST SEVERAL MONTHS, that growth will continue to be judged in the
light of the behavior of M2 and M3 and other factors. Somewhat
greater or lesser reserve restraint might/(WOULD) be acceptable
depending on the behavior of the aggregates, the strength of the
business expansion, developments in foreign exchange markets,
progress against inflation, and conditions in domestic and
international credit markets. The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations
that reserve conditions during the period before the next meeting
are likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently
outside a range of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 4 to 8] percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
September 22, 1986
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
Hay
June
July
Aug.
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
Seasonally adjusted
Strictly Confidential (FR)--
Class II FOMC
SEPT. 22, 1986
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt2
nontransactlons total loans U.S.
trlod M1 M2 components M3 L and government2 other 2  total-2
in _M2 In M3 only I__n tmnts
PERCINT ANNUAL GEBONT:
ANNUALLY (Ut TO QIV)
APB.
MAr
JUNE
AUG. P
MONTHLY LETZELS
1986-API.
Iat
JU 8
JOLI
AUG. P
ANNUAL BATES FO1 BANK CMDTOT ABE ADJUSTED FOr & TRiANSiFR OF LOANS FHO CONTINENTAL ILLINOIS NATIONAL BANK TO THE FDIC
BEGIHNANG SEPTEMBER 26, 1984.
DEBT 1AIA ABE ON A MONTHLI AVERAGE bASIS DRLKVED I AVERAGlIIG END-OF-HONTH LEVELS OF ADJACNI MlONTHS, AND HAVE BEEN ADJUSTED
To EHIIUV DISCONTINUITIS.
P-PBELIHINAh
S8PT. 11
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
SEPT. 22, 1986
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds, NSA denomi- Term Term Short-
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation g.jneral Institu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Commer- Bankers
Period Currency depots deposits Epoiturodollars NSA deposits time purpose, tions time NSA NSA bonds reasury clal paper accep-
NSA deposits' and broker/ only deposits3  securities tances
dealer'
AIIOULLI (4TH QTR):
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities CLASS II-FOMC
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
September 19, 1986
Trea bills Treasury coupons net purchases' Federal agencies net purchases' Net change
Period Treasury bills -0 outright holdings Net RPs'
n
t c han
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
LEVEL--Sept. 17
($ billions)
maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury
borrowing from the System.
