Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
March 28, 1986
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) March 28, 1986
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) After essentially no growth in January, M1 subsequently
accelerated, expanding at annual rates of 7-1/4 percent in February and an
estimated 14-1/2 percent in March. As a result, M1 grew from November to
March above its 7 percent short-run objective--leaving this aggregate
somewhat over the upper bound of its 3 to 8 percent long-run target cone.
Given the staff's first-quarter GNP forecast, M1 velocity is estimated to
have declined at around a 1-3/4 percent annual rate this quarter, compared
with its drop of 6 percent over all of 1985. Expansion in M2 also picked up
in February and March, but on balance growth was quite modest and the aggre-
gate remained below both the Committee's short-run path and long-run cone.
Growth of M3, meanwhile, remained moderate throughout the quarter, with the
aggregate essentially on the Committee's short-run path and ending the
quarter around the middle of its long-run range.
(2) The recent strength of M1 reflected mainly a sharp acceler-
ation in demand deposits following their runoff in January. OCDs so far in
months of 1985. Available information continues to suggest that the January
deregulation of NOW accounts has had little overall impact on M1, with
depositories to date generally not posting more liberal contract terms on
these accounts. M2 growth was held down by sluggishness in its nontrans-
actions component through most of the quarter. Inflows to retail deposits
again appear to have been depressed by household investments in bond and
stock mutual funds; in the early months of the year, bond and stock funds
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Nov. QIV'85
to to
Jan. Feb. Mar.P Mar.P Mar.P
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
continued to increase at about the elevated 50 percent annual rate that
has prevailed since the spring of last year. Within the non-M2 component
of M3, large time deposits decelerated over the past two months; while there
was a sharp pickup at thrifts, outstanding CDs at commercial banks declined
a little.
(3) The expansion in total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors
slowed appreciably over the first quarter following its extraordinary
growth late last year. Tax-exempt borrowing was virtually nil, on net,
and federal government borrowing dropped off as the Treasury drew down
its cash balance to meet a substantial portion of the first-quarter
deficit. Although businesses borrowed unusually heavily in long-term
bond markets, much of this borrowing substituted for shorter-term sources
of credit such as bank loans and commercial paper or served to refund
existing long-term debt; on a net basis, credit market borrowing by
businesses slowed as the financing gap remained moderate and merger
activity abated. Equity issuance, spurred by soaring stock prices, also
lessened business needs for borrowed funds. Falling interest rates
stimulated mortgage activity, including refinancings, as interest rates
in this market reached the lowest level in seven and a half years.
(4) Total and nonborrowed reserves grew at about a 14 percent
annual rate on average in February and March, mirroring the strength in
transactions deposits. Throughout the intermeeting period the nonborrowed
reserves path was constructed on the assumption of $300 million of adjust-
ment plus seasonal borrowing. The allowance for excess reserves was
raised to $900 million about midway through the period in view of the
recent high levels of excess reserves; in part, this might reflect needs
for larger balances related to an expanded volume of clearings associated
with very heavy financial transactions. In the three complete maintenance
periods since the last FOMC meeting borrowing averaged $353 million.
(5) The federal funds rate remained mainly between 7-3/4 and 8
percent during the first half of the intermeeting period, but fell to around
March 7. Other short-term market rates have declined about 50 to 80 basis
points since the last FOMC meeting and the prime rate was reduced from
to further weakness in oil prices, against a backdrop of mixed economic
news and declines in some aggregate price indexes. Corporate and Treasury
bond yields have dropped 100 to 150 basis points, while rates for fixed-
rate mortgages have declined around 75 basis points. Broad stock price
indexes surged over the intermeeting period, increasing about 10 percent.
(6) The trade-weighted average value of the dollar, though
firming somewhat in recent days, dropped about 2 percent further on balance
since the last FOMC, bringing its total decline since the September G-5
meeting to about 15 percent. It is now nearly 30 percent below its
February 1985 peak. During the intermeeting period the dollar reached a
postwar low against the yen, prompting
statements of concern and hints of action by Japanese
officials. These developments contributed to the recent more general
appreciation in the dollar.
Policy alternatives
(7) The table below gives three alternative specifications for
growth in the monetary aggregates from March to June, along with associated
federal funds rate ranges. More detailed data, including growth rates implied
by each alternative from the fourth-quarter base of the Committee's long-run
ranges to June, can be found on the table and charts on the following pages.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from
March to June
(8) Under alternative B, which assumes maintenance of about
the current degree of pressure on bank reserve positions as indexed by $300
million in borrowing, M1 would be expected to grow at about a 7-1/2 percent
annual rate from March to June. This would leave it a little above the
upper end of its 3 to 8 percent longer-run range in June. M2 growth at 7
percent over the three months would lift this aggregate to around the lower
end of its long-run range. M3 would be somewhat below the midpoint of its
(9) With reserve conditions unchanged under alternative B,
federal funds would be expected generally to trade in the 7-1/4 to 7-3/8
percent area. Other interest rates may change little, although some reversal
of recent declines cannot be ruled out, and on foreign exchange markets the
dollar may remain around current levels for a time. To some degree, a
further easing in monetary policy over coming months may be built into the
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in billions
1986-January
February
March
April
May
June
Monthly Growth Rates
1986-January
February
March
April
May
June
Quarterly Ave. Growth
1985-Q2
Q3
Q4
Nov.85
Dec.85
Feb.86
Mar.86
Mar.86
Mar.86
June 86
June 86
Chart 1
ACTUAL AND TARGETED M1
- ACTUAL LEVEL
--- PROJECTED LEVEL
* SHORT RUN ALTERNATIVES
-H 670
S *A
*B
D J F M A M J J
1986
A S 0 N DO N
1985
existing interest rate structure. Thus, should the market come to view
such an easing as unlikely, the 3-month bill rate could back up into the
as well, though they are likely to continue to be influenced importantly by
movements in oil prices. On the supply side of the bond market, offerings
are expected to remain relatively heavy. Though corporate issuance may
ease back from recent record levels reached in response to the decline in
rates so far this year, Treasury bond issuance will pick up now that the
Congressional ceiling on high coupon bonds has been lifted.
(10) M1 growth in the March to June period under this alternative
is expected to remain at about the same rate on average as over the first
three months of the year. The transactions demand for M1 is projected to
slacken, given the slowing in nominal GNP growth expected by the staff in
the second quarter and probably also a drop-off in the heavy volume of
financial transactions that accompanied the surge in stock and bond
prices of recent months. On the other hand, demands for M1 are likely to
be boosted somewhat over the next few months by the recent declines in
short-term interest rates. The accompanying flattening of the yield
curve, by working to reduce offering rates on small time deposits, would
also seem to add to demands for interest-bearing M1 balances.1 On a
quarterly average basis, M1 would be expected to expand at a 9 percent
annual rate in the second quarter under alternative B, implying a drop in
velocity at around a 4 percent annual rate, given the staff GNP forecast.
(11) M2 under alternative B would be expected to increase
considerably more rapidly from March to June than its relatively sluggish
rate of growth in the first quarter, partly as shifts to bond and stock
investment vehicles moderate as portfolio adjustments to the recent surge
in securities prices abate. 1 The continued moderate M3 growth under this
alternative presumes that bank credit growth will remain relatively sub-
(12) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is likely to
grow over the second quarter at around the much reduced pace of the first
quarter, although the level of debt in June would still be somewhat above
the upper limit of the FOMC's monitoring range. Federal borrowing is
projected to be larger on a seasonally adjusted basis in the spring than
in winter, when a sharp drop in the Treasury cash balance had financed a
substantial portion of the deficit. Municipal security issuance also is
likely to pick up a bit from the early months of the year. On the other
hand, households, while apt to maintain a relatively steady pace of
fixed-rate mortgage borrowing in response to recent rate declines, are
expected to ease demands for consumer credit in light of their already
heavy debt burden. Businesses will continue to focus on longer-term
markets as sources of funds, but overall net borrowing should be kept
subdued by a continued modest financing gap and diminishing merger and
acquisition activity.
(13) Alternative A encompasses some easing of reserve conditions,
with discount window borrowing dropping to minimum levels of $100 to $150
million, and the federal funds rate averaging around, or a little below,
the 7 percent discount rate. While some monetary easing may be anticipated
in the current structure of market rates, those interest rates probably
would decline further under this approach, partly on more widespread expecta-
tions of another reduction in the discount rate. Depending on the pervasive-
ness of such expectations, the 3-month Treasury bill rate may fluctuate
around a 6 to 6-1/4 percent area. Long-term rates are not likely to
decline by more than short-term rates, and probably by less, assuming no
further change in inflation expectations. The dollar would probably
again come under donward pressure, particularly if other leading central
banks did not also ease monetary conditions.
(14) M1 growth would be expected to strengthen under alternative
A to around 9 percent over March to June, noving this aggregate further
above the upper end of its long-run range, though within its parallel band.
Even more rapid growth could occur, given the very narrow spread that
could develop between rates on market instruments, MMDAs and time deposits
and those on NOW accounts--especially if institutions are reluctant to
reduce the latter in the fluid competitive environment following full
deregulation. Strong demands for money may well continue later in the
year partly in lagged response to the rate declines associated with this
alternative. Under those circumstances, and particularly if transactions-
related demands were also on the strong side, greater restraint on reserve
positions and an increase in interest rates might be needed at some point
later in the year if M1 were to be constrained within its longer-run
range for 1986.
(15) Under alternative A, the stronger growth of M2--bolstered
by inflows from market instruments mainly into MMMFs and MMDAs--would move
this aggregate up into its longer-run range by June. The acceleration
of M3 would probably be less. Bank credit growth through the second
quarter would be further restrained by softness in business loans as
corporations rely more heavily on bond financing in response to a further
drop in long-term rates.
(16) Alternative C entails a firming of reserve conditions
characterized by discount window borrowing rising to around $500 million.
The federal funds rate would probably move up to the 7-3/4 to 8 percent
area. Such a tightening is not anticipated by market participants, and
substantial upward rate movements would probably occur. The 3-month bill
rate would rise to above 7 percent. Long-term rates would also back up
considerably for a time, but upward pressures should abate as corporate
bond issuance drops off and as incoming data continue to suggest low
inflation. The foreign exchange value of the dollar would tend to firm
over the short run.
(17) M1 growth under the money market and reserve conditions
of alternative C would be expected to slow over the March to June period,
bringing this aggregate to within its long-run range by June. However,
M2 would remain noticeably below the lower end of its long-run range,
though within its parallel band. Moreover, if growth of M2 within its
longer-run range for the year is to be attained, the higher level of
rates is likely to prove unsustainable, particularly if it worked to
restrain economic expansion significantly.
Directive language
(18) Draft language for the operational paragraph, with the usual
alternatives, is shown below with suggested deletions from the current direc-
tive indicated in strike-through form and proposed additions in caps. The
proposed format follows that used at the December and February meetings in
highlighting the uncertainties surrounding the behavior of M1. With regard
to the issue of intermeeting adjustments in the degree of reserve pressure,
the draft retains the symmetrical language of the last directive. An asym-
metric approach could of course be indicated by insertion of "might" or
"would" as appropriate.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain (Alt. B)/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. This action is expected to be consistent with
growth in M2 and M3 over the period from [DEL: November to] March TO
JUNE at annual rates of about [DEL: 6] ____ percent and [DEL: 7] ____ percent,
respectively; while the behavior of M1 continues to be subject to
unusual uncertainty, growth at an annual rate of about [DEL: 7] ____ percent
over the period is anticipated. Somewhat greater reserve restraint
or somewhat lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable depending on
behavior of the aggregates, the strength of the business expansion,
developments in foreign exchange markets, progress against inflation,
and conditions in domestic and international credit markets. The
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the
period before the next meeting are likely to be associated with a
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 6 to 10] ____ TO
____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
March 31, 1986
Short-term Long-Term
Treaury bills CD comm. money bank U.S. government constant corporate municipal conventional home mortgages
federal eary b secondary market A utility secondary
Period secondary market paper prime maturity yields Bond primary market
n r l-month loan Buyer
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
- 9.00
- 9.00
E T
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
Seasonally adjusted
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
MAR. 31, 1986
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and govenment 
2
other 2 total
I___ n M2 In M3 only Invetmente'_
HONTHLI
1985--EAR.
APR.
nAT
JUIB
JULY
AUG.
SEPT.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
DEC.
1986--JA8.
r B.
WREELY LEVELS ($BXLLIONS)
1986--FEB. 3
ARNUAL RATES FOR BANK CREDIT ARl ADJUSTBD FOR A TRANSfBR Or LOANS FRO CONTIBETAL ILLINOIS NAtIOEAL BANK TO THE FDIC
BEGINNING SEPTEBBBER 26, 1984.
DBBT DATA AlE O0 A BONTBLI AVERAGE 8ASIS, DEB(IBD B! ATERAGING EtD-OP-HOWTH LEVELS OF ADJACKRT auuTHS. AND HAVE BERN ADJOSTD2
TO RBEOVB DISCONTINUITIES.
P-PRBLII NART
PE-PRELIINARE BSTINATE
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted MAR. 31, 1986
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denoml- mutual funds, NSA denomi- Term Term Short-
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation gineral Institu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Commer- Bankers
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars NSA deposits time purpose, tions time NSA NSA bonds Treasury clal paper accep-
securities tances
dealer'
ANMUALLr (412 QTR):
APR.
AAI
JUNE
JULT
AUG.
SEPT.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 CLASS II-FOMC
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
March 31, 1986
maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon Issues, and direct Treasury
borrowing from the System.
