Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
August 14, 1987
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
CLASS I - FOMC August 14, 1987
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) M2 growth picked up a little in July, although at a 2-3/4 per-
cent annual rate, expansion of this aggregate was less than the Committee's
lower bound of its 1987 target range. The strengthening of M2 was accounted
for entirely by a turnaround in M1, which edged up at a 1-3/4 percent pace in
July after the substantial runoff in June. Demand deposits declined in July
but at a much reduced rate from June; weakness in these deposits may have
stemed in part from continued reductions in compensating balances and a
further slowing in mortgage refinancing in response to previous increases in
interest rates. Other checkable deposits resumed growth in July, albeit at a
moderate 6-1/4 percent rate, after the nearly unprecedented June decline.
Weekly data for late July and early August suggest that some further strength-
ening of growth in both M1 and M2 is in train this month.
(2) The nontransactions component of M2 decelerated in July.
MMDAs continued to run off and growth of savings deposits slowed substantially
further, as opportunity costs on these more liquid accounts remained consider-
ably wider than in 1986 or early this year. Rates on short-term small time
deposits already had moved into closer alignment with market rates in June,
and yields on longer-term accounts continued to rise in July as the market
yield curve steepened. In response, small time deposits increased at a
secutive months of outflows.
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV '86
to
May June July July
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve measures
Nonborrowed reserves1
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
pe-Preliminary estimate.
1. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
(3) M3 expanded at only a 2 percent rate in July, considerably
below the 7-1/2 percent path set at the last Committee meeting, placing this
aggregate just above the bottom of the parallel band associated with its
with their M2 deposits growing moderately, banks reduced their managed liabil-
ities, including CDs and RPs in M3, and advanced a sizable volume of funds
to their foreign branches, which probably contributed to less aggressive
bidding for Eurodollar deposits and the decline in this component of M3 as
well. At thrifts, on the other hand, overall issuance of large CDs was well
maintained in July, although troubled institutions continued to experience
runoffs of uninsured deposits.
(4) Growth in total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors slowed
in July, largely owing to the disruption to federal financing from the debt
ceiling problem. Early in August, however, the bill auction that had been
omitted in July was made up, and by mid-August, Treasury financing was back
on track with the mid-quarter financing auctions occurring this week for
normal settlement on August 17. Total borrowing by nonfinancial businesses
appears to have eased somewhat in July; bond issuance remained near the
higher June pace, but short-term credit was repaid on balance, with both
business loans at banks and commercial paper outstanding registering declines.
Tax-exempt bond offerings receded somewhat in July, and in early August both
state and local governments and businesses have reduced their long-term bor-
rowing in response to the recent rise in bond yields. In the household sec-
tor, mortgage borrowing has ebbed a bit in recent months, although a sharply
rising ARM share probably has tended to lessen the effects of higher interest
rates. Mortgage lending also has been boosted by the shift from consumer
credit to home-equity loans, which probably has shaved several percentage
points from consumer installment credit growth this year.
(5) Total reserves continued to decline in July, but at a re-
duced 2 percent annual rate, largely reflecting weakness in transactions
deposits and decreases in excess reserves. The monetary base, which was
essentially flat in June, expanded at a 4-3/4 percent pace in July. The
assumption for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window used
in constructing the nonborrowed reserve path was maintained at $500 million
throughout the intermeeting period. Late in July, in light of slow growth
in the monetary aggregates while the dollar was strengthening, the Account
Manager was resolving uncertainties about reserve provision so that borrowing
would more likely turn out below, rather than above, the path assumption.
Most recently, given signs of strength in the economic expansion, continuing
concerns about price pressures, and a pickup in money growth, the Manager has
returned to a balanced stance of reserve provision. Borrowing for the three
reserve maintenance periods ended since the July 7 FOMC meeting has averaged
$466 million.
(6) The federal funds rate edged off during the intermeeting
period to average around 6-5/8 percent recently. Most other private money
market rates also moved a little lower, but bill rates backed up once the
Treasury was able to complete a full auction schedule and paydowns of bills
in weekly auctions slowed from the pace in the first half of the year. In
capital markets, yields on Treasury and corporate bonds moved higher through
early August, as pressures on oil prices from the Persian Gulf tensions
against a backdrop of reasonably robust economic data and uncertain progress
on the federal deficit seemed to intensify concerns about inflation and credit
demands in the future. Following the completion of the mid-quarter refund-
ing bond rates have retraced a portion of this rise, but since the last
meeting are up on balance by about 25 to 35 basis points. Apparently spurred
by optimism about the outlook for profits, however, stock prices soared over
the intermeeting period, with major indexes gaining from 6 to 10 percent.
(7) The dollar expanded by 1-1/2 percent on balance over the
intermeeting period against a weighted average of other G-10 currencies. It
rose strongly through much of the period, buoyed by the relative strength of
the U.S. economy and the tensions in the Persian Gulf, but subsequently fell
back in response to the worse-than-expected June trade figures. The dollar
was particularly strong against the mark, perhaps reflecting a sluggish
outlook for the German economy, and by late in the intermeeting period the
dollar-mark exchange rate had recovered to its early 1987 level.
, with
U.S. activity coming to $631 million over the intermeeting period, split
evenly between the Federal Reserve and the Treasury.
. Money market conditions tightened somewhat in Germany
and more in the United Kingdom, while remaining unchanged in Japan. Long-
term rates rose significantly in all these countries, with the largest rise
occurring in Japan amid improved prospects for economic activity as well as
concerns about the inflation implications of mid-East tensions.
Policy alternatives
(8) The table below presents three alternative specifications for
monetary growth from June to September, along with associated federal funds
rate ranges. (More detailed data, including growth from July to September
and from the fourth-quarter base of the long-run ranges to September implied
under each alternative, are shown on the table and charts on the following
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from June
to September
(9) Alternative B is based on retaining $500 million of adjust-
ment plus seasonal borrowing as the assumption in constructing reserve paths.
Federal funds would be likely to trade mainly in the lower portion of a
rate tax date, when unusually large payments may impart some temporary upward
pressure to the funds rate. With no major changes in supply anticipated, at
least until the time of the next expiration of the Treasury debt ceiling on
September 23, Treasury bill rates now seem broadly consistent with a federal
funds rate continuing to average a little above 6-1/2 percent. Likewise,
other money market rates generally should vary around current levels under
alternative B. Longer-term rates also are most likely to fluctuate near
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
------------------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ --- --- - ----- -- --
recent levels into the late summer, though they should remain sensitive
to developments in the Persian Gulf and other factors bearing on the
inflation outlook and the dollar.
(10) Under alternative B, and the other alternatives as well, M2
growth is projected to strengthen in August and September relative to the
weak expansion of recent months. This pickup would reflect primarily a
waning of the damping influence of previous increases in market rates and
opportunity costs. Offering rates on very liquid deposits now seem roughly
in line with the current levels of short-term market rates; however, some
additional upward adjustment in rates on longer-term small time deposits
probably can be expected, given recent increases in yields on market instru-
ments of comparable maturity. With opportunity costs unchanged or narrowing
a bit under this alternative, growth in M2 over the balance of the quarter
is expected to average near 6 percent, around the trend of income. This
growth would bring expansion over June to September to the 5 percent short-
run growth path specified by the Committee at its last meeting. Owing to
its recent weakness, largely reflecting the earlier widening of opportunity
costs, M2 would expand this quarter at only a 3-1/4 percent annual rate on
a quarterly average basis. Given the staff's greenbook projection for nominal
GNP, M2 velocity would be expected to increase at a 3 percent rate, around
the pace of the first half of the year.
(11) M3 growth over August and September would be expected to
accelerate substantially from its unusually depressed July pace, to a rate
of 7 percent under alternative B. Bank credit should resume its expansion,
boosting issuance of large CDs. Demand for adjustable rate mortgages likely
will continue to support thrift asset growth, funded in part by continued
expansion of large CDs, especially if the recent tendency to pull back from
reliance on FHLB advances continues. Even with the pickup in M3 growth, this
aggregate would fall short of the Committee's current 7-1/2 percent short-run
range for June to September by about 2 percentage points. Total debt of
nonfinancial sectors is expected to grow in August and September around the
more moderate July pace, leaving the debt aggregate in September about 9-1/2
percent at an annual rate above its fourth-quarter base. While federal
government borrowing has picked up following the debt ceiling disruption,
private credit demands may be damped a bit, especially in long-term credit
markets in response to the higher level of bond yields.
(12) Moderate increases in M1 also are expected over the balance
of the quarter as interest-rate effects recede. Since mid-July, growth of
both demand deposit balances and NOW accounts has resumed, and expansion of
M1 at a 5-1/4 percent rate is expected on average over August and September
under alternative B. But the arithmetic effect of weakness in June and July
implies quarterly average growth of less than 1 percent in the current quarter
and a velocity increase of almost 6 percent, the largest advance since early
(13) With respect to the long-run ranges, M2 growth from the
fourth quarter to September is expected to come to only 4-1/4 percent under
alternative B. Expansion at around an 11-1/2 percent rate over September to
December would be required to hit the lower end of the long-run range in the
fourth quarter; 9-1/2 percent growth would be needed to bring this aggregate
to the lower end of its growth cone in December. While a further strengthen-
ing of M2 growth is possible over the fourth quarter should some of the
unusual weakness of earlier this year be reversed, an acceleration of this
magnitude would seem unlikely without a very substantial decline in interest
rates by early in the fourth quarter. M3 growth from its fourth-quarter
base would be at a 5-1/4 percent rate by September under alternative B.
With moderate increases in bank and thrift credit projected, this aggregate
is likely to climb to within the lower portion of its range in the fourth
quarter, even if interest rates moved a little higher in the latter part of
the year, as in the staff forecast. Nonfinancial debt is still expected to
grow 9-1/2 percent in 1987 on a quarterly average basis, in the middle of
its 8 to 11 percent range. Growth of M1 from the fourth quarter of 1986 to
September is projected at 6-1/2 percent under alternative B; with rates re-
maining close to current levels under this alternative through the third
quarter, M1 growth for the year is not likely to differ very much from its
growth through September.
(14) Alternative A assumes adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of
$300 million would be used to construct reserve paths. The federal funds
rate would fall to within a 6 to 6-1/4 percent range, probably gravitating
toward the lower end once the market perceived the extent of the easing of
reserve pressures. Other short-term rates would follow suit, with the 3-
month Treasury bill rate probably slipping to around 5-1/2 percent. Given
the easing of reserve pressures under this alternative, against the back-
ground of recent signs of monetary policy firming in some other major indus-
trial countries, the dollar probably would come under renewed downward pres-
sure. Bond market participants, recently preoccupied with inflationary con-
cerns, might react negatively to a less restrictive stance of Federal Reserve
policy, especially should it be accompanied by a substantial weakening of the
dollar. In such circumstances, bond yields might not fall much, if at all,
over the intermeeting period, absent a sharp break in oil prices.
(15) Owing to the decline of short-term market interest rates
relative to offering rates on deposits, M2 growth under alternative A would
be expected to jump to 7 percent over August and September. Its M1 component
likely would accelerate to a 6-3/4 percent rate over the two months. Growth
of M2 would move noticeably closer to its long-term range, but in September
this aggregate still would have increased at only a 4-1/2 percent annual rate
from its fourth-quarter base. While the easing contemplated under this
alternative probably would have a pronounced effect on money growth in the
fourth quarter, whether M2 could hit the 5-1/2 percent lower bound of its
range without a further easing is uncertain. To make up the shortfall, a
percent to hit the bottom of the growth cone by December). For M3, the 7-1/2
percent growth foreseen for August and September under alternative A would
lift this aggregate to around the lower bound of its annual range. Prospects
would be good that the aggregate would move well within its range in the
fourth quarter; the steeper yield curve expected under this alternative would
provide additional incentives for businesses to focus credit demands on banks
and for home mortgage credit to be met through ARMs at thrifts.
(16) Alternative C assumes an increase in the reserve path allow-
ance for discount window borrowing to $700 million. Federal funds probably
would trade in a 7 to 7-1/4 percent range and bill rates would move commensu-
rately higher. A near-term firming of monetary policy does not now seem
widely anticipated and long-term rates probably would tend to rise under this
alternative. However, any such backup might be limited if such a policy
action were seen as indicative of continued Federal Reserve commitment to
restraining inflation. The dollar's recent firmness in exchange markets
would be more likely to persist, at least for a time.
(17) The backup in short-term market rates under alternative C,
together with lagging returns on deposits, would widen opportunity costs of
holding liquid monetary assets. Expansion of M2 over August and September
would be expected to average 5-1/4 percent, bringing growth from the fourth
quarter through September to around 4 percent. Given the continuing effects
of the rise in interest rates, this aggregate would be unlikely to accelerate
much in the fourth quarter. The 6-3/4 percent growth anticipated for M3 over
the last two months of this quarter would imply that growth of this aggregate
from the fourth quarter base to September would be around 1/4 percentage
point below the lower limit of its 1987 range. Even so, this aggregate
could climb to the lower end of its range in the fourth quarter, assuming
continued moderate expansion of assets at depository institutions. M1
might expand at only a 3 percent rate from June to September under this
alternative, with growth for the year decelerating further to 6-1/4 percent
by September, and dropping noticeably below 6 percent for the year.
Directive language
(18) Draft language for the operational paragraph, with the usual
options for alternative specifications of reserve pressures, is presented be-
low for Committee consideration. With regard to the language on intermeeting
adjustments, the draft provides for the usual options regarding the symmetry
or asymmetry of such adjustments with appropriate use of "would" or "might,"
and "somewhat" or "slightly".
If the Committee wished to change the implicit weighting of the
various factors conditioning intermeeting reserve adjustments, it could
shift or delete the language in the first two sets of brackets. For example,
if the Committee wished to retain the current added emphasis on resisting
inflation but to reduce that on the dollar in light of its recent strength,
it might shift the "as well as" expression to before the reference to the
foreign exchange market. Alternatively, it could delete the language in both
brackets to give the various factors more equal weight.
The language in the third set of brackets is suggested should the
Committee wish to indicate that somewhat faster growth in M2 and M3 than
currently expected would be acceptable, under certain conditions, given
their shortfall from the long-run ranges, which would be expected to persist
through the third quarter under any of the alternatives.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain (Alt. B)/INCREASE
SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
Somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint (WOULD/MIGHT), or somewhat
(SLIGHTLY) lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT), be acceptable depending
on indications of inflationary pressures [and on] developments in foreign
exchange markets, [as well as] the behavior of the aggregates and the strength
of the business expansion. This approach is expected to be consistent with
growth in M2 and M3 over the period from June through September at annual
rates around 5 ____ and [DEL: 7-1/2] ____ percent, respectively. [SOMEWHAT FASTER
GROWTH IN THE BROAD AGGREGATES WOULD BE ACCEPTABLE IN THE ABSENCE OF INDI-
CATIONS OF WORSENING PRICE PRESSURES AND SUBSTANTIAL WEAKNESS IN THE DOLLAR,
GIVEN THE SHORTFALL OF THESE AGGREGATES FROM THEIR ANNUAL RANGES.] Growth
in M1, while picking up from recent levels, is expected to remain well below
its pace during 1986. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if
it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions
during the period before the next meeting are likely to be associated with
a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 4 to 8] ____ TO ____
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
Tr ury bsllCDa comm. 
money
federal Treasury bills sondary pcommr market bank
funds econdary market paper mutual prime
- *1 I-
Monthly
1987 July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Weekly
May 6
Aug. 5
Aug. 12
Daily
Aug 7
Aug. 13
Aug. 14
- 8.25
- 8.25
- 8.25
-- 8.25
August 17, 1987
Long-Term
corporate conventional home mortgages
U.S. government constant corporate municipal sconvantional homeota
S government constant A utility Bond secondary
arturty yil recently 
B d  market pr
im
ary m
a rket
Donoghue's Money Fund Report. Columns 12 and 13 are 1-day quotes for Friday and Thursday, respectively, initial contract rate on new commitments for one-year, adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) at SALs offering both
~I_ ~L
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures cass FO4C
PERCENT ANNUAL GBOWTI;
ANMUALLI (0I1 TO UIV)
IBOTHLI
1986--JULT
AUG.
SEPT.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APIL
BAY
JUNE
JULY P
MONTHLY LEVELS
1987--HAL
AP5.
BAI
JUNE
JULT P
MEBKLY LEVELS
1987-JOLI 6
Money stock measures and liquid assets
nontransactions
M1 M2 components M3 L
in M n M3 only[;, M -7 i -Y
Bank credit
Stoal loans
and
investments'
Domestic nonfinancial debt 2
US I- -
government 2 other 2 Itotalz
AUG. J P 751.8
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
AUG. 17, 1987
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denoml mutual funds, NSA denomi- Term Term Short-
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation general Institu nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Commer Bankers
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodotlars NSA deposits time purpose, tions time NSA NSA bonds Treasury clal paper accep-
NSA deposits' and broker only deposits 3  securities lances
dealer 2
ANNUALLI(4T8 QTR):
P-PB1E18 IIMAB
STRIC1LY CONFIDENTIAL IFH)
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities' CLASS II-FOMC
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
III
IV
LEVEL--Aug. 12
($ billions)
Treasury bills
net change'
Treasury coupons net purchases'
- -75
- -125
-- 5
- -252
-- -- -75
-- -- -125
-- -- 5
Federal agencies net purchases'
August 17, 1987
Net change
outright holdings Net RPs*
I. Change from end-ofperiod to end-of period. 5. In addition to the net purchase of securities, also reflects changes in System holdings of bankers' acceptances,
2. Outright transactions In market and with foreign accounts, and redemptions (-) in bill auctions direct Treasury borrowing from the System and redemptions (-) ol agency and Treasury coupon issues
3. Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts, and short-term notes acquired in exchange for 6 Includes changes in RPs ( +), matched sale-purchase transactions (-), and matched purchase sale transactions ( )
maturing bills Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury
borrowing from the System.
