Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
February 6, 1987
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC February 6, 1987
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) M2 and M3 accelerated in December, and growth remained close
to those higher rates in January; for the two months together, M2 advanced
at about a 9-1/2 percent annual rate and M3 at 9 percent1, both appreciably
faster than the 7 percent paths set by the FOMC for these aggregates for
the November-to-March period. M1 increased at about a 21 percent rate on
average over December and January. Growth of the monetary aggregates was
boosted over the two months by an unusually large volume of transactions
around year-end. An exceptional amount of churning in financial markets
and a surge in bank lending in late December were prompted in part by
incentives to complete certain types of transactions before provisions of
the new tax law took effect at the start of 1987. These developments were
associated with an unprecedented increase in demand deposits from mid-
December through early January; by late January the bulge in such deposits
had run off. In addition, banks stepped up their issuance of managed
liabilities, especially CDs, over the two months to help fund the rise in
(2) The retail components of the aggregates also strengthened in
the November-January period. Growth in OCDs, which may also have been
affected by year-end transactions, picked up in December and accelerated
further in January, reaching around a 40 percent rate last month. Growth
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES 1
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Nov. QIV '85 to
to QIV '86
Nov. Dec. Jan.P Jan.P ('86 targets)
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve measures
Nonborrowed reserves 2
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
p--preliminary; debt data for January are partly projected.
1. Data for monetary aggregates incorporate benchmark revisions and new seasonal
adjustment factors.
2. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
in retail nontransactions deposits in M2 increased as runoffs of time deposits
slowed. The opportunity costs of holding retail deposits have remained quite
low, though moving a bit higher over recent months in part as deposit offering
rates edged down.
(3) Boosted by the borrowing around year-end, total credit growth
of domestic nonfinancial sectors increased to around a 13 percent rate over
December and January. The extraordinary volume of business loan demand at
U.S. banks in this period resulted not only from tax-related transactions,
but also from a shift of credit demands from overseas branches and the commer-
cial paper market as short-term market rates rose sharply relative to the
prime rate; only a portion of the increase in commercial and industrial
loans was reversed over January. Overall short-term credit borrowing by
businesses was quite strong on a month-average basis in both December and
January. Mortgage pool issuance and bank real estate lending have remained
robust, likely reflecting brisk home sales and some substitution of home
equity lines for consumer credit. In the federal sector, tax receipts have
been lifted temporarily by the effects of tax law changes, and the Treasury
has reduced its borrowing by cutting back offerings at weekly bill auctions.
(4) Paralleling the bulge in transactions balances around year-
end, total reserve growth surged to 40 percent in December and then fell to
half that rate in January. Excess reserves also rose sharply in December;
deposit turnover likely was very high, and bank reserve management seemed
especially cautious in the face of unusual pressures in money markets and
the coincidence of the year-end with the end of a reserve maintenance period.
Allowance was made in open market operations for a large amount of excess
reserves over year-end, but the total exceeded $2 billion, a post-war
record. The funds rate spurted to daily averages of 14 to 16 percent on
the final two days of the year and borrowing climbed sharply to meet the
demand for reserves in the statement period ending December 31, averaging
$905 million, compared with the $300 million allowance used throughout the
intermeeting period in constructing the reserve path. Borrowing fell off
to $290 million in the next maintenance period, but rose in the maintenance
period ended January 28 to $462 million as a result of another unanticipated
strengthening in excess reserves. Even after year-end pressures subsided in
January, federal funds continued to trade at or above 6 percent, somewhat
higher than might earlier have been expected given the degree of reserve
pressure. Smaller banks in particular seem to have reduced their discount
window usage--both seasonal and adjustment--perhaps reflecting ample liquidity
and weak loan demand. Most recently, funds have tended to trade around 6
percent; borrowing has averaged $190 million through the first eight days of
the current statement period.
(5) Most other short-term rates rose around year-end as credit
demands intensified and the funds market tightened, but subsequently reversed
those increases, returning to close to their levels at the time of the last
FOMC meeting. Even so, short-term rates remain above their lows of last fall,
when federal funds were trading consistently below 6 percent. Long-term
yields have shown mixed changes over the intermeeting period, with Treasury
bond yields moving a little higher, while rates in the corporate and mortgage
markets have declined somewhat into more typical alignment with Treasury
rates. Although a drop in the dollar and stronger incoming economic data
have raised questions about the scope for a further easing in monetary
policy, some market participants still appear to hold the view that sluggish
growth in the industrialized countries could well prompt further easing
moves by spring. Stock prices soared to new highs over the intermeeting
period, boosted in part by the perceived potential for enhanced competitive-
ness of U.S. industry following the dollar depreciation.
(6) The dollar's exchange value has declined on balance by 6-1/2
percent on a trade-weighted average basis against G-10 currencies since the
last Committee meeting, with decreases of 8 percent against the German mark
and 6 percent against the yen. The dollar began to decline in the latter
part of December, and dropped sharply further after publication at the end
of December of preliminary U.S. trade figures for November, which showed a
much larger than expected deficit and seemed to underscore the slow pace of
adjustment of massive world current account imbalances. The Bundesbank's
announcement in late January of a discount rate cut and the improvement in
U.S. trade figures shown when December data were released, along with other
indications of a brighter outlook for the U.S. economy, have tended to relieve
downward pressures on the dollar, which has rebounded 3-1/4 percent from its
lows in late January.
. The Desk intervened to sell $50 million equivalent of yen for
U.S. account--equally shared by the System and the Treasury.
Long-run ranges
(7) The table below presents three alternative sets of ranges for
growth in the broad monetary aggregates and credit from the fourth quarter of
possibilities discussed at the last FOMC meeting. The tentative ranges for
Alternative I specifies slightly more rapid expansion of M2 and M3, retaining
the 1986 growth ranges for these aggregates. Under both of these alternatives,
the range for the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is the same as the
tentative 1987 monitoring range for this aggregate set in July, which was
unchanged from 1986. Alternative III contemplates a further reduction in
all the ranges. M1 is discussed separately in paragraphs 14 to 16 below.
Alt. I Alt. II Alt. III
(Tentative
1987 ranges)
(8) The staff's forecast for the economy in the greenbook is
believed consistent with a slowing of M2 growth in 1987--to around 7 percent.
In that forecast, nominal GNP growth of around 5-3/4 percent for the year
is expected to be accompanied by little net change in interest rates. A
aggregate in over a decade, but each of the intervening years was marked
by factors--such as rapid income growth, declining market interest rates,
or major deposit deregulation--that are not anticipated this year. 1 Indeed,
growth of M2 at 7 percent would be at the upper end of the range of the
predictions of a number of conventionally specified M2 demand equations using
the staff's interest rate and income projections. Many of these equations
embody more rapid adjustments of deposit offering rates or of the public's M2
holdings in response to the previous narrowing of opportunity costs than the
staff views as likely given recent experience. In the staff forecast, velocity
would drop a little more than 1 percent in 1987, as shown in the chart on the
next page. Although this decline would be considerably smaller than in 1986,
it would leave V2 further below its historic range.
(9) M3 growth also would be expected to moderate in 1987--perhaps
to below 7 percent. Expansion of credit at banks and thrifts should slow in
line with debt expansion more generally, holding down needs to issue managed
liabilities in M3. Banks are likely to allow tax-exempt portfolios to decline
further under the new tax law, and their lending to businesses should taper
off as equity retirements abate and corporations concentrate borrowing on
longer-term markets. Tighter capital requirements should damp asset expansion
at thrift institutions. The securitization and sale of loans by depository
institutions is likely to continue to expand, facilitated in the case of
mortgages by the advent of REMICs under the new tax law. M3 expansion of
a little under 7 percent would imply around a 1 percent decline in velocity
that, as can be seen in the chart, would be about in line with its long-run
(10) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to
increase at about a 10 percent rate in 1987, a bit above the midpoint of
its tentative 8 to 11 percent monitoring range, but substantially below its
rate of growth in 1986. The moderation in the rate of increase in debt is
projected to occur primarily in the government sectors. Much of the decline
in federal government borrowing would reflect the decrease in the deficit;
in the state and local sector, however, debt issuance is expected to fall off
owing to reduced refunding activity, rather than any improvement in the under-
lying budget position. Business borrowing is expected to continue at about
the pace of 1986; the decline in equity retirements will be partly offset by
an increase in the need for external funds to finance investment. Household
borrowing likely will be restructured toward home equity loans and away from
traditional consumer credit, but the overall pace of borrowing should not be
greatly affected, and household debt levels will continue to climb relative
to income.
(11) With respect to the three alternatives for growth in the
broad aggregates, all would appear broadly consistent with moderate growth in
the economy accmpanied by only a modest pickup in inflation, given the
staff's assessment of the economic fundamentals and the factors affecting
money demand. Alternative III might be considered more appropriate to the
extent velocity growth was thought likely to return to previous trends, or
to rebound following its recent marked declines. For M2, such trend
velocity behavior is suggested by the results of many of the money demand
models, which indicate growth at or below the midpoint of this range.
Alternative III also might be considered more appropriate if the risks were
seen to be on the side of mounting inflation, resulting, say, from a further
substantial drop in the dollar feeding through into wage and price increases
more generally, augmented perhaps by pressures on resource utilization should
the trade balance turn around rapidly. Of all the alternatives, the ranges
of alternative III would imply the potential for the greatest restraint on
nominal income under those circumstances, in order to maintain progress
toward price stability. In particular, if upward movements of interest rates
were to accompany the tendency towards higher inflation, velocity could begin
to strengthen substantially, implying the need for growth in the lower alterna-
tive III ranges.
(12) Alternative I ranges, on the other hand, leave a little more
room to accommodate another substantial decline in velocity. Such an outcome
could arise from exceptionally strong demands for liquidity, given income and
interest rates, perhaps associated with continued brisk increases in total
financial assets. Or a sizable drop in velocity also could result from sub-
stantial declines in interest rates should they be needed to sustain economic
expansion, perhaps in the face of faltering growth worldwide or an absence of
any pressures in prices. The effects of any further rate declines on velocity
could be quite large if the adjustment of deposit rates remains very sticky.
Sizable interest rate decreases, especially if they occurred in the early
part of the year, might be enough to augment demands for broad money suffi-
ciently to threaten the upper ends of an 8 or 8-1/2 percent range later in
the year, potentially constraining policy at that time.
(13) Alternative II, embodying the Committee's tentative ranges,
could be seen as balancing these risks. The staff's expectations for M2
and M3 growth, around the middle of this alternative's ranges, suggest com-
parable odds of running either very high or very low in the range. The
alternative II range would provide for some restraint on income growth should
inflationary pressures tend to intensify, and the upper ends of the ranges
would allow further substantial declines in velocity should they materialize.
The downward adjustment of the ranges from 1986 to 1987 would convey the
Committee's sense that slower money growth over time will be necessary to
sustain and consolidate progress toward price stability. At least a modest
slowing of money growth in 1987 would be required under alternative II, given
that the upper ends of the ranges of this alternative are a little below
actual growth in 1986.
(14) M1 would be expected to slow from its extraordinary growth
of 1986 under the conditions in the staff economic forecast, though given
recent experience any M1 projections must be regarded as very uncertain. If
interest rates remain near current levels, as assumed in the forecast, demand
deposit growth is likely to be considerably below the pace of 1986; much of
the adjustment of compensating balances to the decline in rates last year
probably has already occurred, and conditions leading to a still higher
level of mortgage refinancings or another extraordinary burst in financial
transactions contributing to increases in demand balances are not anticipated.
An important source of uncertainty in the M1 projection is the behavior of
deposit offering rates and the public's further response to historically
narrow opportunity costs on these accounts. On the presumption that the
adjustment of NOW account rates is likely to continue to be very sluggish,
inflows to these accounts could remain substantial, tapering off gradually
over the year. On balance, M1 might grow in the neighborhood of 10 percent
in 1987--above the upper end of the Committee's very tentative 3 to 8 percent
range. Such growth would imply a velocity decline of around 4 percent, con-
siderably slower than in 1986, as shown in the chart on the next page. Given
the likely outcome for the first quarter, such growth would require expansion
at an average rate of around 8 percent over the balance of the year. Growth
for the year could exceed 10 percent, however, especially if opportunity
costs do not widen appreciably and depositors continue to shift large volumes
of funds to NOW accounts. On the other hand, econometric money demand models
generally are showing growth rates in the 5-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent range given
the staff's income and interest rate forecast. In the staff's quarterly
model this result rests importantly on a sharp fall-off in OCD inflows result-
ing from a continuing decline in offering rates and a marked response by the
public to the widening spread.
(15) In addition to uncertainties about offering rate behavior and
the public's attitude toward accumulating liquid assets, M1 probably will
remain extremely responsive to any further movements in market interest rates.
Available evidence suggests that a one point change in market rates from
current levels will result in about a 3 to 4 percentage point change in money
demand over a year--about three times the response of M2. Such a response,
along with the various other uncertainties affecting the outlook for M1 and
its velocity, suggest that if the FOMC were to establish a range for Ml, a
very wide range would be needed to encompass the same kinds of contingencies
as a 3 percentage point width for M2 and M3. An M1 range of six percentage
points, say of 7 to 13 percent centered on the staff's expectation, while
allowing for a variety of contingencies, would still seem to be more suscepti-
ble to being breached than the M2 and M3 ranges. Should rates rise sub-
stantially, velocity could advance strongly, implying a very weak M1 for a
given income growth; conversely a further decline in rates might imply another
substantial fall in velocity, with M1 continuing to increase at rates close
to those registered in 1986.
(16) Even so, specification of a numerical range for M1 could convey
in concrete form the Committee's expectations for acceptable growth over the
current year. It would provide a benchmark against which to evalute M1
behavior over the intermediate term, although the aggregate would need to
be interpreted together with other indicators. Another approach to an M1
range would be to put forth a lower range considered consistent with restora-
tion of more normal velocity relationships. It was on this basis that the
Committee established its tentative 3 to 8 percent range for 1987.
Short-run policy alternatives
(17) The table below presents three alternative specifications for
growth in the monetary aggregates through March, together with associated fed-
eral funds rate ranges. Growth rates are shown from a November base, as
chosen at the last meeting; growth rates from December to March, which are
shown in the table on the following page, are somewhat lower, reflecting the dis-
tortions to money stock levels at year-end.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from November
to March
(18) The specifications of alternative B involve maintaining a
reserve path allowance for borrowing at the discount window of $300 million.
The federal funds rate would be expected to range around 6 percent, as it
has in recent days. With funds trading consistently in this area, the three-
month Treasury bill rate might edge back down toward 5-1/2 percent. Bond
rates would be expected to continue to fluctuate around current levels as
incoming economic indicators are likely to point to continued moderate
economic expansion. The dollar could well come under some renewed downward
pressure--given persistent large current account deficits.
(19) It now appears that maintenance of current conditions in
reserve markets under alternative B will be consistent with slightly more
rapid growth of the broad money aggregates over the November-to-March period
than foreseen at the last FOMC meeting, though within the upper bounds of the
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
growth cones associated with any of the long-run alternatives. M2 under
this alternative would be expected to slow substantially in February and
March from the average pace of recent months, but to expand at an 8 percent
rate over November to March, compared with the current short-run specification
of 7 percent. The year-end distortions seem to have unwound by February, and
growth over the balance of the quarter should reflect underlying influences
from income and interest rates. The increase in transactions balances is
expected to moderate substantially and smaller inflows to overnight RPs and
Eurodollars are likely following their recent surge. Nontransactions core
deposits should continue to outpace the growth of income as opportunity costs
remain quite low, especially on savings accounts, given the stickiness of
offering rates. The decline in M2 velocity is expected to moderate from
around a 5-1/2 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter to 3 percent in the
(20) M3 under alternative B also is expected to slow in February
and March from the average pace of recent months as credit demands on banks
decrease sharply from elevated year-end levels, reducing needs to issue man-
aged liabilities. Overall credit growth should moderate as well, with domestic
nonfinancial debt expected to grow at an 8 percent rate over the balance of
the quarter. From the fourth quarter through March, debt would have expanded
at a 10 percent annual rate, in the upper part of any of the long-run
(21) The outlook for M1 growth continues to be highly uncertain
owing to both erratic demand deposit movements and the difficulty of assess-
ing the outlook for OCD growth at historically low opportunity costs. With
demand deposits already having retraced their run-up over year-end, this
component has begun to expand again. OCD growth is projected to moderate.
While this component accelerated in January, the opportunity cost of holding
NOW accounts has been widening since late summer, albeit slowly, and the
outflow of time deposits--one source of funds shifting to OCDs--is expected
to abate further. On balance, M1 growth would slow in February and March
under alternative B from the exceptional pace of recent months, although
continuing to outpace GNP by a substantial margin. In the first quarter, M1
velocity is projected to contract at about a 10 percent annual rate, after
falling at nearly a 14 percent rate in the fourth quarter.
(22) Alternative A assumes a reduction in discount window borrow-
ing to $150 million, a near-frictional level, or a one-half percentage point
cut in the discount rate with the borrowing allowance maintained at $300
million. In either case, the federal funds rate would move down to around
with the three-month bill dropping to close to 5 percent, as there appears
to be little market expectation of monetary easing in the period immediately
ahead. Downward pressure on the dollar would intensify, absent comparable
policy moves by central banks abroad. In the context of a weaker dollar, and
possibly greater concern about inflation, the scope for long-term rates to
fall might be limited; however, should the easing in money markets be followed
by economic indicators pointing to a weaker economy and less inflationary
pressure than is now expected, long-term rates would be more likely to fall
(23) Under alternative A, M2 growth would slow only moderately
from its pace of recent months and the level of M2 in March would be within
the alternative I long-run range, but near the upper end of the alternative
II range and above the alternative III growth cone. Similarly, the decelera-
tion in M3 would be less pronounced, although this aggregate in March would
be below even the upper end of its alternative III long-run range. Flows
into retail accounts are likely to strengthen even further, though this would
be muted to the degree that mounting cost pressures encouraged depository
institutions to no longer delay downward adjustments in offering rates on
retail deposits, especially OCDs and savings deposits. Absent a major adjust-
ment, M1 growth in March might return to close to the 15 percent path of
funds and heavier bank funding needs as businesses took down more bank loans,
especially if long-term rates did not register appreciable declines.
(24) Under alternative C, reserve paths would be drawn with a
borrowing level of $500 million, which would likely lead to a rise in the
federal funds rate to the 6-1/2 percent area. Such a policy move would
exert greater restraint on M2, bringing this aggregate well within even the
alternative III range. A relatively large widening of opportunity costs of
liquid retail accounts would act to damp expansion of M2 while reduced asset
growth at banks and thrifts would limit issuance of managed liabilities in
M3. Tighter reserve conditions also would raise the odds that M1 growth
would decelerate substantially in the months ahead.
(25) The three-month bill rate would rise by about 50 basis points
under this alternative and other short-term rates would rise by a similar
amount, absent any accompanying greater concern about debt-servicing diffi-
culties of bank debtors. Downward pressure on the dollar would be relieved,
at least for a while, and the exchange value of the dollar could even
strengthen temporarily. Bond rates would back up, but the extent of any rise
would be tempered by reduced pressure on the dollar and sentiment that such a
firming measure would act to check inflationary pressure.
Directive language
(26) Presented below for Committee consideration is draft
directive language relating to the decision on the longer-run ranges (draft
language for the operating paragraph is shown in (27) below). Suggested
deletions from the current directive are indicated in the usual strike-
through form 1/ and proposed additions are in caps. Language for the
broad monetary aggregates and debt is given in the first draft paragraph
With respect to M1, two variants are presented. These variants
are drafted as separate paragraphs but, of course, could be combined with
the paragraph on broad money and debt. Both begin with the same sentence--
carried over from the current directive--relating to uncertainties in M1
behavior. In variant I the subsequent language is suggested if the Commit-
tee decided not to set a range for M1 in 1987. Language like that in the
first set of brackets could be used if the Committee wished to give some
general sense of its expectations with regard to M1 growth for the year and
"Given its rapid growth in the early part of the year, the
Committee recognized that the increase in total domestic
nonfinancial debt in 1986 may exceed its monitoring range
of 8 to 11 percent, but felt an increase in that range would
provide an inappropriate benchmark for evaluating longer-term
trends in that aggregate.
For 1987 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges of monetary
growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 1986 to the fourth
quarter of 1987, of 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 for M2 and M3. While a range
of 3 to 8 percent for M1 in 1987 would appear appropriate in the
light of most historical experience, the Committee recognized
that the exceptional uncertainties surrounding the behavior of
M1 velocity over the more recent period would require careful
appraisal of the target range at the begining of 1987."
some indication of the possible implications, depending on circumstances,
of substantial deviations from expectations. Wording such as that pro-
posed in the second set of brackets could be used if the Committee
wished at the same time to indicate that more weight might be given to
M1 over time under appropriate circumstances. The variant II paragraph
is proposed in the event that the Committee were to decide to specify a
numerical growth range for M1, while also indicating the possibility
that growth above or below the range might be acceptable.
Language for the Broader Aggregates and Debt
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster reasonable price stability over time,
promote growth in output on a sustainable basis, and contribute to
an improved pattern of international transactions. In furtherance
of these objectives the Committee [DEL: agreed at the July meeting to
reaffirm the ranges] established [DEL: in February for] growth RANGES OF
RESPECTIVELY, measured from the fourth quarter of [DEL: 1985] 1986 to the
fourth quarter of [DEL: 1986] 1987. The associated range for growth in
total domestic nonfinancial debt was [DEL: provisionally] set at [DEL: 8 to 11]
____ TO ____ percent for 1987.
Variant I for M1
With respect to M1, the Committee recognized that, based on the
experience of recent years, the behavior of that aggregate is subject to
substantial uncertainties in relation to economic activity and prices,
depending among other things on the responsiveness of M1 growth to changes
in interest rates. In light of these uncertainties [DEL: and of the substantial
decline in-velocity-in the first-half-of-the-year,] the Committee decided
[DEL: that] NOT TO ESTABLISH A RANGE FOR THE growth of M1 IN 1987 AT THIS TIME
[DEL: in excess-of the-previously-established 3-to-8-percent range for 1986
would-be-acceptable. Acceptable-growth-of M1 over the remainder of the
year-would-depend on] M1 WILL BE EVALUATED IN LIGHT OF the behavior of
its velocity, developments in the economy and financial markets, and
price pressures. [THE COMMITTEE ANTICIPATES SLOWER M1 GROWTH IN 1987.
CONTINUED VERY RAPID GROWTH IN THIS AGGREGATE IS POSSIBLE, AND MIGHT
BE A MATTER OF CONCERN, PARTICULARLY IF IT OCCURRED IN THE CONTEXT OF
INTENSIFYING PRICE PRESSURES AND RAPID GROWTH IN THE BROAD MONETARY
AGGREGATES. CONVERSELY, MARKED WEAKNESS OF M1 COULD OCCUR AND MIGHT
BE ACCEPTABLE IN LIGHT OF THE EXTRAORDINARY EXPANSION OF THIS AGGREGATE
IN RECENT YEARS, ESPECIALLY IN CIRCUMSTANCES CHARACTERIZED BY RISING
INTEREST RATES AT A TIME WHEN THE ECONOMY AND PRICES WERE SHOWING
STRENGTH.] [THE BEHAVIOR OF M1 WILL BE REVIEWED DURING THE YEAR AND THE
WEIGHT PLACED ON THIS AGGREGATE OVER TIME WILL DEPEND ON THE EXTENT TO
WHICH ITS VELOCITY SEEMS TO BE RESUMING MORE PREDICTABLE PATTERNS.]
Variant II for M1
With respect to M1, the Committee recognized that, based on the
experience of recent years, the behavior of that aggregate is subject to
substantial uncertainties in relation to economic activity and prices,
depending among other things on the responsiveness of Ml growth to changes
in interest rates. [DEL: In light of these uncertainties and of the substantial
decline- in velocity in the first half of the year,] The Committee decided
that A RANGE OF ____ TO ____ PERCENT WOULD BE APPROPRIATE FOR THE GROWTH OF
M1 IN 1987, BUT IN LIGHT OF THE UNCERTAINTIES ASSOCIATED WITH THE BEHAVIOR
OF M1, GROWTH ABOVE OR BELOW THIS RANGE COULD (WOULD) BE ACCEPTABLE. [DEL: growth
of M1 in excessof the previously established 3 to 8 percednt range for
of-the-year-would-depend on] M1 WILL BE EVALUATED IN THE LIGHT OF the
behavior of velocity, growth in the other monetary aggregates, develop-
ments in the economy and financial markets, and price pressures.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
(27) The proposed language conforms with that adopted at the
December meeting in that no expectations are indicated for M1 growth.
With regard to possible intermeeting adjustments in the degree of
reserve pressure, the usual wording alternatives are supplied should
the Committee wish to change the asymmetrical language of the latest
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain (Alt. B)/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. This action is expected to be consistent with
growth in M2 and M3 over the period from November (DECEMBER) to
March at an annual rate RATES of about [DEL: 7] ____ AND ____ percent,
RESPECTIVELY. Growth in M1 will continue to be appraised in the
light of the behavior of M2 and M3 and the other factors cited
below. Slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint or somewhat
(SLIGHTLY) lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable
depending on the behavior of the aggregates, taking into account
the strength of the business expansion, developments in foreign
exchange markets, progress against inflation, and conditions in
domestic and international credit markets. The Chairman may call
for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic
Operations that reserve conditions during the period before the
next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds rate
persistently outside a range of [DEL: 4 to 8] ____ TO ____ percent.
MONEY STOCK REVISIONS
Measures of the money stock have been revised to incorporate
annual benchmark and seasonal adjustments. This appendix discusses the
revisions and presents tables comparing growth rates of the old and new
series. These revisions are to be regarded as strictly confidential until
their scheduled release on February 12.
Benchmark Revisions
Deposits of commercial banks and thrifts have been benchmarked to
incorporate call reports through June 1986 as well as revisions from other
reports. The benchmark revisions had smaller effects on monetary growth
than was common in earlier years, owing largely to reporting improvements,
especially for RPs. The benchmark lowered growth in the broader aggregates
for 1986 slightly and had no net impact on M1 growth. M2 growth for the year
as a whole was reduced by 0.2 percentage point, while M3 growth was lowered
by 0.1 percentage point.
Seasonal Revisions
The seasonal factor review employed basically the same X 11-ARIMA
procedures that were used last year. Unlike past years, however, seasonally
adjusted M1 is now constructed by summing travelers checks, currency, demand
deposits and other checkable deposits (OCDs), each seasonally adjusted sepa-
rately. Owing to data limitations, seasonally adjusted OCDs previously had
been derived indirectly as the difference between seasonally adjusted trans-
actions deposits (demand deposits plus OCDs) and seasonally adjusted demand
deposits. M2 continues to be calculated by seasonally adjusting its non-M1
component as a whole, and M3 by adjusting its non-M2 component as a whole.
Seasonal factor revisions modified the pattern of growth within
year was raised while growth in subsequent months on balance was lowered.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
February 9, 1987
July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
reb. 4
Dtily--Jan. 30
Feb. 5
-- 7.30
-- 7.50
-- 7.50
MOTE: Weekty data tor column 1 tIough 11 re statement week aavrage. Dat In column 7 are taken from gage (FRMs w*l. 80 percent balonto-valu ratios alt a mple oft awing end Man. Column 10 I 
l h
Donoghu's Money Fund Iport. Column U2 and 13 re 1lday quote for Friay and Thursday. repectively. Inltlla contract rate on now commntments for one yw. ad(ustabilele mortg1ag0 ARMs) at SL olfferng bot
tIwing the Ond of the statement wek. Column 13 the Bond uyF rnevnue ndex. Column 14 Is ) FNMA FRMe and ARMs with the sme number of discount points.
prchae yeold. plu loan erlcing fee, on 30-day enetory deliery comnmtments on the Friday ollowing the
mnd of th Mstatenennt k. Colmn15 IS lthe Iaerae contrcl rate an new commillment for fixed-rate mort- FR 1367 (121
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Striclty Confidiential (FR)
Seasonally adjusted
FEB. 9, 1987
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt 2
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government 2  other 2  total 2
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH:
ANNUALLY (uIT TO QIV)
PE-PRELIMINATI ESTIMATE
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
FEB. 9, 1987
Small Money market Large
Other Ovenight denomi- mutual funds, NSA denomi- Term Term Short-
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation general Institu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Commer- Bankers
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars NSA deposits time purpose, tlons time NSA NSA bonds Treasury clal paper accep-
NSA deposits' rnd brokerD only deposits 3  securities tances
dealer_
AIIUALL (4TH QT):
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 CLASS 1-FOMC
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Feb. 4
LEVEL--Feb. 4
($ billions)
direct Treasury borrowing from the System and redemptions (-) of agency and Treasury coupon issues.
- 495
February 10, 1987
The attached tables incorporate corrections to data presented in the
corresponding tables included in an appendix to the February 6 bluebook.
Columns 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, and 10 of the first table and columns 2, 3,
10, and 13 through 16 of the second table were affected. Figures presented
in other tables and the text of the bluebook were not affected.
The data presented in these tables incorporate annual benchmark and
seasonal factor revisions and are confidential until their release scheduled
for February 12.
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Strictly Confidential(FR)-
Seasonally adjusted
FEB. 9, 1987
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt2
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government
2  other 2  total 2
PERCENT ANNUAL GROTH:
ANNUALLY (QIT TO 017)
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
FEB. 9, 1987
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds, NSA denomi- Term Term Short-
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation general Institu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Commer- Bankers
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars NSA deposits time purpose, tions time NSA NSA bonds Treasury clal paper accep.
ANNUALLI (4TH QTR):
HAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEPT.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
INCLUDES RETAIL REPORCHASE AGREEMENTS. ALL IRA AMD
FRBO SHALL TINE DEPOSITS.
EXCLUDES BIA AND KEOGH ACCOUNTS.
KBOGH ACCOUNTS AT COMMERCIAL
BANKS AND TBNIFT IMSTITUTIONS ARE SUBTRACTED
NET OF LARGB DENOMINATION TIME DEPOSITS HELD BY HMNEY0 ARKET MUTUAL FUNDS AND THRIFT INSTITUTIONS.
P-PRELIINARY
