Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
December 11, 1987
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 11, 1987
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) Following the November 3 FOMC meeting, reserve paths were
constructed assuming $400 million of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing.
However, in light of the fragile market conditions and uncertainty about
liquidity demands and discount borrowing behavior, the Desk treated the
allowance for borrowing flexibly, gearing open market operations to a
considerable extent on the level of the federal funds rate relative to a
central tendency of 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent, as discussed by the Commit-
tee. In each of the two complete maintenance periods since the last
meeting, the Desk made informal downward adjustments to the borrowing
allowance in order to avoid a tightening of money markets and a surge of
borrowing late in the period, and actual borrowing averaged about $225
million over the two periods. On December 4, the borrowing allowance
was reduced formally to $300 million, as evidence of a reduced willing-
ness to borrow accumulated. Actual borrowing has averaged $140 million
over the first eight days of the current maintenance period. After
expanding at a double-digit pace in October, total and nonborrowed
reserves contracted in November, owing to a drop in required reserves
associated primarily with the reversal of the post-crash bulge in
transactions accounts, and to a lower average level of excess reserve
(2) Federal funds have averaged in the 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent
range over the intermeeting period, close to the average in the days
leading up to the last FOMC meeting. Most other short-term rates have
risen somewhat on balance, perhaps reflecting some ebbing both of pref-
erences for liquidity as markets calmed somewhat and of hopes for fur-
ther ease in monetary policy, as incoming data failed to suggest a near-
term weakening of the economy and the dollar fell. Rate increases were
especially sharp on one-month private instruments, but these were
attributable to efforts to lock in funding over the end of the year in
anticipation that once again reserve market conditions would tighten
substantially around that date. Yields on long-term Treasury securities
have risen a little less than one-half a point since early November,
with much of the increase occurring as the dollar declined sharply
following release of unfavorable trade data for October. Corporate bond
yields rose considerably less, however, and rates on municipal bonds
have fallen over the intermeeting period, reflecting the restoration of
calmer, more liquid conditions to most sectors of these markets. In
general, markets are functioning more normally, with bid-ask spreads and
dealer access to funding returning to levels prior to the stock market
collapse; even so markets remain skittish, with occasional episodes of
unusually wide price swings and of incipient flights to liquidity and
quality echoing the experience after mid-October.
(3) The dollar has declined by about 5 percent on a weighted-
average basis since the last Committee meeting. Market disappointment
over U.S. budget deficit reduction efforts contributed to the dollar's
weakness in the early part of the intermeeting period, as did various
statements by U.S. and German officials to the effect that they were not
willing to sacrifice other objectives to that of exchange rate stabil-
ity. The early December round of concerted official interest rate
reductions by Germany and several other European countries did lend some
temporary support to the dollar. However, dollar declines resumed, and
disappointing trade figures for October triggered a steep further drop
in the exchange value of the dollar.
The Desk purchased
about $1.5 billion against marks and yen, with the total divided evenly
between System and Treasury accounts. Over the period, short-term
interest rates declined by about 1/2 percentage point, on average, in
major foreign countries, while long-term rates declined slightly on
balance. Stock prices fell by about 3 percent in Japan, while dropping
a further 12 percent in Germany and rising slightly in the United King-
dom, compared with declines of around 6 percent in the United States.
(4) The monetary aggregates weakened substantially in November.
While some of the weakening reflected a runoff of the bulge in demand
deposits that followed the stock market plunge in October, demand depos-
its dropped below early October levels and OCDs decreased. M1 contract-
ed at a 6-1/2 percent annual rate in November; growth for October and
November combined was about 4-1/4 percent at an annual rate. With the
nontransactions portion of M2 expanding only sluggishly, the level of M2
KEY MONETARY AGGRETGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
September QIV'86
to to
September October November November November
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
was about unchanged in November, following a 7-1/4 percent rate of
growth in October; growth of M2 at a 3-1/2 percent rate over the two
months fell short of the Committee's 6 to 7 percent range for the broad
aggregates. Only small time deposits and money fund shares have shown
any strength recently, as their yields have remained attractive relative
to rates on market instruments and liquid deposits. The extent of the
dropoff in M1 and M2 in November, as well as the relative movements of
components within M2, suggest that there were no lasting unusual demands
for liquid, insured deposits. In addition, the runup in interest
rates and opportunity costs through mid-October probably continued to
restrain demands for these aggregates. To supplement weak core deposit
growth, banks and thrift institutions issued managed liabilities at a
robust pace in November, and flows into institution-only money funds
moved up sharply, as returns on these funds lagged the downward movement
of market rates in late October. As a consequence, M3 expanded at a 4-
September to 6-1/2 percent. Based on the staff Greenbook GNP forecast,
the velocities of M1 and M2 appear to be increasing slightly further in
the fourth quarter, while the velocity of M3 probably is dropping a
(5) The staff estimates that growth for 1987 on a fourth-quarter
to fourth-quarter basis will be 4-1/4 percent for M2 and 5-1/2 percent
for M3, considerably below the pace of recent years, leaving these
aggregates respectively well below and at the lower ends of their 5-1/2
to 8-1/2 percent annual ranges. M1 growth, at 6 percent, also would
represent a sharp deceleration from the experience of the previous two
years. The slowing of these aggregates and turnaround of their veloci-
ties appear to be attributable primarily to the rebound in interest
rates and opportunity costs in 1987 following steep declines in 1986.
However, the extent of the moderation in money growth is somewhat more
than can be accounted for using historical relationships among money,
interest rates, and income. In part, the interest sensitivity of money
demand may have increased in recent years, given the effects of deregu-
lation and greater ease in effecting financial transfers; weakness in
demand deposits in particular may be reflecting this tendency. In
addition, special factors, including changes in consumer borrowing
incentives under the new tax law, may have tended to restrain
accumulation of liquid assets in M2.
(6) Borrowing by private nonfinancial sectors may have slowed
somewhat in November. Partial data suggest that business borrowing
weakened last month, with both bond issuance and short-term borrowing
below the pace of previous months. In part, credit needs were depressed
by a reduced level of merger and leveraged buyout activity. Borrowing
by state and local governments remained near the subdued pace that has
prevailed in recent months. For households, banking data together with
the earlier expiration of most auto incentive programs suggest consumer
credit growth was moderate. On the other hand, Treasury borrowing has
increased to fund a larger fourth-quarter deficit. Overall, the debt of
domestic nonfinancial sectors is estimated to have expanded in November
in line with its trend of just over 9 percent since the fourth-quarter
near the middle of its 8 to 11 percent range.
Policy alternatives
(7) Three alternatives for monetary policy are presented below for
Committee consideration. They are based on the options of maintaining
current reserve and money market conditions, or seeking somewhat easier
(alternative A) or somewhat tighter (alternative C) conditions. The
latter two alternatives are assumed to involve changes of approximately
associated adjustments of reserve pressures. Investor caution about
default risk and potential volatility may continue in financial markets
over the near term. In such circumstances, the apparent added reluc-
tance of banks to be seen tapping the discount window since the last
FOMC meeting also could persist. Moreover, year-end pressures may
affect bank reserve management and the movements of interest rates in
coming weeks. As a consequence, the relationship between the amount of
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing and the spread of the funds rate over
the discount rate is likely to remain unusually uncertain for awhile.
In constructing the alternatives, the staff has assumed that, if finan-
cial markets remain unusually sensitive and instability in the borrowing
relationship persists, the borrowing objective will continue to be
interpreted with some degree of flexibility in implementing open market
(8) Anticipated growth of the monetary aggregates from November to
March under each alternative is presented in the table below, along with
the associated federal funds rate bands. The memo items in the table
show the implied rates of growth through March from the estimated
fourth-quarter base for the 1988 ranges, as well as the FOMC's tentative
charts on the following pages.) Under all the alternatives, growth of
the monetary aggregates in coming months is expected to rebound from the
unusual weakness in November. However, based on the experience of
recent weeks, the projected growth paths do not incorporate any allow-
ance for heightened demands for money resulting from the stock market
collapse and subsequent financial and economic uncertainty.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from November
to March
Memo items: Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Implied growth from Tentative 1988
Q4'87 to March range (Q4 to Q4)
(9) Alternative B would involve federal funds trading continuing
to center around 6-3/4 to 6-7/8 percent. Borrowing at the discount
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
-------------------------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
window associated with this level of federal funds trading seems espe-
cially difficult to gauge for the coming two maintenance periods, which
surround year-end, as depository institutions position themselves for
anticipated year-end pressures. Given continuing uncertainties in
financial markets and concerns about bank credit quality, some reluc-
tance on the part of banks to be seen at the window is likely to persist
after year-end. Borrowing of perhaps around $300 million could be
consistent with the assumed federal funds rate in the new year.
(10) With federal funds continuing to trade around recent levels,
short-term rates might show mixed movements in coming weeks. Private
short-term rates should decline once year-end pressures have passed,
while Treasury bill yields could edge higher, with the 3-month bill rate
rising to above 6 percent under alternative B. However, any narrowing
of spreads could be limited, as economic uncertainties here and abroad,
combined with the overhang of previous financial difficulties, sustain
market concerns about the financial strength of debtors and the institu-
tions that have extended them credit. The dollar would probably continue
under general downward pressure, although a new G-7 accord could lend an
element of stability for a time. Should dollar weakness abate, and eco-
nomic indicators point to a softer economy along the lines of the staff
forecast, bond yields could drop somewhat from the elevated levels of
recent days.
(11) Under the unchanged reserve market conditions of alternative
B, M2 growth from November to March likely would pick up from the 3-1/2
percent average pace of October and November, placing this aggregate
just below the 5 percent lower bound of the growth cone associated with
its tentative 1988 range by March. The decline in market interest rates
since mid-October has lowered opportunity costs on retail deposits to
around their summer levels. As the effects of increases in opportunity
costs earlier this year fade, deposit inflows should pick up. M2 is
thus expected to grow nearly apace with GNP through the first quarter of
next year, with its velocity essentially unchanged. This compares with
an increase in V2 that averaged 3 percent at an annual rate over the
first three quarters of this year.
(12) M3 is expected to grow at a 6 percent annual rate from Novem-
ber to March under alternative B, about the same pace as in recent
months; such growth would keep this aggregate through March well within
its tentative range for 1988. Flows to institution-only money funds
should weaken substantially as their returns move down into more normal
alignment with market rates. However, bank credit expansion is likely
to rebound in coming months from its November pause, and thrift asset
growth should be well maintained, buoyed by continued large acquisitions
of ARMs. Overall household mortgage and consumer credit expansion in
the first quarter is expected to stay around the reduced fourth-quarter
pace, as housing activity and consumer durables spending remain about
flat. Business borrowing is expected to be sizable, as the financing
gap remains appreciable, while share retirements fall back only
modestly. State and local bond issuance should continue near its recent
subdued pace, but a substantial volume of federal government borrowing
is anticipated to finance the higher deficit. In all, the debt of
domestic nonfinancial sectors in March is expected to stand 9 percent at
an annual rate above its fourth-quarter base--the midpoint of its 7-1/2
to 10-1/2 percent tentative range for 1988.
(13) M1 growth is expected to average 4 percent over the next four
months under alternative B. This represents a slight pickup from its
average pace over October and November, abstracting from the effects of
the bulge. Little expansion is expected on a month-average basis in
December, given the pattern of growth in late November and early Decem-
ber. But with interest rates essentially flat, increases averaging 5
percent at an annual rate are projected over the first three months of
next year. Even so, the monthly pattern of M1 growth is expected to
produce an increase in velocity of 2 percent in the first quarter.
(14) The 1/2 percentage point lowering of the federal funds rate
under alternative A would bring it to the 6-1/4 to 6-3/8 percent area.
This probably would be associated with minimal borrowing in the near-
term and perhaps in a range around $150 million in the new year. Such
an easing is not expected by financial market participants, at least in
the absence of much hard evidence indicating that the stock market
decline or other factors have begun to retard spending significantly.
Choosing this alternative thus would depress short-term market rates
below recent levels, with the 3-month Treasury bill rate likely to
fluctuate around 5-1/2 percent. Yields on private short-term
instruments probably would decline by more, as the policy easing
improved prospects for continued economic expansion and helped relieve
worries about credit quality. Such an action would tend to restore
differentials between U.S. and European short-term interest rates to
levels prevailing before recent cuts in official lending rates abroad,
increasing downward pressure on the dollar. If inflationary concerns in
financial markets are intensified, declines in bond yields may be
(15) Lower short-term market rates relative to deposit offering
rates under alternative A would prompt more rapid inflows into M2-type
accounts. M2 growth from November to March would be expected to pick up
to 6 percent. Higher compensating balance requirements in response to
reduced market rates would boost business demand deposits, while more
savings-type balances would be diverted to NOW and other liquid accounts
in response to reduced opportunity costs. M1 growth of 6 percent
expected over November to March implies expansion at almost an 8 percent
rate in the early months of 1988, given the slow growth now in train for
December. The faster growth in core deposits likely would produce only
a partial offset in reduced issuance of managed liabilities in M3, as
greater loan demands would be placed on banks and thrifts in response to
generally easier credit conditions. With this alternative, M3 might
expand at around a 6-1/2 percent pace from November to March. By then,
M2 would be within, and M3 around the midpoint of, the FOMC's tentative
ranges for 1988.
(16) The firming of reserve market conditions embodied in alterna-
tive C would also take market participants by surprise. Federal funds
rates could rise back to the 7-1/4 to 7-3/8 percent area, with borrowing
perhaps around the $500 million range in early 1988. Rates on private
instruments could rise appreciably, especially if a negative reaction in
stock markets induced a renewed flight to safety and liquidity. Higher
funding costs would cause banks to increase their prime rates by at
least 1/2 point, while rates on consumer installment and mortgage loans
also would be raised. But higher interest rates would enhance the
attractiveness of dollar assets to international investors, and a ten-
dency for the exchange value of the dollar to appreciate in the near-
term could emerge.
(17) The higher interest rates of alternative C can be expected to
prevent M2 from accelerating much from its recent pace. M3 growth could
slow somewhat, especially as money funds experienced outflows when mar-
ket rates rose. In March, M2 would be well below, and M3 somewhat
above, the lower bounds of their tentative 1988 ranges. Given its rela-
tively greater interest sensitivity, M1 would probably grow at only a 2
percent rate through March, well below its average growth to date this
Directive language
(18) Draft language for the operational paragraph is shown below.
The second sentence from the November directive, which calls for special
flexibility in the conduct of open market operations, might be retained.
However, the remaining special language from that directive is proposed
for deletion; much of it referenced unusual demands for liquidity. The
sentence on possible intermeeting adjustments would add a reference to
"conditions in financial markets" to the usual listing of factors to be
considered in deciding on the desirability of such an adjustment.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Com-
mittee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain (Alt. B)/INCREASE
SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the degree of pressure on reserve positions [DEL: sought in
recent days]. The Committee recognizes that STILL SENSITIVE [DEL: the volatile]
conditions in financial markets and uncertainties in the economic out-
look may continue to call for a special degree of flexibility in open
market operations [DEL: ,depending, in particular, on-demands-for-liquidity-
growing out of recent or prospective developments in financial markets].
TAKING ACCOUNT OF CONDITIONS IN FINANCIAL MARKETS, [DEL: apart-from-such-con-
siderations,] somewhat (SLIGHTLY) lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT),
or slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint might (WOULD), be ac-
ceptable depending on the strength of the business expansion, indica-
tions of inflationary pressures, developments in foreign exchange mar-
kets, as well as the behavior of the monetary aggregates. [DEL: While the
outlook for monetary growth over the months ahead is subject to unusual
uncertainly,] The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from NOVEMBER
THROUGH MARCH [DEL: September through December] at annual rates of about [DEL: 6 to 7]
____ percent AND ____ PERCENT, RESPECTIVELY [DEL: but more rapid growth is pos-
sible should preferences for liquidity be pariticulary strong]. Over the
same period, growth in M1 is expected to REMAIN RELATIVELY LIMITED [DEL: be
well above its average pace in the previous several months]. The Chair-
man may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the period before the
next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds rate per-
sistently outside a range of [DEL: 4 to 8] ____ TO ____ percent.
December 14, 1987
paper
1-month
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
-Cnorx- ta-..
----- reasury bills----
--- secondary market---
ods
sec mkt
3-month
-U.S. Gov't. constant-
---- maturity yields---
money
market
mutual
fund
bank
prime
loan
Lon- I r...
corp. A
utility
rec off
muni.
Bond
Buyer
-- conventional home--
r---r tgages
sec mkt
fixed-
rate
fixed-
rate
Monthly
DEC 86
JAN 87
FEB 87
MAR 87
APR 87
MAY 87
JUN 87
JUL 87
AUG 87
SEP 87
OCT 87
NOV 87
federal
funds
L Jl
w _
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted DEC. 14, 1987
. ._ .. Money stock measures and lquid a s Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debi2
nontransactions total loans US
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government2 other 2 total
2
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
DEC. 14, 1987
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denoml- mutual funds, NSA denomi- Term Term Short-
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation general nstlltu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Commer- Bankers
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars NSA deposits time purpose, tlons time NSA NSA bonds Treasury cl paper accep.
NSA deposits' nd brokerl only deposlts' securities tances
dealer'
AINUALLI (4TH QOT )
P-P LININABI
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities1
MillIons of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
December 14, 1987
LEVEL -Dec. 9
Treasury bills
net change'
Treasury coupons net purchases'
within
1-year
-- 150
-- 195
-- 185
-- 120
Net change
outright holdings Net RPs'
Change from end-of-period to end-of-period.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts, and redemptions (-) In bill auctions.
Outright transactions In market and with foreign accounts, and short-term notes acquired in exchange for
maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury
borrowing from the System.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts only. Excludes redemptions and maturity shifts.
