Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
March 27, 1987
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) March 27, 1987
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Growth of the monetary aggregates has slowed sharply in the
last two months. Preliminary data indicate that over the January-March
period M2 and M3 increased at 1 and 2-1/4 percent annual rates, respectively,
well below their 6 to 7 percent short-run paths. As a result, both aggregates
in March are around the lower bounds of their annual growth ranges for 1987.
The velocities of the broader aggregates are estimated to have fallen only a
shade in the first quarter, based on the greenbook GNP forecast, following
decreases of about 4 percent in 1986. M1 expanded at only a 2-1/2 percent
annual rate over the latest two months. However, owing to the bulge at
year-end, M1 growth on a quarterly average basis came to 13-1/4 percent in
the first quarter, implying a further substantial drop in velocity--perhaps
(2) Slow growth in the aggregates over the last two months has
been broadly based. Some of the deceleration appears to be related to a
reversal of the bulge in deposits and bank lending associated with the surge
in transactions before year-end; also, some of the moderation in deposit
growth relative to last year likely reflects the completion of portfolio
adjustments to the decline in rates through last summer. However, reasons
for the extent of the recent weakness against a backdrop of moderate increases
in spending and income are not entirely clear. Weakness in demand deposits,
which have been essentially flat since mid-January, may be related in part
to a falloff in the pace of mortgage prepayments. Other checkable deposits
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
January QIV'86
to to
January February MarchP MarchP MarchP
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
p--preliminary. n.a.--not available.
have been expanding at a sharply reduced pace as well since January, without
a compensating pickup in other retail deposits. With short-term rates some-
what above their levels of last fall and stock prices soaring while rates on
some retail deposits continue to edge down, savers may be finding alternative
investment outlets more attractive. Shifts into such instruments are sug-
gested by recent increases in noncompetitive tenders for Treasury bills, which
had been declining since last March, and some pickup in flows to bond and
stock mutual funds in January and February. In light of the less favorable
treatment of consumer interest expenses under tax reform, some households
also may be drawing down M2 assets to repay consumer credit or to substitute
for borrowing to finance large outlays, including contributions to IRAs
before the tax date.
(3) With bank credit growth weak in February and March following
the run-up over year-end, issuance by banks of CDs and other managed liabili-
ties in M3 also has moderated in recent months. Declines in overnight RPs
and Eurodollars contributed to the weakness in M2, but were offset in their
effects on M3 by increases in their term counterparts. At thrifts, CDs
continued to drop fairly rapidly, likely reflecting slow asset growth as
well as continued reliance on Federal Home Loan Bank advances.
(4) Debt expansion by domestic nonfinancial sectors has slowed
noticeably since January, bringing the growth of this aggregate from its
fourth-quarter base to a little above the upper end of its long-run range.
Business borrowing has fallen off as equity retirements have remained below
their year-end pace and sales of new equity picked up in lagged response to
rising share prices. Encouraged by relatively low long-term rates, busi-
ness borrowing has been concentrated in bond markets, and short-term credit
contracted in February and likely in March as well. Overall household
borrowing seems to have moderated somewhat in early 1987, but remains rela-
tively robust; strength in mortgages relative to consumer credit appears to
reflect underlying spending patterns as well as a substitution from consumer
credit to mortgage borrowing under home equity lines. The growth in Treasury
debt has been cut back substantially early this year, including a large
paydown of Treasury bills; the Treasury has met a substantial portion of its
needs by drawing on its sizable year-end cash balance.
(5) Total and nonborrowed reserves fell slightly over February
and March, as required reserves leveled off following the year-end bulge in
transactions deposits and excess reserves edged lower in line with their
usual seasonal pattern. In the three complete reserve maintenance periods
since the February FOMC meeting adjustment plus seasonal borrowing has aver-
aged $280 million, close to the $300 million level assumed in the reserve
paths. The federal funds rate associated with borrowing around this level
edged off from nearly 6-1/4 percent at the last Committee meeting to around
testimony that the System had not altered its basic stance toward reserve
(6) Other interest rates were little changed on balance since the
February FOMC meeting in exceptionally quiet trading. In addition to reduced
concerns about a monetary tightening, incoming data were seen as presenting a
mixed picture for the economy, although concerns about the dollar have tended
to limit the scope for any decline in rates. On balance, private short-term
rates are generally unchanged, while Treasury bill rates have declined about
heightened concerns about credit quality related in part to Brazil's
suspension of debt servicing as well as the paydown of bills by the Treasury.
In contrast-to the quiet debt markets, equity prices rose 8 percent over the
period, bringing their gains since year-end to around 25 percent.
(7) The dollar traded in a narrow range through most of the inter-
meeting period, with its stability reinforced by the perception that at
their meeting in Paris on February 21-22 major industrial countries agreed
to support the prevailing structure of exchange rates. However, in recent
days the dollar has come under substantial selling pressure against the yen,
apparently triggered by renewed trade frictions between the United States and
Japan and by official statements that raised some questions about the U.S.
ccmmitment to the Paris agreement. As the dollar dropped below the 150 yen/
dollar level,
the United States by purchasing nearly $1-1/2 billion against
yen, of which roughly half was done for Federal Reserve account;
. Nonetheless, the
dollar has fallen about 4-1/4 percent against the yen since the last FOMC
meeting. Throughout the intermeeting period sterling has been strengthening
appreciably against the dollar and other currencies on brighter fiscal news
and improved electoral prospects for the Thatcher government.
Policy alternatives
(8) The table below gives three alternative specifications for
growth in the monetary aggregates from March to June, along with associated
federal funds rate ranges. (More detailed data, including growth rates im-
plied by each alternative from the fourth quarter to June, can be found in
the table and charts on the following pages.) Expansion in the monetary
aggregates under all three alternatives is expected to pick up from the
sluggish pace of February and March; even so, growth is projected to be
relatively moderate, and by June the broader aggregates would still be well
below the midpoints of their ranges under alternatives A and B and at or a
bit below the lower bounds under alternative C.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from March to June
(9) Alternative B assumes maintenance of the current degree of
pressure on reserve positions, with reserve paths allowing for $300 million
of borrowing at the discount window. Federal funds would be expected to
trade around 6 percent or a touch above. The Treasury bill rate is expected
to remain around current levels or perhaps move lower in response to a
further reduction in supply; although the Treasury is likely to sell cash
management bills in coming days, they would mature shortly after the April
tax date, and net redemptions of bills at regular weekly auctions are expected
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
to continue for a time. Little net movement in long-term rates is antici-
pated under this alternative, consistent with staff expectations of moderate
economic expansion and limited inflationary pressures. The dollar might
remain under some downward pressure, but the decline in exchange rates
through the spring is expected to be moderate assuming continuing efforts
to stabilize rates under the Paris agreement. Sustained weakness in the
dollar could tend to push up interest rates in U.S. markets owing to con-
cerns about monetary policy responses and the strength of overall demand
for dollar assets.
(10) Under alternative B, growth in M2 would be expected to
strengthen to a 6 percent annual rate over the March-to-June period, lifting
this aggregate to the lower end of its long-run range. With market interest
rates little changed for some time now, and not anticipated to move far
from current levels under this alternative, M2 might grow about in line
with income over coming months. Shifts into non-M2 savings vehicles may
diminish, especially should stock prices show less strength, and any use of
M2 balances to pay down existing consumer loans in the wake of tax reform
might abate if those with a significant tax incentive have moved relatively
promptly. The deadline for 1986 IRA contributions is in mid-April, but
with the tax law changes it is difficult to predict the effects on M2
growth. On a quarterly average basis, M2 would rise at only a 4-1/2 percent
annual rate in the second quarter, given the pattern of growth over the
first quarter, and the staff's GNP forecast would imply a small rise in M2
velocity, the first increase in more than a year.
(11) M3 growth under alternative B also would be expected to
strengthen to a 6 percent rate over the March-to-June period. Inflows to
M2 deposits at banks are expected to be augmented by some pickup in the
issuance of managed liabilities included in M3; borrowing from foreign
branches should drop back from recently elevated levels, and overall needs
for funds are projected to increase reflecting in part a turnaround in
business loans now that much of the year-end bulge has been worked off.
The pace of CD runoffs at thrifts is expected to moderate as their asset
growth rebounds a bit from the recent depressed pace, though any intensi-
fication of concerns about the health of these institutions or their
insurance fund could work in the other direction. On a quarterly average
basis, M3 would grow at only a 4-3/4 percent rate, the slowest pace in more
than a decade and a half; M3 velocity, which has trended downward, would
post a small increase.
(12) Under alternative B, expansion of M1 is anticipated to
strengthen to a 9 percent annual rate over March to June. The acceleration
in M1 would reflect a resumption of growth in demand deposits, which are
anticipated to increase at a rate only a little below the projected growth
of spending. OCDs are expected to grow at around the reduced pace of
February and March; however, with opportunity costs widening only a little
further with the continued downward drift of offering rates, the pace of
growth would still considerably exceed that of income. On a quarterly
average basis, M1 would rise at a 7-1/2 percent rate in the second quarter,
the slowest rate since late 1984, and its velocity would decline at only a
at about a 10 percent annual rate.
(13) Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to con-
tinue to run much below the pace of last year, though remaining well in
excess of the expansion of income. Debt is projected to increase at a 9
percent rate from March to June, moving the debt aggregate down to within
the upper portion of its 8 to 11 percent range. Borrowing by private
sectors should be around the reduced pace of the first three months of
the year and of roughly the same composition. With interest rates re-
maining around current levels and the yield curve relatively flat, business
borrowing is expected to remain concentrated in long-term markets. Gross
equity issuance might be close to its advanced March pace, while share
retirements, though substantial, likely will remain below the average rate
of 1986. Similarly, household borrowing is likely to continue to be con-
centrated in mortgage markets, reflecting strong single-family housing
activity and further substitution of home equity loans for consumer credit.
On a seasonally adjusted basis, federal borrowing will rebound from its
recent reduced pace, though in part this would serve to boost the Treasury's
cash balance over the quarter.
(14) Alternative A assumes a reduction in discount window borrow-
ing to a near-frictional $150 million or a 50 basis point decrease in the
discount rate with borrowing maintained at $300 million. In either case,
the federal funds rate would decline to close to 5-1/2 percent. This easing
in money market conditions would be expected to bolster the expansion of the
aggregates, increasing the odds that M2 and M3 will be in the long-term
ranges at midyear, even if economic growth turns out to be somewhat weaker
than the staff projects. Without such unanticipated economic weakness, M2
growth would be expected to strengthen to a 7 percent annual rate over the
March-to-June period, and M3 to 6-1/2 percent, lifting both noticeably above
the lower boundaries of their long-run ranges by June. Flows into retail
accounts would strengthen again, boosted by lagging offering rates on these
accounts, especially OCDs and passbook savings. M1 likely would accelerate
appreciably over the coming months.
(15) There appears to be little expectation of an easing action
in the period just ahead and thus the three-month bill rate also would
decline by about 1/2 of a percentage point, toward 5 percent. Other short-
term rates could fall a little more, tending to reverse the recent widening
in spreads, to the degree that lower interest rates were viewed as enhancing
the financial condition of troubled borrowers and intermediaries. Unless
this alternative were undertaken in the context of a generally weaker than
expected world economy accompanied by substantial monetary easing abroad,
downward pressure on the dollar likely would intensify, perhaps requiring
substantial additional official intervention if authorities attempted to
maintain exchange rates around recent levels. Absent indicators pointing
to a much weaker economy, the pressure on the dollar and perhaps more
concern about inflation might limit the extent of any decline in long-term
(16) Under alternative C, reserve paths would be drawn with a
borrowing level of $500 million, which would push the federal funds rate up
to the 6-1/2 percent area. The three-month bill rate would rise about 50
basis points under this alternative and CD rates possibly by more. The
increase in interest rates would tend to relieve downward pressure on the
dollar, at least for a while. Bond rates would rise, as there appears
to be little expectation in the markets of a tightening, although any such
increase would be limited by sentiment that such a move was acting to
contain inflationary pressures, in part through its effect on the dollar.
(17) A rise in interest rates would limit the extent of the pick-
up in M2--as opportunity costs of holding M2 balances widened. Given the
weakness of this aggregate in the first quarter, which may have reflected
shifts in portfolio preferences, alternative C would tend to bring M2
farther below the lower end of its long-run range over the second quarter.
Slower expansion of assets at banks and thrifts would act to restrain M3
growth to along the lower end of its long-run range. Growth in its M1
component would be expected to remain subdued but still be above that of
Directive language
(18) Draft language for the operational paragraph, with the
usual alternatives for indicating the degree of reserve pressure, is shown
below. The draft provides for the specification of numerical growth rates
for M2 and M3 but, as in earlier directives, not for M1. Should the Commit-
tee wish to place particular emphasis on exchange market conditions in the
implementation of policy over coming weeks, language along the lines shown
in the first bracket might be used (with corresponding deletions to the present
language on foreign exchange market developments also shown in brackets).
An alternative would be to move up the reference to exchange market develop-
ments in the existing sentence on possible intermeeting adjustments. With
regard to such adjustments, the draft provides for numerous options with
appropriate usage of "would," "might," "somewhat," and "slightly."
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain (Alt. B)/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. This action is expected to be consistent with
growth in M2 and M3 over the period from MARCH [DEL: January] through
[DEL: March] JUNE at annual rates of ____ AND ____ [DEL: about 6 to 7] percent,
RESPECTIVELY. Growth in M1 is expected to REMAIN [DEL: slow] substantially
BELOW ITS PACE IN 1986 [DEL: from the high rate of earlier months.] [IN
LIGHT OF THE RECENT INSTABILITY OF THE DOLLAR IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE
MARKETS, PARTICULAR EMPHASIS WILL BE PLACED ON CONDITIONS IN THESE
MARKETS IN OPERATIONAL DECISIONS. IN ADDITION, ] somewhat (SLIGHTLY)
greater reserve restraint would (MIGHT), or slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser
reserve restraint might (WOULD), be acceptable depending on the
behavior of the aggregates, taking into account the strength of the
business expansion, [developments in foreign exchange markets,]
progress against inflation, and conditions in domestic and inter-
national credit markets. The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations
that reserve conditions during the period before the next meeting
are likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently
outside a range of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 4-to-8] percent.
Selected Interest Rates
March 30, 1987
SShort-tem Long-Term
Truy bms co one y nk U.8. government constant orort municipal conventnal home mortgage
P0 fedal d MWOmy secons pK6  prime maturity yields A utility Bond primary mrketuno d  mrt n""k mutual recenl mtli B e rket
Siont | ntIy- 3Smonth -nh i fund 3-year 10year 30-yer offered fixed- ate fixed-rate ARM
Monthly
19 .- lar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
eekly
1986-Dac. 3
Daily
1987-Mar. 20
- 7.50
S 7.50
-- 7.50
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures 
Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted
MAR. 30, 1987
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debts
nontranactions total loans U.S.
MPtod M1 M2 componentl M3 L and government other 2 totall
in M2 In M3 only __ Investments
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
MAR. 30, 1987
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds, NSA denom- Term Term Short-
Demand checkable RPs and MMDA Savings nation general Instilu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Commer- Bankers
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars NSA deposits time purpose, lions time NSA NSA bonds Treasury clal paper accep-
NSA deposits' nd broker/ only deposits
3  securities tances
AUOALLI (4T78 Ut):
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 CLASS II-FOMC
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
March 30, 1987
Tresury bills Treasury coupons net purchases' Federal agencies net purchases' Net change
Period " I -Ih- I -1-,n outright hodings Net RPs
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
LEVEL--Mar. 25
($ billions)
..... - - -
maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury
borrowing from the System.
