Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL August 12, 1988
Class I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) In accordance with the Committee's decision at its meeting in
late June, the allowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing was raised
immediately from $550 to $600 million. Actual borrowing, however, averaged
about $1.3 billion in the first complete reserve maintenance period follow-
ing the meeting, reflecting a surge in borrowing over the long July 4 week-
end and some subsequent difficulties in assessing reserve availability and
demand. In the next two reserve maintenance periods, borrowing averaged
close to $600 million.1 Over much of the intermeeting period, federal
funds traded primarily in a range of 7-3/4 to 7-7/8 percent--about 1/4
point over the level at the time of the last Committee meeting and also
above Desk expectations and the level consistent with previous relation-
ships between borrowing and interest rate spreads. Contributing to upward
pressures were market expectations of further near-term restraint on
reserve provision in light of strength in incoming economic data. In addi-
tion, reserve management by banks turned more cautious in the aftermath of
the earlier bulge in borrowing. On August 9, the discount rate was raised
at the time of the increase, have risen to around 8-1/8 percent most
(2) Other interest rates also have risen substantially over the
intermeeting period. Before the discount rate hike, short-term rates
generally were up 1/4 to 1/2 of a percentage point--including a 1/2 point
increase in the prime rate--somewhat more than the increase in the funds
rate. Bond yields, held down to an extent by the effects of a reduced
supply of long-term issues in several markets, were unchanged to 1/4 point
higher. With some further firming of policy already built into the
structure of interest rates, private short-term market rates rose only
about 1/4 percentage point more following the discount rate increase,
although the prime rate was raised another 1/2 percentage point. Bond
yields also have risen by about 1/4 of a percentage point in recent days
and broad measures of stock prices have fallen around 3 percent. Some of
the initial reaction in capital markets seemed to reflect uncertainty about
the eventual extent of policy firming and concern about the response of
foreign markets and authorities; these were mirrored in the relatively
damped adjustment in Treasury bill rates, which increased only about 15
basis points. Judging from the behavior of risk premiums and the stock
prices of banking and thrift organizations, the failure of First Republic-
Bank and the deepening thrift crisis appeared to have had little overall
effect on market assessments of the risk of advancing funds to depository
institutions and their holding companies.
(3) Responding in part to the firming of monetary policy and to
better-than-expected U.S. trade figures for May, the dollar's weighted
average exchange value climbed by about 2-1/4 percent over the intermeeting
period, . At its peak
just following the rise in the discount rate, the dollar was nearly 4 per-
cent above late-June levels, but it has eased off a little in recent days.
Some of the strength in the dollar reflected a more general weakness in the
mark, even in the face of Bundesbank action that pushed short-term market
rates up by nearly a full percentage point over the period. Short-term
interest rates in the United Kingdom rose even more, as the Bank of England
moved to restrain further a U.K. economy threatening to overheat. Japanese
short-term rates increased only slightly.
the Desk sold about $3 billion
against marks, all before the discount rate increase, divided equally
between System and Treasury accounts.
for 3-year notes on the day of the discount rate increase, but less
robust for the 10-year notes the next day. These issues yielded 8.77 and
9.27 percent, respectively, about 15 to 20 basis points above yield
levels in when-issued trading prior to the discount rate action.
MONETARY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV '87
May June July to
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial
debt
Bank credit
Reserve measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
(4) Money and credit flows in July were affected by the previous
tightening of monetary policy and by some short-term adjustments in assets
and liabilities by banks, their depositors, and borrowers, partly in
anticipation of rising rates. Growth of M2 and M3 slowed last month to 3
and 5-1/2 percent annual rates, respectively, both somewhat less than the
Committee's specifications of 5-1/2 and 7 percent for the June-to-September
period. The weakness in M2 was concentrated in its overnight RP and Euro-
dollar components. Both overnight and term RPs declined last month in
conjunction with declines in commercial bank holdings of Treasury securi-
ties in trading accounts in late June and early July. The drop in over-
night Eurodollars was partly mirrored in a jump in term Eurodollar instru-
ments; banks began issuing term Eurodollars at relatively more attractive
rates, perhaps to lock in funding costs. Reflecting the rise in market
interest rates and opportunity costs since early spring, growth of retail
assets in M2--that is, M2 less demand deposits and overnight RPs and Euro-
dollars--was around 5-1/2 percent, considerably less than in the first few
months of the year. In view of the fairly steep retail deposit yield
curve, expansion of retail instruments was surprisingly tilted in favor of
liquid deposits--especially other checkable deposits--and may have
reflected expectations that time deposit rates would continue to rise. M3
slowed only moderately in July despite a sharp deceleration in bank credit;
issuance of managed liabilities in this aggregate was buoyed by substitu-
tions for other sources of funds. Through July, M2 and M3 expanded at
ing them a little above the midpoints of their annual ranges.
(5) M1 expanded at a 9 percent annual rate in July, boosted by the
strong growth in other checkable deposits. Since the fourth quarter of
accelerated to a 10-1/2 percent annual rate in July, bringing growth for
the year to 8-1/4 percent. Strength in the base mainly reflected a surge
in total reserves, to a 12 percent rate, partly as excess reserves
(6) Borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors moderated in July,
especially in bond markets, where offerings by state and local governments
and corporations fell substantially following a surge in June. Business
borrowing from commercial banks slowed only a bit last month, but commer-
cial paper of nonfinancial business dropped off sharply. Judging from bank
data, consumer borrowing also appears to have slowed last month. Federal
borrowing was seasonally light, as the Treasury funded operations in part
by a sizable drop in its cash balance; however, the Treasury announced
financing plans consistent with a large increase in borrowing in coming
months. From the fourth quarter of 1987, domestic nonfinancial debt is
estimated to have expanded through July at an 8-1/4 percent rate, below the
midpoint of its 7 to 11 percent annual range.
Policy Alternatives
(7) Two policy alternatives are presented below. Alternative B
maintains the current $600 million assumption for adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing and alternative C increases intended borrowing to $800 million.
Under alternative B, a federal funds rate of around 8 percent would be
consistent with the average relationship that prevailed over the first half
of this year between borrowing and the funds rate-discount rate spread.
However, expectations of a further tightening of policy could persist under
alternative B, causing funds to trade somewhat higher, in an 8 to 8-1/4
percent range. Federal funds likely would trade between 8-1/2 and 8-3/4
percent under alternative C, perhaps more toward the lower end of this
range if the additional firming acted to dispel expectations of still
further near-term policy moves.
(8) The table below gives expected June-to-September growth rates
of the monetary aggregates under the two alternatives, as well as the
implied growth rates from July to September. Also shown are the associated
federal funds rate ranges that trigger Committee consultation; both are
higher than the current 5 to 9 percent range, to center them more around
the expected level of federal funds trading. (More detailed data are shown
on the table and charts on the following pages.) As discussed below, under
either alternative, growth in M2 and M3 is projected to fall short of the
rates specified for June to September at the last FOMC meeting, mainly
reflecting the effects of the rise in interest rates over the last six
weeks, which was not assumed in constructing the money paths at the last
meeting, and the unexpected weakness in bank credit along with associated
funding needs. Both alternatives would leave M2 near the midpoint of its
long-run range by September, and M3 a little above the midpoint of its
Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from June
to September
Implied growth from
July to September
(9) Financial markets in recent days have largely built in a
federal funds rate of around 8-1/8 percent, although some further adjust-
ments may occur under alternative B. For example, the 3-month Treasury
bill rate might edge higher to around 7-1/8 percent as some of the remain-
ing uncertainties about any further responses of capital markets in the
U.S. and financial markets and policies abroad are resolved. Bond yields
should remain around current levels, especially if the dollar, as expected,
continues fairly firm. The dollar could come under downward pressure,
however, and bond yields resume their rise, if incoming data suggested that
the pace of international adjustment was proceeding considerably less
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C
rapidly than previous trade reports had suggested, other data were seen as
portending greater odds of inflation pressures, or foreign monetary author-
ities tightened aggressively. In any case, the long-term Treasury bond
yield would tend to move higher, perhaps by 10 to 20 basis points, if the
Treasury receives authority to issue more of such securities.
(10) M2 under alternative B is expected to increase at a 3-3/4
percent pace over the last two months of the quarter, slightly higher than
in July. This speedup is associated with a strengthening in overnight RPs
and Eurodollars, already evident in recent weekly data, in part as banks
rebuild their government security positions. The retail component of M2
should decelerate in response to wider opportunity costs. Within M2,
liquid household deposits, which have begun to soften in early August, are
expected to be relatively weak. Small time deposit growth should quicken
as the public takes advantage of the more attractive returns offered on
fixed-maturity accounts, but not by enough to offset the moderation in
liquid deposits. Slower OCD growth, along with weakness in demand deposits
as compensating balance requirements are scaled back, should damp M1
expansion over the next two months to an average of just under 4 percent.
(11) On a quarterly average basis, M2 growth in the third quarter
would be only 4 percent, implying a 3 percent rate of increase in its
velocity given the staff's income projection, after a 1 percent rate of
decline in the first half of the year. This rebound in velocity largely
reflects the turnaround in market interest rates and opportunity costs
since early spring. Even if short-term rates remain near current levels,
velocity still would be expected to rise further in the fourth quarter.
Under these circumstances, M2 would be likely to continue growing at around
its third-quarter pace, and to end the year near, though perhaps a bit
below, the midpoint of its annual range. While the drought is reducing
second-half growth in nominal GNP in the staff forecast, it is not expected
to affect appreciably the relationship of money demand to GNP and interest
rates. Nonetheless, this relationship is more uncertain than usual, given
the effects of the drought in boosting the ratio of final sales to current
income; on the one hand, for a given level of income, higher nominal pur-
chases would tend to increase transactions demands for money and depress
income velocity; on the other, in order to finance these purchases saving
flows and associated acquisitions of financial assets, including those in
the monetary aggregates, would be reduced, tending to raise income
(12) Under alternative B, average M3 growth over August and
September is projected to stay at its 5-1/2 percent July pace, despite a
pickup in bank and thrift credit. Outflows from institution-only money
funds are expected to follow the recent rise in market rates, and inflows
to Treasury deposits will be holding down needs for managed liabilities.
With credit at depository institutions projected to continue in the fourth
quarter at around the rates of August and September, M3 could grow at close
to a 6 percent rate over the balance of the year, bringing its growth for
the year to around 6-1/2 percent. The debt of domestic nonfinancial sec-
tors is projected to grow at around an 8 percent annual rate over the
remainder of the year, placing it a little below the midpoint of its moni-
toring range by year-end.
(13) The tightening of reserve positions under alternative C
immediately following the discount rate hike would be somewhat surprising
to market participants and the associated 1/2 percentage point increase in
the funds rate probably would show through nearly fully in private money
market rates. Nominal bond yields probably would rise by less. This
action might allay market concerns about future inflation, implying that
the rise in nominal interest rates would reflect at least as large an
increase in real rates. The higher real rates would boost the dollar on
foreign exchange markets, at least for a time, and the greater foreign
demand for dollar assets could cushion somewhat the effects on bond and
stock prices.
(14) With the higher interest rates of alternative C, M2 is pro-
jected to record only 3 percent growth over August and September. The
upward movement of rates would slow M2 even further in the fourth quarter,
moving this aggregate appreciably below the midpoint of its annual growth
range. Growth of M3, by contrast, would probably not be damped enough
under alternative C to move below its midpoint, even by year-end. Long-
term debt issuance by businesses likely would be more restrained under
alternative C, shifting some business credit demands to banks, despite a
probable further increase in the prime rate.
Directive language
(15) Draft language for the operational paragraph, with the usual
alternatives for varying degrees of reserve pressure, is presented below.
The draft language on possible intermeeting adjustments also has the usual
options for symmetry and asymmetry; in the ordering of the factors affect-
ing such adjustments, it retains the implicit emphasis on resisting infla-
tionary pressures adopted at the June meeting.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future,
the Committee seeks to DECREASE SLIGHTLY (SOMEWHAT)/MAIN-
TAIN/increase slightly (SOMEWHAT) the existing degree of
pressure on reserve positions. Taking account of indications
of inflationary pressures, the strength of the business
expansion, developments in foreign exchange and domestic
financial markets, and the behavior of the monetary aggregates,
somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint would (MIGHT), or
slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint might (WOULD), be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with growth in
M2 and M3 over the period from June through September at annual
rates of about ____ AND ____ [DEL: 5-1/2-and-7] percent, respectively.
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears
to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions
during the period before the next meeting are likely to be
associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a
range of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 5-to-9] percent.
August 15, 1988
-nort-i .n-
- Treasury bills-
-- secondary market---
cds
sec mkt
3-month
comm.
paper
1-month
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent
money
market
mutual
fund
ieme
-U.S. Gov't. constant-
--- maturity yields--
bank
prime
loan
corp. A
utility
rec off
muni.
Bond
--- conventional home---
-- mortgages--
sec mkt primary market
fixed- fixed-
rate rate ARM
A--Migh
Low
Honthly
AUG 87
SEP 87
OCT 87
NOV 87
DEC 87
JAN 88
FEB 88
MAR 88
APR 88
HAY 88
JUN 88
JUL 88
federal
funds
Daily
AUG
AUG
A4 •
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class 
I I FOMC
Seasonally adjusted AUG. 15, 1988
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt1
nontranactions total loans U.S.
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government' other' totar
in M2 in M3 only investments
ANN. GROTH RATES (M) :
ANNUALLY (Q4 TO 04)
LEVELS ISBILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Class II FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted AUG. 15, 1988
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds NSA denomi- Term Term Short- Bankers
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation general Institu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Commer- accep.
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars NSA deposits time purpose tions time NSA' NSA' bonds Treasury cial paper1 tances
NSA1 deposits1' and broker/ only deposits' securities
dealer3
MONTHLY
1987-JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR.
HAY
JUNE
JULY p
are subtracted from small time deposits.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II--FOMC
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities1
August 15, 1988 Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
Treasury bills Treasury coupons .. Federal Net change
Period Net purchasess  agencies outright Net RPs5
Net Redem- within Redemp- Netchang redemptions holdins
purchases2  tions (-) Netchange within over 10 ions (-) Net cange ) total-yearover 10
May 25
LZVEL (bil.$)6
Aug. 10
exhange for maturing bills. Excludes maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing coupon issues.
S -800
- -3,761
-- 7,614
- 2,462
- 1,403
- -3,034
- 7,328
- 2,825
S -876
sale transactions (+).
6. The levels of agency issues were as follows: within over to
Meno:
111.5
