Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 9, 1988
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Immediately following the November 1 FOMC meeting, reserve
paths continued to incorporate adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $600
million. As the month progressed, however, it became increasingly evident
that the shortfall in demands on the discount window that had first sur-
faced in mid-October was widening. In these circumstances, the Desk
allowed a lower level of borrowing than the target while federal funds
were trading at a slightly higher rate than had been anticipated at the
time of the meeting. Specifically, in the first full maintenance period
of November, adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaged $396 million,
while the average funds rate remained just above 8-1/4 percent. To take
formal account of the apparent change in borrowing behavior, but also in
light of incoming information suggesting considerable strength in the
economic expansion with the potential for price pressures, the Manager for
Domestic Operations on November 22 reduced the borrowing assumption to
$400 million, with the expectation that federal funds would trade in a
range around 8-3/8 percent. In the most recent complete maintenance
period, the funds rate averaged at this level; borrowing increased to $699
million, but almost half of this amount was due to a computer problem at a
large commercial bank. Similarly, a funds transfer failure at a Reserve
Bank led to a spike in borrowing in the current maintenance period, ac-
counting for $265 million of the average adjustment plus seasonal borrow-
ing of $516 million for the first eight days of the period.
(2) Over the last week, federal funds have firmed a bit further
to trade around 8-1/2 percent, nearly 1/4 percentage point above the level
at the time of the last meeting. Other short-term rates have registered
substantially larger increases on balance, as expectations of Federal
Reserve tightening have been encouraged by release of strong economic
data, higher world oil prices, and weakness in the dollar over much of the
period. The prime rate was raised 50 basis points and most short-term
market interest rates have risen roughly 1/2 to 3/4 percentage point since
the beginning of November, with anticipation of some year-end pressures
apparent in the still-larger increases at the one-month maturity. Long-
term rates rose along with short-term rates, though by appreciably less,
as market participants apparently did not view economic developments as
presaging a sustained intensification of inflation, perhaps in part be-
cause of the anticipated response of the Federal Reserve. More recently,
some of the initial increases in bond rates have been trimmed amid hopes
for significant federal deficit reductions--sparked mainly by reports that
the Soviet Union would announce sharp defense cuts. On balance, the 30-
year rate is only about 20 basis points above its early-November level.
These movements have left yields on Treasury securities with maturities of
one year or longer all about 9 percent, while the yield curve on shorter
maturities has retained a moderate upward slope. Stock prices fell during
the first half of the intermeeting period, but most indexes have since
recovered to nearly their values at the time of the November meeting.
(3) Immediately after the U.S. elections on November 8, the
dollar resumed its steep decline in foreign exchange markets. By early
December, the dollar had dropped by about 3-1/4 percent on a weighted-
average basis since the last Committee meeting, bringing the total depre-
ciation from its late-September peak to nearly 9-1/2 percent. Exchange
market participants appeared to be concerned that the international
adjustment process was slowing and that U.S. macroeconomic policies were
not doing enough to restrain U.S. domestic demand. In recent days, as
prospects for budget deficit reduction seemed somewhat brighter, the dol-
lar has recovered a little. Over the intermeeting period, rising interest
differentials have helped to support the dollar. Short-term market inter-
est rates increased only slightly in most major foreign countries (except
in the United Kingdom where they rose markedly) and long-term rates abroad
were about unchanged.
with the Desk accounting for
$1.9 billion, primarily against yen, but also against marks.
(4) The broader monetary aggregates accelerated last month from
the unusually sluggish pace of September and October, with surprising
strength in the liquid retail components of M2. This aggregate rose at a
to nearly 4 percent, compared with the 2-1/2 percent September-to-December
pace specified by the FOMC at its last meeting. The pickup in M2 occurred
despite continued weakness in Ml, which remained about flat last month, as
MONETARY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
September QIV '87
September October November to to
November November
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
the Federal Reserve.
Monthly reserve measures, including excess reserves and borrowing, are cal-
by prorating averages for two-week reserve maintenance periods that overlap
Reserve data incorporate adjustments for discontinuities associated with
in reserve requirements.
it has been since midsummer. The runoff in demand deposits resumed in
November and currency demand moderated; as a result, growth of the mone-
tary base slowed somewhat. M3 growth rose to 6-1/4 percent last month,
implying a 5-1/2 percent rate of increase over the September-to-November
period--consistent with the Committee's 6 percent specification for the
final three months of this year given the expected further pickup in
(5) Balances in OCDs, savings deposits, and money market mutual
funds rose substantially last month. This may have reflected the uncer-
tain outlook for interest rates, as well as some parking of funds received
from stock sales in corporate restructurings. For example, the surge in
savings deposits primarily reflected the deposit of proceeds of a par-
ticular change in corporate ownership. Small time deposit growth, while
softening somewhat, remained in double digits, leaving growth of total
retail-type balances in M2 at a rapid 8-1/4 percent rate last month. The
inflow of retail deposits was concentrated at commercial banks and, com-
bined with some slowing in bank credit growth, trimmed bank needs for
additional managed liabilities; as a result their net new issuance of
large CDs in M3 virtually ceased. At thrifts, growth of large CDs also
slowed substantially, despite weak growth of core deposits, as they
increased their reliance on advances from the Federal Home Loan Banks.
(6) Bank credit growth ebbed in November to a 5-3/4 percent
annual rate as security acquisitions slowed and C&I loans edged lower.
Overall business borrowing appears to have been relatively weak last
month, despite some financing of corporate restructuring. In the long-
term market, investment-grade industrial offerings remained sparse, al-
though the market came up with a few new forms of insurance against "event
risk" (present whenever a corporation is perceived as vulnerable to a
takeover or significant financial restructuring). Junk bond issuance,
however, remained robust in November, fueled by merger-related demands.
In other sectors, municipal bond offerings dropped off last month, and it
appears that consumer borrowing may have too. Available data suggest,
however, that mortgage demand has been well maintained.
(7) For 1988, the staff expects debt growth to remain just below
the center of its 7 to 11 percent monitoring range, at 8-3/4 percent on a
fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter basis. The targeted monetary aggregates,
M2 and M3, also are likely to come in near the 6 percent midpoints of
their ranges, increasing 5-1/4 and 6-1/2 percent, respectively. These
growth rates represent a pickup of roughly 1 percentage point from 1987,
despite the stronger restraining influence of rising interest rates this
year. In 1988 growth of M2 has been more closely in line with its his-
torical relation to income and interest rates than in 1987, when this
aggregate expanded unusually slowly. At the beginning of this year, the
opportunity costs of holding monetary assets were quite narrow, reflecting
the declines in market interest rates after last October's stock market
crash. As a result, money demand was rather buoyant early in the year.
After midyear, however, M2 decelerated markedly, largely in response to
the turnaround in market interest rates and opportunity costs that ensued
from the series of tightening moves initiated by the Federal Reserve in
March. M1 growth also followed this uneven pattern over the year, but,
reflecting its larger interest rate sensitivity, fell to just 4 percent on
a fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter basis, its lowest rate of growth in
nearly 20 years. The pickup in M3 growth for the year occurred despite
some slowing in credit growth at depository institutions, but these
institutions relied relatively less on Eurodollar borrowing and other non-
M3 sources of funds in 1988 than they had in 1987.
Policy Alternatives
(8) Two policy alternatives are presented below for Committee
consideration. The relation between federal funds rates and borrowing
under both alternatives is unusually uncertain, in light of the recent
shortfalls in borrowing relative to the spread of the funds rate over the
discount rate. The possibility of year-end pressures in the funds market
and the scope for changing expectations of near-term policy actions add
to this uncertainty over coming weeks. Under Alternative B, a borrowing
objective of $400 million would be retained, and federal funds would be
expected to settle mainly into an 8-3/8 to 8-1/2 percent range, though
slightly higher rates are possible through year-end. Alternative C incor-
porates an increase in intended discount borrowing to $600 million, with
the federal funds rate likely to move up to around 8-7/8 to 9 percent.
Similar conditions in the funds market also could be engendered through a
at $400 million. These relations assume that most, though perhaps not
all, of the recent shortfall in borrowing will persist; smaller banks may
well remain less willing to tap the discount window, but large bank
borrowing, while subject to the usual vicissitudes of computer problems,
could return toward normal once the year-end, with its anticipated money
market pressures, is past.
(9) The money growth paths from November to March associated
with each alternative are presented in the table below. Under both
alternatives, M2 growth over coming months would be relatively restrained,
reflecting recent and, under alternative C, prospective increases in mar-
ket interest rates. As a consequence, this aggregate in March would be in
the lower portion of its tentative 3 to 7 percent range for 1989. M3
through March would be above the midpoint of its tentative 3-1/2 to 7-1/2
percent range under either alternative, boosted by the expected surge in
managed liabilities at banks to fund lending associated with mergers and
Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from November
to March
(10) Short-term market interest rates are likely to retreat some-
what under alternative B. These rates now embody some near-term firming of
policy, and as funds ease back a bit from their recent trading range and as
no subsequent tightening move materializes, short-term rates are likely to
drop. The 3-month Treasury bill rate should fall from around the recent
could be damped for a time, however, reflecting the effects of normal year-
end activity and a potential surge in credit demands associated with
corporate restructuring over coming months. These developments will have
their greatest impact on short-term rates, especially in light of the large
volume of bank financing of equity retirements. Any declines in long-term
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in billions
1988 October
November
December
Monthly Growth Rates
1988 October
November
December
Quarterly Ave. Growth Rates
1988 Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Sep. 88 to Dec. 88
Nov. 88 to Mar. 89
Dec. 88 to Mar. 89
rates might be quite limited, given the recent rally in bond markets. These
markets already seem to be building in some prospective budget deficit
reduction, and would be sensitive to any indication of disappointing
progress. Moreover, the dollar likely would come under downward pressure
under this alternative, raising concern about future inflation trends,
especially if the decline occurred in the context of continued strength in
the economy as envisioned in the staff forecast.
(11) From a November base, M2 growth is expected to average 4 per-
cent at an annual rate through March under alternative B, maintaining its
average pace of October and November. Liquid balances may be boosted a
little over the near term by the spate of corporate buyouts. This effect
should be minimal for M1, since share sellers are unlikely to keep funds in
idle or low-yielding balances for long. For M2, any such effects are ex-
pected to dissipate over the first quarter as funds are redeployed. Even
though short-term rates might drop from recent levels under this alterna-
tive, they would remain above those of late summer and early fall. This net
advance in interest rates and deposit opportunity costs coming on top of the
earlier increases would damp M2 demand in the first quarter about as strong-
ly as it was restrained in the second half of this year. Based on the
greenbook forecast for GNP, M2 velocity is expected to rise at a 4 percent
annual rate in the first quarter, near its estimated pace in each of the
last two quarters of 1988.
(12) M3 growth of 7 percent at an annual rate is anticipated from
November to March under alternative B, somewhat above the average of the
last two months. This aggregate should accelerate around year-end, spurred
by massive LBO and merger financing requirements, which will require a sub-
stantial pickup in managed liabilities, including large CDs. However, M3
growth is expected to moderate to around 6-1/2 percent in February and
March, as bank credit growth returns to its former trend. Quarterly aver-
age M3 growth would be associated with a gain of M3 velocity in the first
quarter of about 1-1/2 percent, close to the pace of the previous two
(13) Credit-financed corporate restructuring is expected to boost
the growth rate of the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors to a 10 percent
annual rate from November to March, leaving this aggregate in the upper half
of its tentative 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent range for 1989. Net equity
retirements over these four months are projected at a record pace, with
business borrowing at banks and in the commercial paper market bearing the
brunt of the outsized credit demands. Abstracting from the effects of the
pickup in equity retirements, business borrowing would be expected to con-
tinue at about the pace of earlier this year. In the household sector,
mortgage borrowing is likely to continue near the pace of the last few
quarters as home sales are anticipated to hold close to recent levels for
several months, especially to the extent that interest rates stabilize or
ease off under alternative B. Consumer credit growth may pick up tempo-
rarily early next year if, as expected, auto makers step up their sales
promotions to boost demand. The federal government is expected to increase
further its issuance of coupon securities, now that the Treasury has long-
bond authority, but as seasonal financing needs ease with a pickup of tax
receipts, the Treasury is expected to lessen net bill issuance. State and
local government offerings are likely to stay relatively subdued, though any
tendency for rates to drop under this alternative might foster a renewed
interest in refunding outstanding debt.
(14) Although market rates incorporate some near-term firming of
policy, an immediate rise in federal funds to the 8-7/8 to 9 percent area
associated with alternative C likely would elicit some further increase in
short-term market interest rates. Such increases, however, are likely to be
less than the nearly half point upward movement of the federal funds rate.
In addition, the prime rate would be boosted further. Long-term rates would
be likely to rise by somewhat less, especially if Federal Reserve actions
were seen as further reducing the potential for higher inflation. A dis-
count rate increase would be viewed as a more forceful step, prompting a
more immediate increase in short-term rates and one that might be larger as
well if markets interpreted it as portending even further policy tightening.
Downward pressure on the dollar would be offset, and the currency could even
firm for a time, especially if the tightening took the form of a discount
rate increase. Any upward pressure on the dollar would likely be mitigated
by firmer policy abroad, as foreign monetary authorities took advantage of
this opportunity to respond to the potential for inflation pressures in
their own economies.
(15) M2 growth probably would be held down to a 3 percent annual
rate from November to March under alternative C, placing this aggregate just
at the lower end of its tentative 1989 target range. The higher funds rate
of this alternative would reinforce the restraining influence on M2 demand
of rate increases earlier this year. Given the still flatter market yield
curve, however, household demands for those liquid assets whose rates do
adjust promptly--such as money funds--could be relatively strong. With
higher market interest rates, M1 likely would remain about unchanged on
balance through March. Some restraint also would show through to M3, which
would be expected to post a 6-1/2 percent annual growth rate over the next
four months. Higher market interest rates would curb inflows to institu-
tion-only money funds, and should damp credit extensions by depository
institutions somewhat, even as a further shifting of business credit demands
from long-term markets toward banks also is induced. By March M3 still
would be well above the 5-1/2 percent midpoint of its 1989 target range.
Directive Language
(16) Draft language for the operational paragraph, with the usual
options for varying degrees of reserve pressure and for symmetry and
asymmetry, is presented below:
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/main-
tain/INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. Taking account of indications of
inflationary pressures, the strength of the business
expansion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates, and
developments in foreign exchange and domestic financial
markets, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint
would (MIGHT), or (SOMEWHAT) slightly lesser reserve
restraint (WOULD) might, be acceptable in the intermeet-
ing period. The contemplated reserve conditions are
expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over
the period from NOVEMBER [DEL: September] through MARCH [DEL: December]
at annual rates of about ____ AND ____ [DEL: 2-1/2 and 6] percent,
respectively. The Chairman may call for Committee con-
sultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic
Operations that reserve conditions during the period
before the next meeting are likely to be associated with
a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of ____
TO ____ [DEL: 6 to 10] percent.
-- Treasury bills---
-secondary market--
federal 3
funds month
cds
sec mkt
3-month
comn.
paper
1-month
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Ipercent)
-- U.S. Gov't. constant-
--- maturity yields--
money
market
mutual
fund
bank
prime
loan
corp. A
utility
rec off
uni.
Bond
Buyer
December 12, 1988
---- conventional hoe---
---- r tgages-
sec mkt
fixed-
rate
fixed-
rate
Monthly
DEC 87
JAN 88
FEB 88
MAR 88
APR 88
MAY 88
JUN 88
JUL 88
AUG 88
SEP 88
OCT 88
NOV 88
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted DEC. 12, 1988
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period M1 M2 componnlts M3 L and government' other' total'
ANN. GROWTH RATES (%) :
ANNUALLY (Q4 TO Q4)
LEVELS (BILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Class II FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted DEC. 12, 1988
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds, NSA denomi. Term Term Short- Bankers
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation general Inltitu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings tfrm Commer- accep.
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars NSA deposits lime purpose lions time NSA' NSA' bonds Treasury cial paper* tances
MONTHLY
1987-OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasury coupons Federal Net change
Period Ne eNet purchases 3  agencies outright Net RPsPeriod Net Redemp- Net change wthi Redemp- redemptions holdin gs
Sept. 7
Dec. 7
Memo: LEVEL (bil.$)
Dec. 7
exhange for maturing bills. Excludes maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing coupon issues.
- -9,176
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities'
December 12, 1988 Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjustedDftc-b~r i-f iy88
