Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Class I FOMC
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC May 13, 1988
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) In accordance with the Committee's decision at its March 29
meeting to increase slightly the degree of reserve pressure, the allowance
for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing was raised by $100 million, to $300
million, during the maintenance period ending April 6. Actual borrowing
averaged $332 million over the first two maintenance periods since the
meeting, but jumped to $438 million in the period ending on May 4. Reserve
management in the latter period was complicated by considerable uncertainty
about the timing and magnitude of federal tax payments. Market expectations
that the funds rate would firm as Treasury balances soared, together with
apparently heightened demands for excess reserves, may have contributed to
upward pressure on the funds rate and particularly heavy borrowing in the
second week of that period. Much of the increase in borrowing in the May
a rise of nearly $70 million in seasonal borrowing to $191 million. Early
in the current maintenance period, in light of data since the last FOMC
meeting showing considerable economic strength with possible accompanying
price pressures, and given growth of M2 and M3 in the upper portions of
their ranges, the borrowing assumption was raised further to $400 million.
Over the first eight days of this period, adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
has averaged around $350 million.
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV '87
to
Feb. Mar. April April
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial
debt
Bank credit
Reserve measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
(2) Responding to the increases in reserve pressures, the federal
funds rate has moved up from around 6-1/2 percent at the time of the last
FOMC meeting to around 7 percent most recently. Other short-term interest
rates increased by similar amounts--including a 1/2 percentage point rise in
the prime rate to 9 percent; bond yields rose 30 to 45 basis points. Much
of the upward movement in rates, especially in long-term markets, occurred
following release of economic and price data (along with a disappointing
trade balance) that pointed to strength in demands on the economy and pos-
sible labor cost and price pressures, engendering expectations that the
Federal Reserve would need to tighten; at the time of their occurrence,
actual increases in reserve pressures and the federal funds rate had little
further effect on bond markets. On balance, movements in broad stock price
indexes were mixed over the intermeeting period; daily volatility in stock
prices picked up somewhat, though remaining well below that in late 1987 and
early 1988.
(3) Indications of a tightening of U.S. monetary policy in early
April and again in early May lent some firmness to the dollar, interrupted
by a mid-April weakening in response to the release of U.S. trade figures
for February. On balance, the dollar's weighted average exchange value has
appreciated about 3/8 percent since the last Committee meeting.
. The Desk purchased $500 million against yen and
marks . Short-term interest rates
abroad generally rose only slightly, except in Canada, where concern about
inflation prompted increases about in line with those in the United States,
and in the United Kingdom, where rates declined in response to the Bank of
England's efforts to offset some of sterling's strength. Long-term rates
abroad, especially in Germany, rose somewhat, partly on expectations that
monetary authorities might tighten following the rise in U.S. interest
(4) Monetary growth in April was distorted by a build-up of
transactions balances associated with outsized individual nonwithheld tax
payments. Transactions deposits surged after mid-month to meet final tax
liabilities for 1987, which had been buoyed by underwithholding and possibly
by realized capital gains associated with increased stock market trading
volume last year. A large portion of the checks written against these
deposits did not clear until late April and early May, and preliminary data
for early May indicate substantial declines in transactions deposits. For
the month of April, M1 accelerated to an 11-1/4 percent rate of growth, with
perhaps as much as 5 percentage points accounted for by tax-related
increases in cash balances. Total and nonborrowed reserves in April
paralleled the pickup in required reserves against transactions deposits,
and with currency growth unchanged last month, expansion of the monetary
base also accelerated.
(5) Within the broader aggregates, a good part of the tax distor-
tion likely was offset as individuals funded part of the increases in M1
deposits by drawing down savings-type balances included in M2 and as deposi-
tory institutions used a portion of the net additions to core deposits to
reduce their issuance of managed liabilities in M3. M2 and M3 expanded in
April at rates of 10 and 6-3/4 percent, respectively, compared with the
FOMC's 6 to 7 percent path for March to June. Relatively rapid M2 growth in
April may have reflected not only some tax-related effects, but also lagged
adjustments to earlier declines in opportunity costs. Moreover, heightened
preferences by households for liquid assets in response to uncertainties
about future movements in long-term securities prices, as evidenced by
weakness in bond and stock mutual funds this year, may have contributed to
continuing strength in M2. A resumption in bank borrowing from foreign
branches reduced the need to issue managed liabilities in M3, despite a
surge in bank credit. Growth in this aggregate also was held down by a
faster runoff from institution-only money market funds, as the opportunity
costs of holding such funds widened further with the rise in market rates.
(6) Growth of the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors in April
slowed to an estimated 8 percent rate. Private borrowing appears to have
been well maintained last month, while Treasury borrowing declined markedly.
Given its ample cash position, the Treasury continued to pay down bills in
regular weekly auctions during April. Among private sectors, overall busi-
ness borrowing was strong as the financing gap likely remained wide and
heavy equity retirements continued to create large funding needs. With the
backup in market rates, business borrowing shifted somewhat from bond mar-
kets to short-term sources; the sum of bank loans and commercial paper
surged last month. Bank data for April suggest that growth of consumer and
real estate loans remained substantial.
Policy Alternatives
(7) The three policy alternatives presented below are geared to
unchanged, increased, and decreased pressures on reserve positions relative
to the Desk's current operating objective. The assumption for adjustment
plus seasonal borrowing would be kept at $400 million under alternative B
and would be raised or lowered by $200 million under alternatives C and A,
respectively. The federal funds rate would be expected to average around
alternatives C and A. These relations embody some continued reluctance of
banks to be seen at the discount window compared with patterns before the
stock market crash; to the extent this reluctance abates or is offset by
further unusually strong increases in seasonal credit, however, federal
funds rates consistent with these borrowing assumptions could average a
little lower.
(8) The table below gives growth rates for the monetary aggre-
gates from March to June expected to be associated with the reserve market
conditions for each alternative. Under all the alternatives, M2 growth
should be appreciably slower on average over May and June compared with its
advanced April pace, reflecting the effects of higher interest rates and the
unwinding of the tax-related build-up. Under alternative B, the effects on
money demand for the March-to-June period of somewhat higher interest rates
than anticipated at the last FOMC meeting are offset by upward revisions to
income, and the growth rates of M2 and M3, respectively, are projected to be
at the upper end and in the middle of the Committee's current 6 to 7 percent
short-run specifications. The detailed table and charts on the following
pages indicate that the broad aggregates would be expected under all the
alternatives to remain within the upper halves of their annual target cones
through midyear.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from March
to June
(9) Market interest rates now appear to incorporate the policy
stance of alternative B. Thus, with federal funds continuing to trade
around 7 percent, the three-month Treasury bill rate could remain in the
confirm the second-quarter strength of economic activity envisioned in the
greenbook forecast, heightened market concern about inflation and anticipa-
tion of further policy restraint could well induce a further firming in
short- and long-term rates as midyear approaches. Pressures on the dollar
will depend not only on incoming information about the trade deficit and on
movements in relative interest rates, but also on market views of how macro-
economic developments and policies are affecting the sustainability of
improvements in external imbalances. A substantial firming of monetary
policies abroad in the wake of recent Federal Reserve action, or emerging
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
-- Actual Level
------ Growth From Fourth Quarter
* Short-Run Alternatives
market perceptions over coming weeks of a need for more U.S. policy
restraint in the face of the maintenance of the reserve conditions of alter-
native B, could result in a decline in the dollar.
(10) Under alternative B, opportunity costs of holding liquid
retail accounts would remain higher through midyear than in recent months,
given the likely very gradual response of offering rates on such accounts to
the recent rise in market rates. The unwinding of tax-related balances also
will be depressing money growth rates in May. Both of these influences will
have considerably smaller impacts on M2 than on M1. The latter was boosted
more substantially in April by the temporary build-up of transactions depos-
its and will be more affected by the rise in interest rates as depositors
shift funds from OCDs into small time deposits, whose yields adjust more
promptly to market rates. Growth in M1 is projected to drop below 3 percent
on average over May and June from 11-1/4 percent in April. In light of
weakness early in May, probably related to clearing of tax checks, M2 is
projected to increase at only a 4-1/2 percent rate this month. In June, M2
expansion is expected to rebound to around 6-1/2 percent--a little below the
projected growth of nominal income over the current quarter, owing to higher
opportunity costs. Implied M2 growth from March to June would be held to 7
percent, but, with the rapid M2 expansion through April, quarterly average
growth would amount to around 8 percent. Assuming the staff projection of
second-quarter growth in nominal GNP of around 7 percent, M2 velocity would
fall by about 1 percent, approximately half of the decline in the first
(11) M3 growth should moderate to around a 6-1/4 percent rate over
May and June under alternative B. Money market mutual funds in M3 probably
will decline further for a while as returns lag behind recently elevated
short-term market rates. The drop in core deposit inflows in May and June
is likely to be only partly offset by increased issuance of managed liabili-
ties by banks and thrifts because depository institution credit is antici-
pated to slow. At banks, business loan growth, though likely to remain
strong given the rise in bond rates, should drop back from the April pace,
which was boosted by an extraordinary volume of merger-related and other
special borrowing, and households may tap consumer credit and home equity
lines to a lesser extent in coming months with the scaling back of auto
incentives and the passing of the April tax date. At thrifts, however, the
restraining effects on asset expansion of the recent upturn in mortgage
rates will be cushioned some by a growing share of ARMs. Total household
borrowing over the remainder of the quarter is expected to edge down, while
overall business credit demands should remain robust into the summer given
the elevated financing gap and continuing merger activity. But with federal
government borrowing light over the rest of the second quarter, the growth
in the debt of all domestic nonfinancial sectors by June is expected to be
moving closer to, though still staying a little above, the 9 percent mid-
point of the Committee's annual range.
(12) The increase in discount borrowing to $600 million under
alternative C would raise the federal funds rate by 1/2 percentage point and
carry Treasury bill rates up by similar amounts. Banks very likely would
raise the prime rate by another 1/2 point, and business financing costs on
open market paper also could rise by a like amount. Downward pressure on
the exchange value of the dollar would be forestalled, at least for a time.
As is typical, bond yields would go up by less than short-term rates, though
the initial declines in bond and possibly stock prices in response to an
unanticipated firming of the size contemplated under this alternative could
be substantial. Over time, however, movements in securities prices will
depend on perceptions both of underlying strength in credit demands and of
the likely success of the Federal Reserve in checking any emerging accelera-
tion of inflation. While the course of economic activity and prices would
not be much affected by small variations in the time path of interest rates,
alternative C is closer to what was contemplated in the staff GNP forecast,
which anticipates a fairly substantial rise in money market yields through
early 1989.
(13) The higher market interest rates associated with alternative
C would further damp money growth. M1 would show little expansion in May
and June; reduced compensating balance requirements would constrain demand
deposits, and still wider opportunity costs would make NOW accounts, along
with other liquid retail accounts, even less attractive. Slower M2 growth
through June would be expected to bring its March-to-June pace to 6-1/4
percent, and its expansion from the fourth quarter to 7 percent. M3 could
be supported somewhat by a further shifting of business credit demands to
banks as higher bond yields curtail firms' offerings of longer-term debt,
necessitating greater reliance on managed liabilities by banks than under
alternative B.
(14) Alternative A would be implemented through restoring the
assumption for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing to the level of $200 mil-
lion that was in force from late January through late March, with federal
funds probably returning to the 6-1/2 percent trading area; even lower rates
could prevail if seasonal credit, which is now above $200 million, responded
relatively little to the decline in reserve pressures. Such a measure on
the heels of the two recent tightening steps clearly would be unexpected by
market participants and, in the absence of considerably weaker economic and
price data, might raise doubts about the Federal Reserve's anti-inflationary
resolve. The exchange value of the dollar would come under strong downward
pressure, and there is some risk that heightened inflationary expectations
would have adverse implications for bond prices. The prospect that such a
policy easing could not long be sustained also would limit associated
declines in short-term interest rates, with the three-month Treasury bill
rate perhaps not falling much below 6 percent. This decline in money market
rates would encourage somewhat faster growth in the broader monetary
aggregates, although the March-to-June growth of M2 and M3 still would
remain well below their December-to-March pace, and in June these aggre-
gates still would be below the upper limit of their 4 to 8 percent long-run
Directive Language
(15) Draft language for the operational paragraph, with the usual
options for alternative specifications of reserve pressures and possible
intermeeting adjustments, is presented below for Committee consideration.
The second sentence calling for continued flexibility in the conduct of
operations is shown in brackets.
Operational Paragraph
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SLIGHTLY (SOMEWHAT)
(Alt. A)/MAINTAIN (Alt. B)/increase slightly (SOMEWHAT)
(Alt. C) the degree of pressure on reserve positions. [The
Committee agrees that the current more normal approach to
open market operations remains appropriate; still sensitive
conditions in financial markets and uncertainties in the
economic outlook may continue to call for some flexibility
in operations.] Taking account of conditions in financial
markets, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint
WOULD (MIGHT) or somewhat (SLIGHTLY) lesser reserve
restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable depending on the
strength of the business expansion, indications of
inflationary pressures, developments in foreign exchange
markets, as well as the behavior of the monetary aggre-
gates. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to
be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from
March through June at annual rates of about [DEL:6-to-7] ___
PERCENT AND ____ percent-, RESPECTIVELY. The Chairman may
call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions
during the period before the next meeting are likely to be
associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a
range of [DEL: 4-to-8] ____ TO ____ percent.
May 16, 1988
Short
-- Treasury bills---
-- secondary market-
federal 3
funds month
cds
sec akt
3-month
paper
1-month
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent I
money
market
mutual
fund
-U.S. Gov't. constant-
-- maturity yields--
bank
prime
loan
SLOn- Isr.-
-- conventional hom---
or t gages
corp. A
utility
rec off
muni.
Bond
sec mkt
fixed-
rate
fixed-
rate
Monthly
HAY 87
JUN 87
JUL 87
AUG 87
SEP 87
OCT 87
NOV 87
DEC 87
JAN 88
FEB 88
AR 88
APR 88
Daily
MAY
MAY
MAY
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted
MAY 16, 1988
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period M 1 M2 components M3 L and government other total1
In M2 In M3 only investments1 _
PIICBUT AIIUAL GROITH:
ArN1ALLY (01I TO 01V)
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
MAY 16, 1988
ANNUALLY (4TH QTR):
JULI
AUG.
SEPT.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR. P
Currency
Demand
deposits
Other Overnight
checkable RPs and
deposits Eurodollars
MMDAs
NSA
|I
Savings
Small
denoml-
nation
time
Money market
mutual funds, NSA
general I Instilu-
purpose.
and brokerl
Term
RPs
NSA
Large
denoml.
nallion
time
deposits
3
Term
Eurodollars
Savings
bonds
Short
term
Treasury
securities
Commer-
cial paper
Bankers
accep
tances
i Il_ _l _l__I .. . ....._ I I 1L
1/ INCLUDES RETAIL REPOBCHASE AGREERENTS. ALL IBA AND K6OGH ACCOUNTS AT COMMERCIAL BANKS AN THIFT INSTITTIUIONS AS t SUBTRACTED
FROM 5lALL TIME DEPOSITS.
2/ EXCLUDES 4IA AND KBOGH ACCOUNTS.
3/ NET OF LARGE UENOMINATION TIME DEPOSITS HELD BI MONET MARKET MUTUAL FUNDS AND THHIFT INSTITUTIONS.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II -FOMC
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities'
May 16, 1988 Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
Treasury bills Treasury coupons Federal Net change
Period Net purchases3 agencies outright Net RPsNet Redemp- within Redemp- N h redemptions holdings
Memo: LEVEL (bil.$)
May 11
exhange for maturing bills. Excludes maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing coupon issues.
- -3,522
- 7,529
sale transactions (+).
6. The levels of agency issues were as follows: withf in 1-
