Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) March 25, 1988
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) Since the February FOMC meeting, reserve paths have been
constructed assuming adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $200 million, in
accordance with the Committee's decision to maintain the slightly reduced
degree of reserve pressure sought in the days preceding the meeting. This
level of borrowing was expected to be associated with federal funds trading
around 6-1/2 percent, once the market had perceived the degree of Federal
Reserve easing. Over the three complete maintenance periods since the FOMC
meeting, adjustment plus seasonal borrowing has averaged $238 million, and
the federal funds rate has averaged 6.59 percent. The difficulties of some
Texas banks and the associated surge of extended credit have had little
apparent impact on reserve markets. The Desk readily offset the increased
supply of reserves, and bank reserve management does not seem to have been
affected. Excess reserves have fallen on balance over the intermeeting
period in typical seasonal fashion, and willingness to tap discount credit
does not appear to have diminished further.
(2) Most other interest rates have risen somewhat over the
intermeeting period, especially in bond markets where yields increased
around 3/8 of a percentage point. Data and reports on the economy
suggested more strength than had been anticipated, prompting a shift in
market sentiment about prospects for future inflation and Federal Reserve
policy. Despite the Texas bank situation, spreads between private and
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Nov. QIV '87
to to
Jan. Feb. Mar.pe Mar.pe Mar.pe
Money and credit aggregates
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Treasury rates have continued to fluctuate in a narrow range, well below
the relatively high levels reached after the stock market collapse, though
prices of bank stocks fell following reports of those problems. Broad
stock price indexes posted sizable gains through most of the period,
reaching their highest levels since last October. They have retreated in
the last week, perhaps prompted by renewed concerns about the prospects for
interest rates and the dollar; however, substantial stock price declines in
the last two days were accompanied by decreases in Treasury bill and bond
rates, in a pattern similar to last October.
(3) The dollar's weighted average exchange value against 10
major currencies declined by about 1-1/2 percent since the last Committee
meeting. Although January trade figures were generally better than
expected, incoming economic data were interpreted as suggesting stronger
domestic demand, calling into question the prospects for reducing external
imbalances. Sterling was particularly strong, pushing through Britain's
de facto target ceiling rate of 3.00 marks per pound, later prompting a
rates. Elsewhere, interest rate movements were fairly narrow. As the
dollar weakened at the end of the intermeeting period the Desk
bought dollars against yen, with Desk purchases amounting to
$148 million.
(4) The broader monetary aggregates expanded rapidly again in
February and March. Over the two months combined, M2 and M3 increased at 9
and 8-3/4 percent rates, respectively, leaving M2 a little above and M3 at
the upper bound of the Committee's 6 to 7 percent November-to-March growth
ranges. On a quarterly average basis, both broad aggregates increased at a
velocity (based on the Greenbook GNP projection)--the first since the last
quarter of 1986. The strength in M2 and drop in its velocity reflected the
decrease in the opportunity costs of holding deposits in this aggregate
that has resulted from the fall in market interest rates on balance since
October. Within M2, liquid retail components as a whole increased in the
first quarter following several months of declines, as rates on these
instruments fell more slowly than those on time deposits or market instru-
ments; even so, flows into small time deposits remained quite rapid, owing
to their still large rate advantage. Flows into money funds, both at the
M2 and M3 levels, continued strong in February, but in March shares of
institution-only money funds leveled out as their rates fell into closer
alignment with market rates. Issuance of large time deposits was brisk in
February. Bank credit growth picked up last month, while reliance on
funding from foreign offices was reduced; the supply of funds in Euro-
dollar markets may have contracted as foreign official institutions shifted
dollar investments to U.S. government securities. In March, however,
issuance of large time deposits decelerated sharply, perhaps associated
with the weakness in credit at large banks that is suggested by data for
the first part of the month.
(5) M1 slowed sharply in February, but growth is estimated to
have rebounded in March. On balance over the two months, NOW accounts have
increased at a relatively robust pace, but demand deposits have declined
further. Owing to the weakness in demand deposits, the velocity of M1
continued to increase in the first quarter, though at a slower pace than
over the second half of 1987. With transactions accounts relatively
sluggish on balance and excess reserves declining, total reserves advanced
at only a 3 percent rate over February and March. Relatively flat reserve
growth along with slowing expansion in currency led to a deceleration in
the monetary base over February and March, holding the rise from November
to March to 7-1/2 percent.
(6) Expansion of nonfinancial debt picked up to a double-digit
pace in February and early indications are that growth has continued strong
in March. Overall business borrowing has been sizable, in part reflecting
heightened merger and acquisition activity, and has been focused increas-
ingly on longer-term markets in response to the decline in bond rates since
last fall. Tax-exempt bond issuance also increased in the last two months,
spurred by a resumption of refinancings. Bank data suggest that consumer
installment borrowing remained substantial in February and early March.
Treasury borrowing has strengthened in February and March, but sales to
foreign official institutions and state and local governments have enabled
it to hold down offerings to the general public.
Policy alternatives
(7) Three short-run policy options are presented below. Alter-
native B would retain the $200 million assumption for adjustment plus
seasonal borrowing now used in constructing paths for nonborrowed reserves,
with federal funds rates remaining generally in the 6-1/2 percent area,
once any quarter-end pressures were past. Under alternative C, the
borrowing objective would be raised to $400 million and the funds rate
would move up to the vicinity of 7 percent. Under alternative A, federal
funds would be expected to trade around the current 6 percent discount
rate; this could be accomplished by reducing the discount rate by 1/2 point
while keeping the $200 million borrowing objective, or by decreasing this
objective. The staff estimates that borrowing on the order of $100 million
might represent the level associated with this alternative. However, this
estimate is subject to considerable uncertainty as we have very limited
experience with operating at borrowing around frictional levels. More-
over, at very low levels of borrowing, the funds rate might become quite
sensitive to relatively minor changes in borrowing behavior. Such changes
could include the normal pattern of seasonal credit as well as other
(8) The relationship between the funds rate-discount rate
spread and borrowing specified in alternatives B and C (and A with a
discount rate cut) corresponds to average experience over the period since
December. Although depository institutions may be somewhat less reluctant
to be seen at the window than they were immediately after the stock market
crash, some concern seems to remain, and achieving a given spread appears
to require targeting about $100 million less borrowing than suggested by
the relationship from early 1986 through mid-October 1987. The specifi-
cations of the policy alternatives also assume that the Texas bank situa-
tion and indications of other difficulties of depository institutions will
not alter overall borrowing behavior in the period ahead. And they
abstract from any effects at low total borrowing levels of rising seasonal
borrowing expected over coming months. The Committee may wish the Manager
to remain alert to any need for revisions to intended borrowing should the
relationship to money market conditions be affected by these potential
influences on discount window use.
(9) The anticipated growth in the monetary aggregates from
March to June implied by these policy alternatives is shown in the table
below, together with the associated federal funds rate ranges. (More
detailed data are shown on the table and charts on the next few pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from March
to June
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
------------------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
(10) With recent conditions in the reserves market maintained
under alternative B, interest rates would tend to remain around current
levels, at least for a time. But given the staff economic forecast, which
implies a flow of data that would not allay market concerns about
potentially inflationary pressures on resources, the market might well
remain edgy. In addition, if signs of further expansion in domestic demand
were combined with trade data suggesting sluggish adjustment of U.S.
external imbalances, the dollar could come under further downward pressure
which, in this context, would be likely to contribute to some increases in
U.S. interest rates.
(11) Given the financial conditions associated with alternative
B, M2 and M3 are expected to grow at 7 and 6-1/2 percent annual rates,
respectively, from March to June, leaving them well into the upper halves
of their 4 to 8 percent annual ranges. Although the broader aggregates
would be expected to slow somewhat from the pace of the last three months,
important impetus to growth of M2 will continue to be the reduced oppor-
tunity cost of holding retail interest-bearing accounts. To be sure,
opportunity costs are likely to widen a little once again in coming months
as returns on retail balances edge off further in lagged response to the
previous decline in market rates. Nevertheless, the expected second-quar-
ter spread between market rates and the average return on retail balances
in M2 still would represent a very substantial reduction from its peak in
the third quarter of last year. Inflows to these accounts might be sup-
ported by other influences as well: the personal saving rate is projected
to remain high relative to last year, and additions to IRAs should be
considerably smaller than in recent years in response to tightened tax-
reform restrictions.
(12) M3 growth in the spring and early summer will be damped by
weaker inflows to money market mutual funds as their rate advantage over
short-term market instruments narrows further. Depositories are expected
to maintain the recent pace of issuance of managed liabilities to fund
credit expansion in the face of a moderation in core deposit growth. Bank
credit growth is projected to be supported by some strengthening in
business loans, reflecting a projected widening financing gap and continued
rapid share retirements. However, consumer lending at banks is likely to
weaken a little, as the rise in consumer spending moderates. Mortgage
borrowing should remain at around the first-quarter pace. For thrifts,
asset growth at around the moderate pace of recent months would continue to
be bolstered by demand for ARMS, which are retained in their own portfolios
to a greater extent than are fixed-rate mortgages. Overall, however, the
debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to slow to around an
the midpoint of its 7 to 11 percent annual range. The deceleration results
entirely from a marked slowdown in federal borrowing, as the Treasury trims
its auctions to moderate the surge in its cash balance associated with
higher-than-usual spring tax payments.
(13) M1 growth in April might be boosted by a buildup in trans-
action balances associated with tax payments, which are projected to exceed
the typical volume reflected in the transactions account seasonals, though
abated by early May. On a March-to-June basis, M1 is expected to increase
at a rate of about 4-1/2 percent under alternative B. Demand deposits are
anticipated to strengthen only a little on balance over the next three
months, after the somewhat inexplicable weakness through the first quarter.
NOW account growth, while moderating from recent rapid rates, would remain
above the pace of the second half of 1987. M1 velocity would continue to
increase, but at a slower rate than in the first quarter.
(14) The more restrictive monetary posture of alternative C, at
least at this time, would come as some surprise to financial markets. With
the funds rate averaging around 7 percent, the 3-month Treasury bill rate
could move into an area around 6-1/4 percent. Rate spreads between bank
and thrift paper and Treasury bills could widen, if concerns about their
asset quality and earnings prospects intensify, which might be more likely,
given the already troubled status of many depository institutions. A good
portion of the increases in short-term rates might show through in longer-
term rates. But, an upward movement in U.S. interest rates, especially if
viewed as reflecting Federal Reserve resolve to avoid inflation and faster
external adjustment by containing domestic demand, would help to support
the dollar in the near term, and over time the net increase in bond yields
could be limited.
(15) The broader monetary aggregates under alternative C would
post a more marked slowing over the course of the quarter than under the
other alternatives, as the effects of the rebound in market interest rates
increasingly took hold. Both aggregates would end the quarter a bit
closer to, though still above, the midpoints of their longer-run ranges.
The attractiveness of transactions and other liquid accounts would be
lessened further, as their rates lag in typical fashion behind market
yields. M1 probably would be growing very sluggishly by June, leaving its
growth from the fourth quarter to June a bit below its current 4 percent
rate through March.
(16) Under alternative A, the easing of reserve market condi-
tions would ripple through other financial markets. The 3-month Treasury
bill would drop to below 5-1/2 percent, but declines in longer-term rates
might be small. Absent a weaker economic picture than contemplated under
the staff forecast, market participants may not expect such a policy easing
to be sustained for long. The dollar could come under substantial downward
pressures, particularly if concerns about inflation and external adjustment
(17) With the lower short-term market interest rates of alter-
native A, M2 growth would not be expected to moderate much over the next
three months. Expansion of this aggregate, at an 8 percent rate from March
to June, would leave M2 only a little below the upper end of its annual
target cone. Opportunity costs of holding retail deposits within M2 would
continue the declines begun last fall. Inflows into small time deposits
might abate as their rates completed their downward adjustment, but growth
of NOWs, savings deposits and MMDAs could pick up noticeably. With some
boost to required compensating demand balances of businesses also coming
from lower market rates, M1 might well grow at a 6 percent annual rate from
March to June. M3 would be strengthened somewhat less than the other
aggregates over the three months, as lower market interest rates shift some
credit demands to nonbank sources in light of lagging bank lending rates,
but this aggregate would still record a 7 percent increase from March to
Directive language
(18) Draft language for the operational paragraph, including
the usual options and updating, is shown below. The second sentence
calling for continued flexibility in operations is shown in brackets. The
decision on whether to retain this or a similar sentence might depend on
an assessment of the state of financial markets as well as the Committee's
discussion of operating procedures.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/
maintain (Alt. B)/INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the {DEL: slightly
reduced] degree of pressure on reserve positions {DEL: sought-in
recent-days]. [The Committee agrees that the current more
normal approach to open market operations remains
appropriate; still sensitive conditions in financial
markets and uncertainties in the economic outlook may
continue to call for some flexibility in operations.]
Taking account of conditions in financial markets, somewhat
(SLIGHTLY) lesser reserve restraint WOULD (MIGHT), or
somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint would (MIGHT)
be acceptable depending on the strength of the business
expansion, indications of inflationary pressures, develop-
ments in foreign exchange markets, as well as the behavior
of the monetary aggregates. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with growth in
[DEL: both] M2 and M3 over the period from [DEL: November-through] March
THROUGH JUNE at annual rates of about ____ PERCENT AND ____ [DEL: 6
to-7] percent, RESPECTIVELY. The Chairman may call for
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the
period before the next meeting are likely to be associated
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of
____ TO ____ [DEL: 4-to-8 percent].
MIt~-foU. -
March 28, 1988
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Spercent
- Lfln-Tlr-
-- Treasury bills--- -U.S. Gov't. constant-- --- conventional ho-secondary markt--- ---- maturity yields-- --- rtgages---
money sec mkt primary market
funds month month month 3-month 1-month fund loan 3-year 10-year 30-year rec off Buyer rate rate ARM
Monthly
MAR 87
APR 87
MAY 87
JUN 87
JUL 87
AUG 87
SEP 87
OCT 87
NOV 87
DEC 87
JAN 88
FEB 88
are 1 day quotes for Friday, Thursday or Friday, respectively, following the end of the statement wak. Column 13 is the Bond Buyer revenue index. Column 14
is th. FNHA purchase yield, plus loan servicing fee on 30-day mandatory delivery comitments. Colum 15 is the average contract rate on new commitments for
fixed-rate mortgagesi FRHsI with 80 percent loan-to-value ratios at a sample of savings and loans. Column 16 is the average initial contract rate on nm
commitments for 1-year, adjustable-rate mortgages(ARs) at S&Ls offering both FRHs and ARHs with the ame number of discount points.
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonaly adjusted MAR. 28, 1988
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt2
nontransactions total loans US.
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government other total
In M2 In M3 only Investments1
PEICRIT IANUAL GROWTH:
AI8UALLI (Uil TO 011)
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
MAR. 28, 1988
ANWUALL 1T(8T QT):
APR.
MAT
JUne
JULY
AUG.
SEPT.
Currency
Demand
deposits
Other
checkable
deposits
I ~- -.
Ovenight
RPs and
Eurodollan
NSA
MMDAe I Savings
NSA deposits
bmall
denoml-
nation
lime
- - - - - --- - -
Money market
mutual funds. NSA
general Instilu-
purpose, lions
end brokert only
dealer 2
Large
denoml-
nation
time
depo'
- -10
Term
Eurodollr
NSA
Savings
bonds
Short.
term
Ieasury
securilles
Commer-
clal paper
«14. J
P-PR ELNIMARt
Banker
accep-
tances
*4.S
45.0
*5.7
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II FOMCNet Changes In System Holdings of Securities'
March 28, 1988 Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
Treasury bills Treasury coupons Federal Net change
Period Net purchases3  agencies outright Net RPs5Net Redemp- Redemp- redemptions holdingspurchases tions (-) Ntchange within tions (-) Net change total
Memo: LEVEL (bil.$)
Mar. 23
-- 4,668
- 9,668
exhange for maturing bills. Excludes maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing coupon issues.
- -2,320
- -2,527
