Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
February 3, 1989
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemBy the staff
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) February 3, 1989
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) Open market operations over the intermeeting period were com-
plicated by continuing uncertainty about the relationship between borrow-
ing and money market conditions. Following the December 13-14 FOMC meet-
ing, reserve paths initially were constructed assuming $500 million of
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing. Federal funds moved up from the pre-
vailing 8-1/2 percent level to average 8-7/8 percent in the period ending
December 28, although borrowing was only $380 million. The borrowing
assumption was raised further to $600 million on January 5, in accordance
with the Committee's decision at the December meeting, but heavy year-end
recourse to the window pushed actual borrowing for the second maintenance
period to $840 million. In mid-January, based on historical evidence that
reluctance to borrow at the window typically rises markedly in the early
part of the year, the Desk adopted an extra measure of flexibility toward
the borrowing target. Federal funds trading has centered between 9 and
maintenance period ending January 25 and around $250 million over the
first eight days of the current period.
(2) Prior to the release of strong January employment data, Trea-
sury bill rates had risen only about 1/4 percentage point over the inter-
meeting period, as some firming in policy had been widely anticipated.
Private short-term rates were unchanged or lower, reflecting as well the
unwinding of year-end pressures. After the employment report, money mar-
ket rates rose about 5 to 10 basis points, as markets seemed to anticipate
some additional policy tightening in the near term. Longer-term interest
rates have generally fallen 15 to 40 basis points and stock price indices
have risen 7 to 10 percent on average; these markets benefited from gener-
ally strong demand for dollar assets apparently engendered in part by
damped inflation expectations against a backdrop of actual and expected
monetary policy restraint. The further flattening of the yield curve has
nearly eliminated the spread between the investment yields on 30-year and
time of the last meeting.
(3) The strength of the demand for dollar assets bolstered the
dollar on foreign exchange markets, raising its weighted-average value by
about 6-1/4 percent since the last Committee meeting. The rise occurred
despite two releases of disappointing monthly trade data, sizable inter-
vention sales of dollars, and two rounds of increases in official lending
rates by European central banks. As a consequence of the last, the dif-
ferential between U.S. Treasury bill interest rates and a weighted average
of foreign short-term rates was little changed; foreign long-term rates
rose moderately while U.S. bond rates fell.
, with the
Desk accounting for $2.1 billion of this total.
(4) Preliminary data indicate a pause in money growth in January
after moderate increases in December. For the two months combined, M2
growth averaged 2-1/2 percent, a bit below the Committee's expectation for
the November through March period, while M1 has been about flat.1 The
sluggish expansion of these aggregates appears to reflect recent increases
in money market yields, which have widened the opportunity costs of hold-
ing deposits; this widening has been accentuated by slower-than-usual
adjustment of most retail offering rates over recent months. Administra-
tive pressure on some thrifts to restrain deposit pricing may be holding
down their deposit rates and, by reducing competitive pressures, may be
curbing increases in deposit rates generally. Evidence of shifts from M2
balances may be seen in the large volume of noncompetitive tenders at
recent Treasury auctions and in a resumption of inflows to stock and bond
mutual funds. Reflecting less aggressive pricing of thrift deposits, and
perhaps also some concerns about the resolution of this industry's prob-
lems, retail deposit flows at these institutions, which had slowed over
the summer, have been especially weak in recent months. M3 growth has
averaged 3-3/4 percent over the past two months, falling well short of
expectations. Banks' funding needs have not increased as rapidly as pro-
jected, owing mostly to a shortfall in business loans; weakness in these
loans was accounted for partly by repayment of previous corporate restruc-
turing loans and partly by subdued credit demands for non-merger-related
purposes. At thrifts, greater reliance on Federal Home Loan Bank advances
may have substituted for deposits.
(5) Although business borrowing at banks was less than expected,
commercial paper soared. Problems in the investment-grade industrial bond
seasonal factor revisions, described briefly in the appendix. The
revised data should be considered confidential until their release,
planned for February 9.
MONETARY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
November QIV '88
to to
November December January Januaryp January
Money and credit aggregates
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
market and expectations by some issuers that longer-term interest rates
will decline may have shifted some issuers toward shorter-term debt. Junk
bond issuance has been moderate, but a heavy flow stemming from impending
deals is expected in the near future. Consumer borrowing and mortgage
activity appear to have been well maintained. Overall, domestic nonfinan-
cial debt appears to have grown in January near the pace of recent months.
Longer-run strategies
(6) As background for the Committee's consideration of the ranges
for 1989, projected effects of three alternative longer-run monetary
policy strategies are presented below. Strategy I is a baseline, embody-
ing the monetary policy and economic outlook of the greenbook forecast,
extended judgmentally into 1991. Strategies II and III are based on
somewhat tighter and somewhat easier monetary policies, respectively, as
indexed by M2 growth that is one percentage point less and one percentage
point more than in the baseline over each of the three years. Staff
econometric models were used to derive deviations of the forecasts from
the baseline under the two alternative policy strategies.
M2 (QIV to QIV)
I (Baseline)
II
III
Prices: Fixed-weight
deflator (QIV to QIV)
I
II
III
Real GNP (QIV to QIV) 1
I
II
III
Unemployment rates (QIV)
I
II
III
(7) Under the baseline of strategy I, policy exerts some restraint
on output, putting in place conditions that lead to some moderation in the
pace of inflation starting in 1991. Given the rise in real interest rates
over the near term to a fairly high level, nominal rates can begin to edge
off in the latter part of the forecast period, as inflation moderates.
Even so, real rates remain high enough to keen real output below its
potential. The behavior of nominal rates means that velocity will level
out, and the associated acceleration of M2 growth is still consistent with
restraint on inflation.
(8) The tighter policy of strategy II would lead to quicker and
larger decreases in inflation. That result, however, involves still
higher real interest rates over the forecast horizon in order to induce a
substantial slowing of output growth and an appreciable rise in unemploy-
ment to well above the rate associated with steady inflation--assumed to
be around 5-3/4 percent in these simulations. The level of the unemploy-
ment rate at the end of 1991 implies even greater progress against infla-
tion in 1992, absent a sharp turnaround in policy. The dollar would be
higher under this strategy than in the staff forecast. The negative
effects of this on the improvement in trade, however, might be offset by
the additional restraint on domestic demand and the better performance of
prices and costs for U.S. producers.
(9) The faster money growth of strategy III would avoid a marked
slowing in economic growth, keeping the unemployment rate at or a little
below its current level over the near term and allowing only a small rise
through 1991. Inflation accelerates substantially in 1990, before level-
ing out. Faster expansion of domestic demand tends to deepen external
imbalances, and the greater downward movement of the dollar contributes to
the higher inflation. Nominal interest rates initially are somewhat lower
under this strategy, but the pressure of faster income growth and higher
inflation results in nominal rates equal to those under the other two
strategies by 1991.
(10) The table below gives inflation projections for the three M2
paths based on the single-equation model relating the level of prices to
M2 presented to the FOMC in November. In this model, M2 determines a
long-run level of prices, assuming velocity and output are at their trend
levels. Inflation would accelerate or decelerate depending on whether
actual prices were below or above this long-run level. The results of the
equation simulation tend to give a little more optimistic outlook for
inflation under the three alternatives.
Prices: Fixed-weight
deflator (QIV to QIV)
Long-run ranges for 1989
(12) The table below gives two alternative sets of ranges for
growth in M2, M3, and the debt of nonfinancial sectors from the fourth
quarter of 1988 to the fourth quarter of 1989. The ranges of alternative
I are those adopted on a tentative basis by the Committee in late June.
Alternative II would reduce the money ranges somewhat further, more com-
fortably encompassing staff expectations for growth in M2 and M3 in the
greenbook forecast, and allowing for the slower money growth strategy
outlined in the previous section.
Alt. I Alt. II Memo:
(tentative ranges) 1988 ranges
Growth from QIV '88
to QIV '89
(13) The proposed alternatives retain the 4 percentage point widths
for all the ranges, first adopted last February.2 The rationale for
widening the range for M2 rested primarily on the combined effects of the
rather interest-sensitive nature of this aggregate over the one-year tar-
get period and uncertainty about levels of interest rates that would
accompany pursuit of policy objectives over the year. M3 and debt are
less sensitive to intermediate-term variations in interest rates. How-
ever, some special uncertainties in the financial sector in 1989 might
argue against narrowing any of the ranges. As noted below, the approach
to resolving thrift difficulties could affect both M2 and M3. In addi-
tion, the unpredictable outlook for corporate restructuring activity,
which might be affected by, among other things, actual or proposed legis-
lative action, adds to uncertainties with respect to growth of debt and
(14) The staff expects that M2 growth of only 3-1/2 percent in 1989
will be associated with the greenbook forecast. The sluggish growth of M2
is an aspect of the tighter monetary policy in the latter part of 1988 and
the additional firming of interest rates in 1989 thought likely to be
needed to contain inflation. Although nominal GNP is projected to in-
crease 7 percent this year, the same as in 1988, the upward movement in
rates and associated rise in opportunity costs are expected to increase M2
velocity 3-1/2 percent this year, compared with 1-1/2 percent last year.
(See chart 1.) A substantial part of the velocity increase would seem
already to be in train from the lagged effects of the interest rate in-
creases that have occurred over the second half of 1988. Even with no
additional increase in rates, velocity would be expected to rise nearly
casts for this aggregate, given greenbook income and market interest
rates. This is based on the assumption that the usual relationship of
deposit to market interest rates is not restored in 1989, leaving oppor-
tunity costs a bit higher than generated by the models. Moreover, future
steps to deal with the thrift situation could further adversely affect
returns on deposits, for example through an increase in insurance pre-
miums .
(15) M3 growth also is expected to slow substantially this year--to
about a 4-3/4 percent pace--under the greenbook forecast. This slowing
reflects a projected deceleration in asset expansion and associated fund-
ing needs at thrifts as well as greater reliance on managed liabilities
outside M3 at all depository institutions as core deposit growth moder-
ates. At banks, credit growth is expected to be supported by increased
demands from businesses, which will be funding greater external credit
needs from short-term sources in a rising rate environment. Even so,
capital requirements will foster continued securitization and sale of
loans, contributing to a slight moderation in credit growth at these
institutions in 1989. At thrifts, some easing in the demands for mortgage
credit together with administrative restraints on lending by insolvent or
undercapitalized thrifts, should depress overall thrift asset growth
appreciably. The staff forecast has thrift credit growth slowing substan-
tially in 1989--to 6-1/4 percent from 7-3/4 percent in 1988--but risks may
be on the side of even slower growth of assets and liabilities. Moreover,
Conceptually, the retirement of equity in corporate restructurings
may have boosted the demand for M2 by those receiving the proceeds.
Aside from some short-run effects as funds are held temporarily in the
process of completing these transactions, however, little effect of this
phenomenon has been apparent, and no allowance in the M2 forecast has
been made for the projected slackening of share retirements over coming
quarters this year.
assistance to troubled thrifts from the government could substitute in
part for deposit sources of funds. Thrifts already have been using FSLIC
similar effects on their appetite for deposits.
(16) Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to grow
moderates a little, reflecting a drawdown of cash balances rather than a
reduction of the deficit and underlying pressures on financial markets.
Overall, nonfederal borrowing is projected to be maintained at about its
somewhat as the financing gap widens and corporate restructuring and
equity retirement activity remains brisk, though trending down from the
record pace in late 1988 and early 1989. In the household sector, growth
of mortgage debt is expected to slow as higher interest rates restrain
housing activity; consumer credit expansion also should moderate, in line
with a smaller rise in outlays on consumer durables.
(17) Although alternative I encompasses staff money growth fore-
casts thought to be consistent with the greenbook economic projection for
their ranges. Alternative II would more nearly center projected growth
within the annual ranges, although still involving some expected shortfall
from the midpoints, especially for M2. Alternative II affords more room
for unexpectedly slow money growth, for example should offering rates
adjust even more sluggishly than the staff envisions. Alternative II also
provides more scope for greater monetary policy tightening than in the
staff forecast, should additional restraint on aggregate demand be needed
to check inflation pressures or should the Committee wish to make more
progress against inflation than in the staff projection. At the same
time, should constant or moderately declining interest rates prove consis-
tent with satisfactory economic performance, the upper bound of alterna-
tive II would provide adequate room for the implied faster money growth.
(18) On the other hand, alternative I already represents reductions
in the M2 and M3 ranges for 1989 of 1 and 1/2 percentage point, respec-
tively, from those for last year, and the Federal Reserve's resolve at
least to resist any increase in inflation is not widely questioned. More-
over, should a major initiative to close the deficit over time be forth-
coming, market interest rates would come under downward pressure, and
alternative I would better encompass the somewhat faster money growth
needed should the System wish to assure that economic growth would not
slacken over the near term. Alternative I may be a more natural transi-
tion to the appropriate sequence of monetary ranges in future years, when
nominal interest rates may not be rising and velocity would level out or
even decline. For example, in 1990 M2 and M3 are seen as accelerating to
the year. If the Committee wishes to have scope to continue reducing the
ranges in 1990 and beyond, it may be desirable to avoid larger decreases
at this time.
(19) Under the staff forecast, M1 would be about unchanged on bal-
ance over 1989, as declines in demands for both demand deposits and NOW
accounts, stemming from the projected rise in opportunity costs and
declines in required compensating balances, are about offset by growth in
currency in line with that of nominal GNP. This currency growth would
support expansion in the monetary base over 1989 of 4-1/2 percent, 2-1/2
percentage points slower than last year.
Short-run policy alternatives
(20) The two near-term policy alternatives presented involve
adjustment plus seasonal discount borrowing of $600 million for alterna-
tive B with funds trading at around 9 percent or a bit above, and borrow-
ing of $800 million for alternative C with funds 1/2 percentage point
higher. The funds rate that is likely to be associated with a particular
borrowing level and with the current 6-1/2 percent discount rate clearly
has become harder to predict in light of the substantial downward shift in
the borrowing relationship that started around mid-October of last year.
Additional near-term uncertainties can be identified. If the beginning-
of-year reluctance to borrow extends well into February or turns out to be
a more fundamental shift, adhering to a given borrowing objective would be
associated with somewhat higher federal funds rates. However, some tem-
porary downward pressure on the funds rate relative to staff expectations
might accompany the sizable boost to free reserves projected in coming
weeks from market factors, as currency and required reserves decline sea-
sonally and the Treasury balance runs off. In addition, massive flows of
funds through the banking system in coming weeks, associated with payment
for the RJR-Nabisco takeover and the Treasury's midquarter refunding, may
contribute to temporary volatility in money market rates. In light of
these considerations, it may be appropriate for the Desk to continue to
view the borrowing assumption with some flexibility.
ending December 14 and 28 and in the most recent period ending January
25. Anticipations of System tightening and year-end pressures in
December and a usual beginning-of-year pullback in borrowing in January
likely enlarged those shortfalls. Thus, the expected relationship
assumes that only the average downward shift of approximately $400 mil-
lion since mid-October will prove permanent.
(21) Anticipated money growth rates from December to March are
shown in the table below for both alternatives, along with implied growth
through March from the fourth-quarter base of the annual targets. (Detail-
ed data are presented on the table and charts on the following pages.)
Under both alternatives, M2 would remain around the lower bound of its 3
to 7 percent tentative annual range by March, while M3 would stay in the
lower half of its 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent tentative annual range.
Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from December
to March
Growth from QIV '88
to March
(22) Short-term rates seem to have built in a further firming step
for policy in the near term. With funds continuing to trade at or a
little above 9 percent, as expected under alternative B, some of the rate
increases registered most recently may unwind, with Treasury bill rates
moving back to around 8-3/8 percent or a little below. Bond yields are
unlikely to move substantially, absent more indications of strength in the
economy or intensifying pressures on prices. As maintaining the reserve
pressures of alternative B causes international investors to begin recon-
sidering the likelihood of an imminent U.S. monetary policy tightening,
the value of the dollar could begin to slip.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C
(23) Increases in short-term market rates over recent months should
restrain M2 growth through this quarter under alternative B. Some rebound
from a weak January seems in store in February and March, but M2 growth is
expected to reach only about 3 percent over the next two months, given the
glacial adjustment speed of offering rates recently, especially for liquid
February and March, M1 would decline slightly further. The 2 percent M2
growth of alternative B from December to March implies quarterly average
growth of only 3 percent for this aggregate. M2 demand is not expected to
respond to the anticipated bulge in nominal GNP in the current quarter
resulting from an imputed bounceback of farm activity from the drought
last year. Consistent with the GNP outlook in the greenbook, the income
velocity of M2 would increase this quarter at a 5-3/4 percent annual rate,
nearly twice its rate of change over the second half of 1988.
(24) M3 growth under alternative B should strengthen from its
January lull to a 4-1/2 percent annual rate over February and March,
bringing growth from December to March to a 3-1/2 percent annual rate.
Total thrift deposits, flat in December and January, are expected to ex-
pand weakly over February and March, and S&Ls should continue their reli-
ance on new FHLB advances and other non-M3 borrowing. A bulge in bank
credit associated with financing of the RJR-Nabisco takeover, while other
LBO and merger-related lending remains heavy, should induce substantial
issuance of large CDs this month and next. Corporate restructuring
activity also will be boosting overall debt issuance by domestic nonfinan-
cial sectors for a time. The debt aggregate is projected to grow at a
are forecast at a record $200 billion annual rate for the quarter, while
the corporate financing gap holds steady at around an $80 billion annual
(25) The rise in the funds rate to around 9-1/2 percent or slightly
higher associated with discount borrowing of $800 million under alterna-
tive C would be larger than is currently built into market rates. Short-
term rates would move up across the board, though by less than 1/2 per-
centage point, with the 3-month Treasury bill rate rising to around 8-3/4
percent. The upward pressure on bond rates from market perceptions of a
higher path for short rates in the intermediate term might be largely
offset by expectations that policy actions of this size and speed were
likely to slow growth and reduce inflation. Higher short-term rates
likely would induce some further firming of the exchange value of the
dollar. The increase in short-term rates would further damp expansion of
the monetary aggregates. The projected 1-1/2 percent growth of M2 over
the first three months of the year under this alternative would place it
in March a little below the lower bound of the cone associated with its
tentative annual range, and the upward movement of rates is likely to keep
M2 growth relatively damped into the spring. M3 growth of about 3-1/4
percent from December to March would leave this aggregate just 1/2 per-
centage point above its tentative lower bound by quarter end.
Directive language
(26) Presented below for Committee consideration is draft language
relating to the ranges for 1989 and to the operating paragraph for the
intermeeting period. With respect to the long-run ranges, alternative
language is offered that would fold the M1 sentence into the first para-
graph and apply to the broader aggregates as well as to M1 the notion that
they are evaluated in light of conditions in the economy and financial
markets. This might be considered more consistent with the treatment of
the aggregates in the operational paragraph.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stabil-
ity over time, promote growth in output on a sustainable
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of interna-
tional transactions. In furtherance of these objec-
tives, the Committee at THIS [DEL: its] meeting ESTABLISHED [DEL: in
late June reaffirmed] the ranges [DEL: it had established in
February] for growth of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 4 to 8] percent for [DEL: both
M2 and ____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR M3, measured from the fourth
quarter of 1988 [DEL: 1987] to the fourth quarter of 1989 [DEL: 1988].
The monitoring range for growth of total domestic non-
financial debt was SET [DEL: also maintained] at ____ TO ____ [DEL: 7 to
[DEL: Per 1989 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges
for monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter of
for M2 and 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent for M3. The Committee
set the associated monitoring range for growth of total
domestic nonfinancial debt at 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent.
It was understood that all these ranges were provisional
and that they would be reviewed in early 1989 in the
light of intervening developments.]
[No para] The Committee AGAIN DECIDED [DEL: reaffirmed its
decision in February] not to establish a specific target
[DEL:for 1988 and also decided not to set a tentative range]
for M1 GROWTH IN 1989. The behavior of this aggregate
[THE MONETARY AGGREGATES] will continue to be evaluated
in the light of movements in its velocity [THEIR
VELOCITIES], developments in the economy and financial
markets, and the nature of emerging price pressures.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/
MAINTAIN/increase somewhat the existing degree of pres-
sure on reserve positions. Taking account of indica-
tions of inflationary pressures, the strength of the
business expansion, the behavior of the monetary
aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and
domestic financial markets, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater
reserve restraint would (MIGHT), or (SOMEWHAT) slightly
lesser reserve restraint (WOULD) might, be acceptable in
the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve con-
ditions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2
and M3 over the period from DECEMBER [DEL: November] through
March at annual rates of about ____ AND ____ [DEL: 3 and 6-1/2]
percent, respectively. The Chairman may call for Com-
mittee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the
period before the next meeting are likely to be asso-
ciated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a
range of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 7 to 11] percent.
MONEY STOCK REVISIONS
Measures of the money stock have been revised to incorporate
the results of the annual benchmark and seasonal factor review. The
attached tables compare growth rates of the old and the revised series.
These data are to be regarded as strictly confidential until their
release scheduled for February 9.
Benchmark Revisions
Deposits of commercial banks and thrifts have been benchmarked
using call reports through June 1988 and incorporate revisions from
other sources as well. The benchmark revisions had negligible impacts
on monetary growth over 1988 and on the quarterly pattern of growth
within the year.
Seasonal Revisions
The seasonal factor review continued to employ the X-11 ARIMA
procedure. Although revisions to seasonal factors had little effects on
the broad patterns of growth in 1988, some redistribution of growth
occurred from the first to the second half of the year. Growth of M1
was increased by about 0.4 percentage point, M2 by 0.7 percent, and M3
by 0.5 percent, on a second quarter to fourth quarter basis.
Appendix Table 1
Comparison of Revised and Old M1 Growth Rates
(percent changes at annual rates)
Difference I Difference due to
Revised Old (1) - (2) Benchmark Seasonals
(1) (2) (3) (I 4) (5)
QII '88 to
QIV '88
Annual (OIV TO OIV)
Appendix Table 2
Comparison of Revised and Old M2 Growth Rates
(percent changes at annual rates)
Difference | Difference due to
Revised Old (1) - (2) | Benchmark Seasonals
(1) (2) (3) I (4) (5)
Annual (OIV TO QIV)
Appendix Table 3
Comparison of Revised and Old M3 Growth Rates
(percent changes at annual rates)
Difference I Difference due to
Revised Old (1) - (2) Benchmark Seasonals
(1) (2) (3) 1 (4) (S)
Annual (OIV TO OIV)
Short-Term
--- Treasury bills---
-- secondary market--
federal 3
funds month
cds
sec mkt
3-month
comm.
paper
1-month
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
money
market
mutual
fund
-U.S. Gov't. constant--
---- maturity yields--
bank
prime
loan
ry 6, 1989
Lona- i arm
corp. A
utility
rec off
muni.
Bond
Buyer
-- conventional home--
.ortgages
sec mkt primary market
fixed- fixed-
rate rate ARM
Monthly
FEB 88
MAR 88
APR 88
AY 88
JUN 88
JUL 88
AUG 88
SEP 88
OCT 88
NOV 88
DEC 88
JAN 89
are 1-day quotes for Friday, Thursday or Friday, respectively, following the end of the statement week. Column 13 is the Bond Buyer revenue index. Column 14
is the FNMA purchase yield, plus loan servicing fee, on 30-day mandatory delivery commitments. Column 15 is the average contract rate on new commitments for
fixed-rate mortgages(FRMs) with 80 percent loan-to-value ratios at a sample of savings and loans. Column 16 is the average initial contract rate on new
commitments for 1-year, adjustable-rate mortgages(ARMs) at S&Ls offering both FRMs and ARMs with the same number of discount points.
Daily
JAN
FEB
FEB
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class III
F
OMC
___ _Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactions Itotal loans U.S
Period Mt M2 components M3 L and government' olher' lotal'
ANN. GROHTH RATES (%l
ANNUALLY (14 TO Q4)
QUARTERLY AVERAGE
1988-1st QTR.
1988-2nd QTR.
1988-3rd QTR.
1988-4th QTR.
MONTHLY
1988-JAN.
FEB.
MAR.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
LEVELS ($BILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
NEEKLY
1988-DEC.
.1. U .L _________________ U U U _________________ L U I.
derived by averaging end-of-month levels of adjacent months, and have been adjusted to remove
Seasonally adjusted FEB. 6, 1989
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Class II FOMC
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight donmi - mutual lunds NSA denomi- Term Term Short- Bank.
Demand checkable RPs and MMOAI Savings nation general Institu- nalion RPe Eurodollars Savings term Commer- accp
Period Curency dipeeiu deposits Eurodollars NSA depositl time purpose lions time NSA' NSA' bonds Treasury clal paper' tanc
NSA' deposits' and brokers only depositl' 1curllle
LEVELS I*BILLIONSI :
ANNUALLY 14TH QTR.
MONTHLY
1987-DEC.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
time deposits.
1. Net of money market mutual fund holdings of these items.
2. Includes retail repurchase agreements. All IRA and Keogh accounts at comercial banks and thrift institutions are subtracted from mall
3. Excludes IRA and Keogh accounts.
4. Nat of large denomination time deposits held by money market mutual funds and thrift institutions.
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted FEB. 6, 1989
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1
February 6, 1989 Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasury coupons Feceral Net change
o Nt Net purchase
Feb. 1
Memo: LVEL (bil.$)'
February 1
Change froam nd-of-pariod to end-of-pariod.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts, and
short-trm notes acquired in exchange for maturing bills. Excludes
maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing coupon issues.
purchase sale transactions (+).
6. The level of agency issues were
as follows: within
seurt2essecurities.
(-), and matched
-- 515
I
c
