Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
November 9, 1989
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC November 9, 1989
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) In light of information suggesting added risk of a pronounced
weakening in the economic expansion, pressures on reserve markets were
eased in two separate steps during the intermeeting period.1 The federal
funds rate, which was a bit above 9 percent at the time of the October
meeting, is currently around 8-1/2 percent. The borrowing objective was
reduced in stages from $550 million at the time of the last FOMC meeting
to $250 million, reflecting declines totaling $100 million to effect the
easing of policy and $200 million to take account of trends in seasonal
borrowing. (Seasonal credit has continued to drop steeply, from $430
million immediately preceding the FOMC meeting to $160 million in the
first week of the current maintenance period.) Borrowing was boosted over
the long Columbus Day weekend and ran above its allowance for the first
maintenance period. Since then, however, borrowing has generally come in
below the reduced path allowances, and is running at $185 million through
the first week of this maintenance period.
(2) The easing of policy--only a portion of which had been
anticipated by the market--and evidence of a sluggish economy caused mar-
ket participants to mark down their expectations of interest rates for
some time into the future. Thus, not only did most short-term rates
decline roughly in line with the 1/2 point drop in the federal funds rate,
but rates on one-year Treasury bills and Treasury notes fell by similar
amounts; bond yields dropped somewhat less. Disruptions to bill auctions
and pressures arising from substantial incoming supplies of cash-manage-
ment bills limited the declines in short-term Treasury bill rates: for
example, rates on 3-month Treasury bills are about unchanged over the
intermeeting period. Rates on fixed-rate mortgages in both primary and
secondary markets fell about in line with Treasury bond yields.
(3) The generally rising prices elsewhere in financial markets
were not apparent in the equity and junk bond sectors. Amid growing
indications of a softer economy and declining corporate profits, as well
as difficulties of previously restructured firms, investors began ques-
tioning the earnings and cash-flow projections underpinning highly lever-
aged financing and equity valuation. Evidence that financing for share
buyouts would be less readily available helped to precipitate a sharp
decline in stock prices on October 13, just days after stock price indexes
set new highs. An initial, partial recovery of stock prices was subse-
quently reversed, leaving most averages more than 5 percent lower over the
intermeeting period. In the junk bond market, lower quality issues suf-
fered the deepest losses, and average spreads versus Treasury yields
widened further from the record levels seen in September.
(4) The weighted average value of the dollar in terms of other
G-10 currencies declined about 1-1/4 percent over the intermeeting period.
The dollar was generally buoyant early in the period, despite
and a round of official interest rate
increases in Europe. The dollar reached its high on October 11, the day
the Bank of Japan raised its discount rate. Following the October 13
stock market drop, the dollar moved lower. Market expectations of further
interest rate hikes abroad, along with additional easing by the Federal
Reserve, contributed to this softness. The continued volatility of stock
prices and more general concerns about financial fragility may have helped
push gold prices to their highest levels since midsummer.
Desk sales totaled $1.2 billion against marks and
yen, all in the first ten days of the period.
(5) Growth of all three monetary aggregates picked up in October.
M2 expanded at an 8 percent rate last month, above the 6-1/2 percent
growth rate specified by the Committee for the September-to-December
period, as M1 growth jumped to a 10 percent rate. A surge in demand
deposits early in October--perhaps as compensating balances adjusted to
earlier rate declines--contributed to the unanticipated strength. Growth
of the retail-type components of M2 slowed from their average pace in
August and September, consistent with waning effects of earlier declines
in interest rates. Money market mutual funds reportedly benefited some-
what from shifts out of junk bond funds, but their growth for the month
was in line with past experience based on movements in relative interest
rates, suggesting that the unusual shifts did not add a great deal to
overall M2 growth. Since the fourth quarter of last year, M2 has
increased at a 4-1/4 percent rate and stands in the lower half of its 1989
target range.
(6) M3 expanded at a 4-1/4 percent rate in October, well above
the pace of the preceding two months, and close to the Committee's
expected growth rate of 4-1/2 percent from September to December. Bank
credit expansion strengthened substantially in October. Although a por-
tion of this was financed by M2 deposit transfers from failed thrifts
arranged by RTC, banks also turned to issuance of large CDs, boosting M3
growth. Asset runoffs at capital-deficient thrifts and associated
declines in RPs and large CDs seem to have depressed M3 growth about as
much as they had in August and September.
(7) Partial data suggest that nonfinancial debt grew at around an
and keeping this aggregate in the middle of its monitoring range. Busi-
ness debt growth apparently picked up last month, despite a dropoff in
equity retirements. Lower yields sparked a strengthening of corporate
bond issuance, while shorter-term business borrowing was little changed,
as a falloff in commercial paper issuance about offset faster C&I lending
by banks. In the household sector, data on consumer credit indicated no
growth in September, but this weakness may reflect difficulties in sea-
sonal adjustment; consumer lending by banks, adjusted for securitization,
expanded at about a 10 percent rate in both September and October. Real
estate lending at commercial banks slowed a little in October from the
brisk pace of September, but issuance of pass-through securities by
federal agencies remained robust.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'88
to
August September Octoberpe Octoberpe
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
pe - preliminary estimate.
1. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
NOTE: Monthly reserve measures, including excess reserves and borrowing, are
calculated by prorating averages for two-week reserve maintenance periods that
overlap months.
Policy Alternatives
(8) Two alternatives are presented below for Committee considera-
tion. In alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around
seasonal borrowing of $200 million. In alternative A, a federal funds
rate around 8 percent would be accompanied by a borrowing assumption of
$100 million. The $100 million difference between the alternatives'
borrowing assumptions still seems appropriate in light of the reduced
sensitivity of borrowing as it nears frictional levels. Both borrowing
levels embody a downward technical adjustment of $50 million from the
current $250 million allowance in recognition of recent and anticipated
further seasonal declines in seasonal borrowing. Continuing uncertainty
about borrowing behavior, however, still appears to justify flexibility in
the Desk's approach to the borrowing objective.
(9) Market interest rates generally are expected to remain around
current levels under the unchanged reserve market conditions of alterna-
tive B. The structure of market interest rates appears to embody another
slight easing of monetary policy, but most probably not until late this
year or early next year. In addition, impressions of a sluggish economy,
consistent with data flows likely under the staff forecast, may continue
to foster expectations of future policy easing, even if federal funds
rates remain near 8-1/2 percent. Unlike most other rates, those on short-
term Treasury bills may drop once the large supply of cash management
bills is absorbed into portfolios, with the 3-month bill rate moving down
toward 7-1/2 percent. The exchange value of the dollar could exhibit
little net change over the intermeeting period under alternative B, though
any policy tightening abroad may tend to exert downward pressure on the
(10) The 1/2 percentage point reduction in the federal funds rate
under alternative A would come sooner and be larger than market partici-
pants are now expecting. Rates on other short-term instruments would
decline by nearly the same amount, with the 3-month bill rate dropping
ultimately toward the 7 percent area. In response to the further narrow-
ing of differentials between U.S. and foreign interest rates, the exchange
value of the dollar could be expected to adjust downward. Bond yields
probably would decline noticeably under alternative A; market participants
may interpret an immediate further easing as suggesting a more aggressive
policy posture by the Federal Reserve, and perhaps an assessment of sub-
stantial underlying weakening in the economy. However, should incoming
data show the economy continuing to advance at its recent pace over coming
months, in the context of a weaker dollar, the cumulative effect of past
easing measures and alternative A over a short time might be viewed as
setting the stage for a subsequent strengthening of the economy, raising
questions about prospects for prices.
(11) Anticipated growth of the monetary aggregates under the two
alternatives is shown in the table below. (More detailed data appear in
the table and charts on the following pages.) Under either alternative,
M2 and M3 are projected to finish the year within their annual ranges,
with M2 near the midpoint of its range and M3 somewhat above the lower
bound of its range.
Alt. A Alt. B
Growth from September
to December
Implied growth from
Q4'88 to Q4'89
(12) Even under the unchanged interest rates of alternative B, M2
growth would remain close to last month's brisk pace, buoyed by recent
declines in market interest rates and opportunity costs. Under this
alternative, M2 is expected to expand at a 7-1/4 percent average annual
rate in November and December; growth from September to December and on a
fourth-quarter average basis would be 7-1/2 percent. This combines with
the staff's nominal GNP projection of 5 percent for the quarter to imply a
model-based forecasts incorporating the recent reductions in opportunity
costs. M1 is projected to slow to a 6-1/4 percent rate in the last two
partial offset, however, inflows to nontransaction retail deposits are
seen as strengthening somewhat this month and next, as the effects of the
recent policy easings take hold.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
(13) M3 growth under alternative B will continue to be damped by
the ongoing shedding of assets by undercapitalized S&Ls and by funds
supplied through RTC resolutions. However, M3 is expected to grow in
November and December a bit faster than in October, leaving expansion over
the last three months of the year at a 4-1/2 percent rate. The pace of
decline in S&L assets is expected to wane a little over the next two
months from the extremely rapid pace of the last few months, and RTC
resolutions should slow after the fiscal year-end spurt. As a
consequence, outflows of large time deposits and term RPs at thrifts
should abate somewhat. Commercial bank credit is likely to slow but
expansion of managed liabilities will be maintained, in part to compensate
for reduced RTC funds of thrift deposit transfers. Growth of domestic
nonfinancial debt is expected to moderate to around 7 percent over the
rest of the year, owing mainly to a slowing of federal government debt.
This would leave the debt aggregate in the fourth quarter 8-1/4 percent
above its year-earlier level, close to the midpoint of its monitoring
(14) Under alternative A, growth of M2 and M3 through December
would be boosted slightly by the associated decline in market interest
rates and easing of lending conditions. September-to-December M2 and M3
growth would rise to 8 and 4-3/4 percent rates, respectively.
(15) The recent easing, which would be maintained under alterna-
tive B, and any additional easing under alternative A, would have impor-
tant effects on money growth in the first quarter of next year. Under
alternative B, M2 would expand around the 7 percent upper limit of its
tentative range in the early months of 1990. Alternative A likely would
yield M2 growth noticeably above the upper end of the tentative growth
cone, though well within the parallel lines. Under either alternative, M3
would grow in the lower half of the 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 tentative range for
this aggregate.
Directive Language
(16) Draft language for the operational paragraph, including the
standard options and updating, is shown below.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future,
the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT(SLIGHTLY)/ maintain/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT (SLIGHTLY) the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. Taking account of progress toward price
stability, the strength of the business expansion, the behavior of
the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and
domestic financial markets, slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve
restraint might (WOULD) or slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve
restraint (MIGHT) would be acceptable in the intermeeting period.
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from September through
December at annual rates of about ____ [DEL: 6-1/2] and ____ [DEL: 4-1/2] percent,
respectively. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if
it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve
conditions during the period before the next meeting are likely to
be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a
range of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 7 to 11] percent.
Nov 88
Dec 88
Jan 89
Feb 89
Mar 89
Ap 89
May 89
Jun 89
Jul 89
Aug 89
Sep 89
Oc 89
MI Ma lm Ir m0mni
ledral Twasy bia Cmcmndary comD Wast ba US agnma conuslin A &dMy ommcp a= ecodaryaMUk SACn dar mutMI IMal paper ima pile malurly yt$alk receily Bond mae ia y "mau nel
r-n ad 1*emorgag e(FIM) nl l pmop Vluo- a im i I Cann 10 IB rage il an one an onHwhio 1 -ye Wasl i-e mort ngag(SAhM fr halrIlO niMo
aMing boil FRMi and ARM. wfh h se nurmDber o discona poa
p -pewlinirV y
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
Seasonally adjusstd
Strictly Conlidential (f-H)-
Class II FOMC
NOV. 13, 1989
Money sock measures and liquid assls Bank credil Domestic nonlinancial debt'
in M2 in M3 only 11 investments
ANN. GROWTH RATES () :
ANNUALLY 1Q4 TO Q4)
QUARTERLY AVERAGE
1988-4th QTR.
1989-1st QTR.
1989-2nd QTR.
1989-3rd QTR.
MONTHLY
1988-OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
LEVELS I$BILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
MEEKLY
1989-SEP.
Debt data are on a monthly average basis,
discontinuities.
p-preliminary
pe-preliminary estimate
derived by averaging end-of-month levels of adjacent months, and have been adjusted to remove
Strictly Conlidential (FR)
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures clas IIFOMC
Small Money markel Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual lunds NSA denomi- Term Term Short- Banker
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation general Instilu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Commer- accep
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars NSA deposits time purpose lions time NSA' NSA' bonds Treasury cial paper' lances
NSA' deposils' and broker/ only deposits* securities
________ _______ __ _____dealer' ___
LEVELS I(BILLIONSI :
ANNUALLY 14TH QTR.)
MONTHLY
1988-SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted NOV. 13, 1989
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjustedNovember 13, 1989
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasury coupons Federal N
3 Federal Net change
MeNo: LEVEL (bil.$)6
November 8
- -163
short-term notes acquired in exchange for maturing bills. Excludes
maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing coupon issues.
purchase sale transactions (+).
6. The levels of agency issues were .
as follows:
securities.
(-), and matched
d d
