Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
June 30, 1989
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC June 30, 1989
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Immediately after the May FOMC meeting, the borrowing objec-
tive was raised to $600 million as a technical adjustment to take account
of the effects of surging seasonal borrowing. Federal funds were expected
to continue to trade in a 9-3/4 to 9-7/8 percent range. With reserves
somewhat more plentiful than projected and markets coming to anticipate a
near-term easing of policy, the federal funds rate edged down to around
the lower end of the range, and borrowing averaged $500 million over the
first complete maintenance period following the meeting. In early June,
part way through the second maintenance period, the borrowing assumption
was reduced to $500 million, and funds were expected to move down to trade
mostly in a 9-1/2 to 9-5/8 percent range. This policy adjustment was made
in light of information suggesting a prospective slackening in inflation
pressures, as the monetary aggregates remained unusually sluggish, eco-
nomic activity moderated, and the dollar firmed. In that and the next
maintenance period, the federal funds rate averaged 9-1/2 percent. Bor-
rowing jumped from $465 million in the second period to $680 million in
the third and final maintenance period, with the latter including $470
million under the seasonal program. Seasonal borrowing this year has
increased even more rapidly than might be suggested by rate relationships
and past seasonal behavior; reports from Reserve Bank discount officers
suggest that heavier demands for crop-production loans along with weak
deposits have contributed to the strength in seasonal borrowing.
(2) Market interest rates declined further over the intermeeting
period, with long-term rates dropping around 3/4 percentage point and
short-term market rates 1/4 to 1/2 percentage point. The prime rate was
reduced 1/2 percentage point to 11 percent in early June. Rates responded
not only to the easing of policy, but also to indications of a continuing
softness in the economy. Prospects for slow growth were seen as suggest-
ing weaker demands for credit and greater scope for the Federal Reserve to
reduce short-term rates further over the near term without adverse im-
plications for inflation. The drop in bond rates brought them to their
lowest levels since early 1987, and produced a slightly greater downward
tilt to the yield curve, albeit through the unusual combination of a
larger drop in long- than in short-term rates. Stock prices rallied
through much of the intermeeting period to reach post-crash highs, fos-
tered by lower interest rates along with the perception that containing
inflation was more likely to be compatible with continued economic expan-
sion. More recently, as doubts about the sustainability of the expansion
emerged, stock prices retreated, generally reversing most of their pre-
vious gains.
(3) The dollar surged from mid-May to mid-June, even as U.S.
interest rates declined and differentials with foreign rates narrowed.
Factors supporting the dollar were better-than-expected U.S. trade data
for March and April, heightened political uncertainties abroad, and
demands for dollar assets given anticipated increases in bond and equity
prices. After reaching highs against the mark and the yen on the morning
of June 15 when April trade data were released, the dollar plummeted,
losing much of its earlier gains over the next two weeks. Reasons for the
sudden drop are not clear,
In addition, net demand for dollars associated with turmoil in China may
have abated following the initial reaction to developments in that
country. Even so, the dollar has been buoyant in recent days, despite
rising interest rates abroad
On balance, the dollar rose by 1-3/4 percent on a weighted average basis
over the period. Total intervention amounted to over
the intermeeting period, of which almost $10 billion was accounted for by
the Desk on behalf of the Federal Reserve and the Treasury.
(4) The broader monetary aggregates have rebounded following
declines in late April and early May when transaction and other liquid
deposit balances were drawn down by unexpectedly large federal tax pay-
ments for 1988. M2 is estimated to have expanded at a 6-1/2 percent rate
in June, bringing growth for March to June to 1-1/2 percent--the rate
specified by the Committee at its May meeting. Growth in June likely has
been augmented by some rebuilding of tax-depleted balances as well as by
the effect of declines in the opportunity costs of holding monetary
assets. After strong runoffs in the first quarter, total thrift deposits
have increased, and in May and June savings and small time deposits grew
more rapidly at thrifts than at banks for the first time since mid-1988.
The pattern for M2 carried through to M3, which expanded at a 6-1/4 per-
cent rate in June after declining at a 1 percent rate in May, when bank
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
March QIV'88
to to
April May Junep  Junep June
p
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
p - preliminary.
1. March to May.
2. QIV'88 to May.
3. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
NOTE: Monthly reserve measures, including excess reserves and borrowing, are
calculated by prorating averages for two-week reserve maintenance periods that
overlap months.
sources of funds were boosted by a large increase in Treasury deposits.
Over the March-to-June period, M3 expanded at around a 2-1/2 percent rate,
compared with the Committee's expectation of 4 percent. The shortfall
seemed to reflect somewhat greater-than-expected reliance on non-M3
sources of funds given credit expansion about as anticipated.
(5) M1 is estimated to have contracted in June at a 6 percent
rate, a much slower rate of decline than in May. Currency resumed a more
normal rate of expansion in June and OCD runoffs slowed sharply, but
demand deposits continued to drop at a double-digit rate. According to
respondents to the Senior Financial Officer Survey conducted in June,
recent weakness in demand deposits largely has reflected the previous
runup in interest rates, working through both compensating balance and
opportunity cost channels, and, for household deposits, tax payments
effects as well. The fall in transaction deposits led to further declines
in both total and nonborrowed reserves in June. With the pickup in cur-
rency, however, the monetary base expanded at about a 4 percent rate after
decreasing on balance in the preceding two months.
(6) Through June, M2 and M3 had expanded from their fourth-quar-
ter 1988 bases at rates of 1-3/4 and 3-1/2 percent, respectively. This
left M2 in June a bit above the lower limit of the parallel band asso-
ciated with its annual range and M3 at the lower edge of its growth cone.
The relatively slow monetary growth over the first half of the year has
reflected in part the restraining impact of the rise in market interest
whose rates adjusted sluggishly, were particularly affected; only small
time deposits and MMMFs, which have yields that adjust fairly rapidly to
market rates, showed robust growth during the first half. In addition,
special circumstances contributed importantly to slow monetary growth this
year. Earlier in the year, the thrift crisis led to considerable outflows
from these institutions. Although staff estimates indicate that the bulk
of these funds was redeployed to other components of M2, some apparently
went outside the aggregates, particularly into Treasury securities, as
suggested by the unusual strength in noncompetitive tenders early in the
year. These outflows are estimated to have reduced first-quarter M2
growth by 1/2 percentage point at an annual rate. In the second quarter,
the unexpectedly large individual tax payments to the Treasury are
estimated to have taken a percentage point from the rate of M2 growth.
Finally, the extreme weakness in demand deposits likely fed through to M2.
(7) Domestic nonfinancial debt is estimated to have continued to
grow in May at a little below the first-quarter pace; fragmentary data for
June do not suggest a significant change in the overall pace of credit
expansion. Growth in federal government debt this quarter has been damped
by the unusually strong tax inflows. Expansion of the debt of nonfederal
sectors picked up a bit in May. Short-term borrowing by nonfinancial
businesses was much stronger in May even though identifiable merger-
related demands in these markets net of paydowns were muted. Boosted by
the RJR-Nabisco buyout financing in early May and by falling interest
rates throughout the month, longer-term business borrowing likewise posted
a sizable gain. Corporate bond issuance remained strong in June, but
short-term business credit growth was held down by a large paydown of a
merger-related bank loan as well as greater reliance on long-term funds.
Municipal issuance was weak in May, although it picked up in early June in
response to lower interest rates. Available evidence suggests that the
household sector has cut back its credit demands in the second quarter.
Nonfinancial debt is estimated to have expanded from the fourth quarter of
its monitoring range.
Long-Run Strategies
(8) As background for Committee consideration of the ranges for
money and credit for 1989 and 1990, the table below presents three alter-
native longer-run strategies for monetary policy through 1991 and their
consequences for output and prices. Strategy I is the baseline forecast,
encompassing the staff greenbook projections and associated policy assump-
tions for 1989 and 1990, with an extension into 1991. Strategies II and
III embody somewhat tighter and easier monetary policies, respectively, as
indexed by 1 percentage point slower and faster M2 growth beginning in the
third quarter and extending through the forecast horizon. The baseline
forecast is judgmental; however, the deviations from baseline associated
M2 (Q4/Q4 % change)
I (baseline) 5.2
II
III
Prices: GNP fixed-
weight deflator
(Q4/Q4 % change)
I 4.5
II
III
Real GNP (Q4/Q4 % change)1
I 2.8 (3.5)
II
III
Unemployment rate
(Q4 level)
I 5.3
II
III
from the effects
of the 1988
with the alternative strategies were derived through econometric model
(9) The baseline forecast is built on a monetary policy designed
to bring about a gradual reduction in inflation. That outcome is judged
to require sufficient restraint on demand to reduce the expansion of
output to below its potential rate of growth for a period in order to
relieve pressure on resources. Once a margin of slack in resource markets
has been created, economic growth can pick up somewhat while inflation
rates recede slowly, and the extension into 1991 incorporates such a
pattern. Against a background of moderately restrictive fiscal policy
through 1991 on the one hand and a resumption of dollar decline on the
other, the monetary policy restraint of the past year is judged about
sufficient to produce this result in the baseline. As a consequence, real
interest rates need move very little from here, and nominal rates can edge
down as inflation and inflation expectations moderate. In this
environment, velocity will no longer rise and should begin to decline.
Thus, a pickup in money growth from recent years will be needed to support
the projected pattern of output and prices in 1990 and 1991.
(10) The effects of the alternative growth paths for money are
felt most immediately in output, and then with a lag in inflation rates.
Eventually, the 1 percentage point money growth differentials would be
reflected in 1 percentage point inflation differentials, but this does not
occur for some time. Even so, the slower M2 growth of alternative II
results in more noticeable progress toward price stability by 1991. But
this outcome entails the virtual cessation of economic growth next year
and a rise in the unemployment rate to 7 percent; this results from the
effects of higher real interest rates and a stronger dollar relative to
the baseline. The faster money growth of alternative III is sufficient to
maintain real growth at around its potential rate and to forestall an
appreciable rise in the unemployment rate. This policy would not result
in any progress against inflation; indeed, inflation would be poised to
accelerate slightly further in 1992.
(11) The table below gives predictions of inflation rates derived
from the P* model using the M2 growth rates of the three strategies.
Interestingly, the P* model prediction using the baseline money path is
indistinguishable from the staff's baseline forecast of inflation. More-
over, at the end of 1991 the predicted level of P would be above its long-
run equilibrium implied by the M2 path (P*), reinforcing the suggestion of
a further moderation of inflation with this strategy. While inflation
rates under the other two alternatives differ from those on the previous
table derived from the large macro model, the contours are very similar:
under strategy II, inflation decelerates by 1991 and would continue to
drop in 1992; under strategy III inflation does not change much through
Prices: GNP fixed-
weight deflator
(Q4/Q4 % change)
Long-Run Ranges
(12) The table below gives the current ranges for the money and
debt aggregates in 1989 along with the staff forecast for the growth of
these measures consistent with the income and interest rate outlook in the
greenbook. All three aggregates are projected to be comfortably within
their 1989 ranges, with M2 rising well into the lower half of its range by
the fourth quarter of the year, while M3 and debt come in somewhat below
the midpoints of their ranges.
Growth from QIV '88 Memo:
to QIV '89 Current Ranges Staff Forecast
(13) An acceleration of M2 growth to 6 percent over the third and
fourth quarters of the year is anticipated. In the greenbook forecast,
nominal GNP growth of 5 percent over the second half of the year is
associated with short-term interest rates remaining essentially at current
levels. Under these circumstances, deposit offering rates on average are
unlikely to move appreciably further over the second half, implying fairly
stable opportunity costs. However, some impetus to M2 growth relative to
GNP will be provided during the second half by the narrowing in oppor-
tunity costs in the second quarter. Also, M2 growth is expected to be
boosted by the continued rebuilding of tax-depleted liquid balances.
Overall, M2 velocity would decline by about 1 percentage point at an
annual rate over the second half. (The historical and projected behavior
of M2 velocity is shown on the chart on the following page.) The fore-
casted M2 growth over the balance of the year would reverse most of its
first-half shortfall relative to the staff money demand model, so that for
a year as a whole, M2 growth of 4 percent is close to the model's predic-
tion. Along with other liquid components of M2, M1 should strengthen over
the second half, as demand deposit growth resumes and outflows from OCDs
abate. On a June-to-December basis, M1 is expected to grow at a 1-1/4
percent rate, though given its weakness in May and June, this aggregate
would be about flat from the second to the fourth quarter. The first-half
drop in M1 implies a decline of almost 2 percent for the year.
(14) M3 is anticipated to accelerate in the second half of the
year to about a 6-1/2 percent pace, producing growth of about 5 percent
for the year. Bank credit, buoyed by a strengthening in C&I lending, is
expected to expand a little faster than in the first half of the year. At
thrifts, net credit extensions are projected to remain sluggish, held down
by regulatory pressure and action to shrink insolvent institutions, as
well as by continued slow overall mortgage activity. However, with core
deposits picking up, depository institutions are projected to need to rely
less on non-M3 managed liabilities to finance asset growth.
(15) Overall debt growth is anticipated to be maintained in the
second half of the year at close to the 7-3/4 percent average pace of the
first two quarters of the year. Business credit demands may strengthen;
net equity retirements are projected to continue at the record pace of the
first half and the gap between capital spending and internal funds to rise
a little. The growth of household debt, however, is thought likely to
expand at the reduced pace of the first half, restrained by the upward
trend of interest rates since early 1988. In the mortgage market, while
mortgage lending by thrifts is expected to be subdued, mortgage demands
are expected to be met by other lenders--either directly or through the
process of securitization--without any further widening of spreads. The
Treasury likely will issue debt at a slower pace over the second half,
seasonally adjusted, as outsized April tax payments have reduced its
financing needs.2
(16) The current ranges for 1989 would appear adequate to encom-
pass not only the greenbook forecast, but also money and debt growth
accompanying economic outcomes or policy strategies somewhat at variance
with that forecast. For example, the further 1/2 percentage point easing
of the federal funds rate over the next several months that appears to be
built into the structure of short-term interest rates would not boost
money growth enough to threaten the upper ends of the current ranges,
given the low June starting points. Alternatively, should the first-half
slowdown in the economy prove to represent only a pause, and should an
associated intensification of inflationary pressures induce some policy
firming later in the year, the aggregates still would be likely to run
above their lower bounds. In this circumstance, the effect of higher
short-term interest rates on the aggregates might be partly offset by
higher nominal spending.
(17) For 1990, the table below presents three alternative long-
run ranges for Committee consideration, along with the staff forecast
based on greenbook GNP and associated interest rates. Alternative I would
retain the current M3 and debt ranges, but raise the M2 range to encompass
more comfortably the pickup in this aggregate projected for next year.
Alternative II reduces the M3 and debt ranges from 1989, but retains the
M2 range. Under alternative III, ranges for both M2 and M3 would be
reduced by 1/2 percentage point from 1989, and that of debt by a full
percentage point. All the ranges retain the 4 percentage point width
that the Committee adopted for the 1988 and 1989 ranges.3 Such a width
seems appropriate in light of the implications of the relatively high
intermediate-run interest elasticity of M2 combined with considerable
Alternative Tentative Ranges for 1990
Memo:
Staff Current 1989
Alt. I Alt. II Alt. III Forecast Ranges
Growth from
Q4 '89 to
Q4 '90
uncertainty about the appropriate path for short-term market rates, along
with continuing questions about the evolution of deposit pricing strate-
gies. In addition, the resolution of the thrift crisis may have an unex-
pected impact on all the money and debt aggregates, if, for example, it
affects the trajectory of S&L asset growth, their funding patterns, or
their deposit pricing.
(18) M2 is expected to grow about in line with the increase in
nominal income next year. In the staff GNP projections, the slowing of
inflation over the course of 1990 could well be accompanied by slightly
lower short-term interest rates than at the end of 1989. As a consequence
velocity might decline a little (chart). This outlook presumes that the
relationship of offering rates at thrifts relative to those at banks is
unlikely to vary much as a result of changes in the regulatory environ-
ment. Demand deposits are expected to expand, albeit less rapidly than
the volume of transactions in keeping with the longer-run trend to econo-
mize on these deposits, as compensating balance requirements stop falling,
and perhaps edge higher. M1 as a whole is expected to record 3 percent
growth over the four quarters of next year, accompanying M2 growth of
(19) The pickup in M2 shows through to M3, but less than fully.
Credit expansion by depositories is projected to about maintain its 1989
pace, and with core deposits stronger, depositories could be expected
to cut back on their issuance of non-M3 managed liabilities, as well as
those in M3, resulting in a net boost to M3 growth. Regarding the effects
of the resolution of the thrift crisis on M3, the impact of new capital
requirements on the behavior of solvent S&Ls will depend on the particular
provisions of the bill. In addition, the procedures followed by the RTC
for dealing with insolvent institutions may influence thrift credit
growth, funding needs, and M3. In the staff forecast, asset expansion at
thrifts remains quite subdued, and these institutions provide a declining
share of mortgage credit.
(20) Growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt for 1990 is
likely to slow a little to about 7-1/2 percent. Growth in Treasury debt
is anticipated to ebb further next year as the federal deficit drops.
Despite some further widening of the gap between capital spending and
internally generated funds, corporate debt should grow a bit more slowly
next year if, as assumed, net equity retirements decline appreciably from
this year's elevated pace. For households, the rate of mortgage debt
formation should strengthen as housing activity next year is supported by
reduced mortgage rates. But consumer installment debt likely will slow
further reflecting restrained consumption spending. In the aggregate, the
growth of debt in 1990 will continue to outpace income by about the same
amount as in recent years (chart).
(21) Alternative I gives the most scope for even faster growth of
the aggregates than in the staff forecast. That room might be needed,
especially for M2, should the Committee wish to avert a slackening in
resource utilization as under the long-term strategy III discussed above.
In addition, the money and debt specifications of alternative I would seem
most compatible with a view that the risks for aggregate demand predom-
inantly are on the side of more weakness than in the greenbook. In these
circumstances, faster money growth would be needed to offset the potential
effects of a shortfall in aggregate demand on spending and output. The
increases in the bounds for M2 from the current year's range, though,
could be interpreted by the public as insufficiently guarding against the
possibility of faster inflation.
(22) If, in contrast, inflationary pressures turn out to be more
intense than in the greenbook forecast, perhaps because increases in labor
costs return to a more normal relationship to resource use or the dollar
falls more rapidly than expected by the staff, a substantial uptrend in
interest rates in 1990 might be appropriate. The lower bound of the M2
range in alternative III would allow the most scope for such an outcome,
although those of alternative I or II could accommodate some policy firm-
ing. But only alternative III involves a further reduction in all the
current money ranges and might seem most in accord with reinforcing the
Committee's longer-term commitment to price stability. Scope at the lower
end of the ranges also might be needed if regulatory pressure on thrifts
caused them to be substantially less aggressive in bidding for retail
deposits. However, this alternative allows no margin for faster M2 growth
than in the staff forecast, should that be warranted.
(23) Alternative II lowers two of the ranges, M3 and debt, under-
scoring the Committee's intention to restrain growth rates of money and
credit over time in moving towards price stability. Retaining the current
M2 range allows some scope for a small decline in velocity should interest
rates trend down in association with either a weaker economy or improving
inflation expectations. At the same time, the M2 range would appear suf-
ficiently low to trigger some policy restraint should inflation pressures
turn out to be stronger than expected and GNP begin to accelerate appre-
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(24) Three short-run policy alternatives are presented below.
Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade in the 9-1/2 to
tions, adjustment plus seasonal borrowing would be expected to average
$650 million over the coming intermeeting period, up from the present $500
million assumption. That adjustment is suggested in light of recent
experience; seasonal borrowing rose to $500 million near the end of the
last maintenance period and is likely to increase somewhat further over
the coming intermeeting period. Under alternative C, funds would trade
around 10 percent or a bit higher with borrowings of $850 million. The
easing of policy under alternative A might be associated with less than
the usual $200 million reduction in borrowing. Since adjustment borrowing
is close to frictional levels it is not likely to decline much in response
to decreases in the spread, and seasonal borrowing has a fairly low
interest sensitivity. As a consequence, the staff estimates that a funds
rate in the 9 to 9-1/8 percent area under alternative A would be consis-
tent with borrowing of perhaps around $550 million. In any event, the
rather high degree of uncertainty about the borrowing relationship sug-
gests that the Desk again should pursue the borrowing objective flexibly.
(25) Growth of the monetary aggregates over the June-to-September
period under the three alternatives is presented below, along with implied
growth through September from their fourth-quarter bases. (More detailed
data are shown on the table and charts on the following pages.) Under all
the alternatives, the monetary aggregates would strengthen from their
average pace of recent months as the full impact of recent declines in
rates takes hold. In addition the public is assumed to continue to
rebuild balances depleted by unexpectedly large final tax payments in
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from June
to September
Growth from Q4 '88
to September
(26) Money market rates currently have built in some further
near-term easing of policy and would likely firm if federal funds con-
tinued to trade around 9-1/2 to 9-5/8 percent. Short-term rates would
climb around a quarter of a percentage point. Bond rates could rise as
well, but probably to a limited degree, given the recent softness in the
economy, which is expected to continue in the staff forecast. The
approaching debt-ceiling constraint, which could well affect the mid-
quarter refunding in August, might lead to unusual movements in rate rela-
tionships involving Treasury securities in coming weeks. At the long end
of the market, rates might react temporarily to impending supplies of
Refcorp bonds, should the legislation pass with off-budget financing. The
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
higher level of U.S. interest rates could postpone the projected depreci-
ation of the dollar for a time.
(27) Under alternative B, M2 would grow at a 6-1/2 percent rate
over the June-to-September period, lifting this aggregate to the bottom of
its annual target cone in September. Despite the small rise in short-term
interest rates expected under this alternative, opportunity costs of hold-
ing M2 balances would remain below levels of the first quarter. Further
contributing to a pickup in M2 growth is the likelihood that outflows from
demand deposits--which have been much larger than expected--will diminish
appreciably and possibly cease over this period, as the recent decline in
market rates is reflected in compensating balance requirements. Retail
deposit growth at thrifts should remain near that of commercial banks, as
it has recently. On a quarterly average basis, M2 would grow at about a
expansion of nominal GNP in the staff forecast. Its M1 component would
edge higher over the June-to-September period, but owing to the declines
in May and June would decline at a 3 percent rate on a quarterly average
(28) M3 growth would strengthen to a 7 percent clip over the
June-to-September period under alternative B. Bank credit is projected to
be somewhat stronger in coming months, partly reflecting the possibility
of major corporate restructuring activity, which would be funded initially
by banks. On a quarterly average basis, M3 would grow at a 5-3/4 percent
rate, implying some decline in its velocity. Domestic nonfinancial debt
is expected to expand at a 7-1/2 percent rate from June to September,
leaving this aggregate 7-3/4 percent at an annual rate above its fourth-
quarter base.
(29) The extent of the easing of policy embodied in alternative A
would be larger than expected by market participants for the very near
term, although the current structure of market rates appears to reflect
expectations of a drop in rates of this magnitude in the next few months.
With federal funds moving immediately to around 9 percent or a bit above,
short-term rates would edge lower. The three-month Treasury bill rate
would settle below 8 percent. The dollar likely would come under downward
pressure, especially if, in light of the recent increases in monetary
restraint abroad, policy easing were viewed by the market as, in part, a
coordinated effort to stem strength in the dollar. Long-term rates would
tend to move lower, although with some easing already built into the yield
curve the decline could be minor.
(30) With money market rates and opportunity costs dropping under
alternative A, M2 growth would strengthen to an 8 percent rate over the
June-to-September period, bringing this aggregate into the lower end of
its annual target cone in August. The pickup in M2 would be most evident
in its liquid components, and M1 would strengthen to a 2 percent rate of
expansion over the three-month period ending in September. M3 growth
would firm under this alternative to a 7-1/2 percent rate, boosted in part
by larger inflows to institution-only money funds.
(31) The tightening of reserve conditions under alternative C
would come as a surprise to the financial markets. With federal funds
moving to 10 percent or a bit higher, money market rates would climb about
on foreign exchange markets. Bond rates would tend to rise under this
alternative, although the extent of any such rise would be limited to the
degree that market participants saw the move as unsustainable or focused
on its impact on inflation pressures over time.
(32) Under alternative C, M2 would expand over the June-to-Sep-
tember period at a 5 percent rate and would remain below the lower bound
of its annual growth cone in September (though on a trajectory to touch
that lower bound in the fourth quarter). Growth of liquid retail accounts
in M2 would be weak and M1 would decline further. M3 would be expected to
grow at a 6-1/2 percent pace over June to September under this alterna-
tive, moving up only gradually within the lower portion of its annual
target range.
Directive Language
(33) Presented below for Committee consideration is a draft
directive giving standard alternative language relating to the ranges for
intermeeting period.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price
stability, promote growth in output on a sustainable
basis, and contribute to an improved pattern of inter-
national transactions. In furtherance of these objec-
tives, the Committee REAFFIRMED at THIS [DEL: its] meeting THE
RANGES IT HAD [DEL: in February] established IN FEBRUARY [DEL: ranges]
for growth of M2 and M3 of 3 to 7 percent and 3-1/2 to
quarter of 1988 to the fourth quarter of 1989. [IN
FURTHERANCE OF THESE OBJECTIVES, THE COMMITTEE AT THIS
MEETING RAISED/LOWERED THE RANGES IT HAD ESTABLISHED IN
FEBRUARY FOR GROWTH OF M2 AND M3 TO RANGES OF ____ TO ____
AND ____ TO ____ PERCENT RESPECTIVELY, MEASURED FROM THE
FOURTH QUARTER OF 1988 TO THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1989.]
The monitoring range for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt was ALSO MAINTAINED set at 6-1/2 to
PERCENT] for the year. FOR 1990, THE COMMITTEE AGREED
ON TENTATIVE RANGES FOR MONETARY GROWTH, MEASURED FROM
THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1989 TO THE FOURTH QUARTER OF
FOR M3. THE COMMITTEE PROVISIONALLY SET THE ASSOCIATED
MONITORING RANGE FOR GROWTH OF TOTAL DOMESTIC
NONFINANCIAL DEBT AT ____ TO ____ PERCENT. The behavior of
the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in
the light of movements in their velocities, developments
in the economy and financial markets, and progress
toward price level stability.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/
maintain/INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of
pressure on reserve positions. Taking account of
indications of inflationary pressures, the strength of
the business expansion, the behavior of the monetary
aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and
domestic financial markets, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater
reserve restraint (WOULD)(MIGHT) or somewhat (SLIGHTLY)
lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable in
the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with growth of
M2 and M3 over the period from JUNE [DEL: March] through
SEPTEMBER [DEL: June] at annual rates of about ____ [DEL: 1-1/2] and ____
[DEL: 4] percent, respectively. The Chairman may call for
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the
period before the next meeting are likely to be
associated with a federal funds rate persistently
outside a range of ____ [DEL: 8] to ____ [DEL: 12] percent.
ADOPTED LONGER-RUN GROWTH RATE RANGES FOR THE MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES
(percent annual rates; numbers in parentheses are
period in February Monetary
QIV 1978 - QIV
QIV 1979 - QIV
QIV 1980 - QIV
QIV 1981 - QIV
QIV 1982 - QIV
QIV 1983 - QIV
QIV 1984 - QIV
QIV 1985 - QIV
QIV 1986 - QIV
QIV 1987 - QIV
QIV 1988 - QIV
i.s.--not specified.
* Figures for M1, M2,
n.s (-3.9)
at end of policy
Bank Credit or
Domestic Non-
financial Debt
of 1988
and M3 are annualized growth rates from the fourth quarter
through June; the figure for domestic nonfinancial debt is growth from the fourth quarter
of 1988 through May.
1. Targets are for bank credit until 1983; from 1983 onward targets are for domestic
nonfinancial sector debt.
2. At the February 1979 meeting the FOMC adopted a QIV'78 to QIV'79 range for M1 of 1-1/2
to 4-1/2 percent. This range anticipated that shifting to ATS and NOW accounts in New
York State would slow M1 growth by 3 percentage points. At the October meeting it was
noted that ATS/NOW shifts would reduce M1 by no more than 1-1/2 percentage points. Thus,
the longer-run range for M1 was modified to 3-6 percent.
3. The figures shown reflect target and actual growth of Ml-B in 1980 and shift-adjusted
M1-B in 1981. Ml-B was relabeled M1 in Janauary 1982. The targeted growth for Ml-A was
3-1/2 to 6 percent in 1980 (actual growth was 5.0 percent); in 1981 targeted growth for
shift-adjusted MI-A was 3 to 5-1/2 percent (actual growth was 1.3 percent).
4. When these ranges were set, shifts into other checkable deposits in 1980 were expected
to have only a limited effect on growth of Mi-A and Ml-B. As the year progressed,
however, banks offered other checkable deposits more actively, and more funds than
expected were directed to these accounts. Such shifts are estimated to have decreased Ml-
A growth and increased Ml-B growth each by at least 1/2 percentage point more than had
been anticipated.
(Footnotes are continued on next page)
actual growth rates as reported
Policy Report to Congress)
Footnotes continued)
Short-Term
--- Treasury bills---
- secondary market---
cds
sec mkt
3-month
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
money
comm. market
paper mutual
bank
prime
loan
--U.S. Gov't. constant--
-- maturity yields--
July 3, 1989
corp. A
utility
rec off
muni.
Bond
Buyer
- conventional home-
- mortgages-
sec mkt primary market
fixed- fixed-
rate rate ARM
Monthly
JUN 88
JUL 88
AUG 88
SEP 88
OCT 88
NOV 88
DEC 88
JAN 89
FEB 89
MAR 89
APR 89
MAY 89
Daily
JUN
JUN
JUN
are 1-day quotes for Friday, Thursday or Friday, respectively, following the end of the statement week. Column 13 
is the Bond Buyer revenue index. Column 14
is the FNMA purchase yield, plus loan servicing fee, on 30-day mandatory delivery commitments. Column 15 is the average 
contract rate on new commitments for
fixed-rate mortgageslFRMs) with 80 percent loan-to-value ratios at major institutional lenders. Column 
16 is the average initial contract rate on new
commitments for 1-year, adjustable-rate mortgages(ARMs) at major institutional lenders offering both FRMs and ARMs 
with the same number of discount points.
federal
funds
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted JUL. 3, 1989
Money stock measures and liquid as ets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period MI M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
in M2 in M3 only investments
LEVELS ($BILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures c
la
ss FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted JUL. 3, 1989
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi mutual funds, NSA denomi- Term Term Short Bankers
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation general Institu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Commer- accep
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars NSA deposits time purpose tions time NSA' NSA' bonds Treasury cial paper' tances
NSA' deposits' and broker/ only deposits
4
securities
dealer'
LEVELS (SBILLIONS) :
ANNUALLY (4TH QTR.)
MONTHLY
1988-MAY
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR.
MAY
I II
1. Net of money market mutual fund holdings of these items.
2. Includes retail repurchase agreements. All IRA and Keogh accounts at commercial banks and thrift institutions are subtracted from small
time deposits.
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 
1
July 3, 1989 Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasury couponsecral Net change
Net purchases agencies outright
Period Net 2 Redemp- Net within Redemp- Net redemptions holdings
Memo: LEVEL (bil.$)6
June 28
S 3,842
accounts.
accounts,
short-term notes acquired in exchange for maturing bills.
maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing coupon issues.
-- -3
-- 225
and
Excludes
purchase sale transactions (+).
6. The levels of agency issues were
as follows:
I- or urasr an agnc securi- . s
(-) or Treasury ana agency securlices.
sale-purchase transactions (-), and matched
