Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
December 15, 1989
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC December 15, 1989
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Since the FOMC meeting on November 14, open market opera-
tions have been aimed at maintaining the reserve conditions established
after the slight easing in early November. The allowance for adjustment
and seasonal borrowing incorporated in the nonborrowed reserve objective
remained at $200 million until a technical adjustment to $150 million was
made in the second full maintenance period to take account of a further
decline in seasonal borrowing.1 Federal funds have traded mostly around
Thanksgiving, however, after market participants erroneously concluded
that policy had been eased again. A reserve injection just before Thanks-
giving to meet a sizable seasonal need at a time when federal funds were
at 8-3/8 percent triggered this perception, which was subsequently revers-
ed by draining reserves the following Monday at an early hour. The ne-
cessity to drain reserves at a time when projections pointed to a reserve
shortfall contributed to a bulge in borrowing to $419 million in the main-
System RP over the period spanning Thanksgiving and the subsequent week-
end. The market's perception of ease was reinforced by a newspaper's
stories on Friday reporting confirmation by "government officials."
Reserves were absorbed on Friday, but the federal funds rate did not
return to around 8-1/2 percent until the earlier than usual draining
operation on Monday.
tenance period ending November 29. In the second and most recent complete
period, borrowing averaged $130 million.
(2) With no change in policy and incoming economic information
generally consistent with expectations of slow growth in the economy, most
market interest rates are little changed on balance from the last FOMC
meeting. The yield curve remains inverted at the short end, as it has
since late October, suggesting the market continues to expect further
declines in short-term rates.
(3) In long-term markets, the gap between the average yield on
lower grade junk bonds and other market rates has widened further, as
investor resistance to these securities intensified in the face of further
problems among issuers. Partly in response to difficulties in the junk
bond market in recent months, the pace of net equity retirements in the
fourth quarter has been well below that of the third. Despite this slow-
down and disappointing third-quarter corporate earnings, most major stock
indexes advanced 1 to 3 percent over the intermeeting period, with the Dow
Jones rising 5 percent. Indexes of thrift and bank stock prices dropped,
however, in response to spreading problems in real estate markets. None-
theless, the spread between rates on bank money market instruments and
Treasury bills remained unusually narrow.
(4) The weighted average foreign exchange value of the dollar
declined by almost 4 percent over the intermeeting period. The dollar
fell by 6-1/2 percent against the mark, mainly reflecting events in
Eastern Europe and their supposed favorable implications for the German
economy, and by somewhat less against other EMS currencies. The dollar
was unchanged against the yen, and fell slightly against sterling.
the Desk sold $150 million against the yen.
Interest differentials against major industrial countries showed little
change over the period; three-month rates in both Germany and Japan eased
back a bit, while long bond rates in those countries were about unchanged.
Rates in some European countries drifted higher as they resisted downward
pressures on their currencies relative to the DM.
(5) Growth of M2 picked up a bit further in November, to an 8-
percent, above the 7-1/2 percent path specified by the Committee for the
September-to-December period; preliminary data through December 11 suggest
continued robust expansion this month. The strength in M2 reflects ear-
lier declines in market interest rates and has been concentrated in its
liquid interest-bearing components, where the decreases in opportunity
costs have been greatest. Noncompetitive bidders at Treasury auctions
have been running down their holdings, providing corroborating evidence of
substitution out of market assets. Demand deposits contracted last month,
reversing almost one-half of October's surge, and M1 growth slowed to a 3-
other checkable deposits.3
(6) M3 expanded at a 6 percent pace in November, the fastest
rate since the summer, and the average October-November pace of 5-1/4
percent was above the Committee's expected 4-1/2 percent growth for the
September-to-December period. Partial data through the first part of
December indicate that this aggregate is continuing to expand at close to
its November pace. The acceleration in November occurred as the contrac-
tion of the thrift component of managed liabilities in M3 abated. This
reflected less aggressive efforts on the part of solvent but capital-
deficient thrifts to shed assets and a hiatus in activities by the Reso-
lution Trust Corporation (RTC). M3 also was boosted last month by
strong growth in institution-only MMMFs, since yields on these funds
tended to lag the decline in market rates.
(7) Expansion of the debt of nonfinancial sectors evidently
slowed last month, apparently owing, at least in part, to shifts in
financing patterns rather than reductions in borrowing to finance spend-
ing. For example, a moderation in business borrowing was accounted for
largely by a reduced issuance of junk bonds and a slowing in the pace of
equity retirements. In addition, while the federal deficit was about
unchanged, borrowing fell as the Treasury drew down its cash balance.
And, offerings of state and local securities also were cut back, but
mostly in the area of advance refundings. Information on the household
sector is sparse; consumer lending at banks continued brisk, probably
reflecting a further increase in their share of consumer credit. Growth
of real estate loans at banks slowed slightly in November, though this may
reflect more caution in commercial lending.
(8) All the monetary and debt aggregates are ending 1989 within
their annual ranges, as can be seen in the table below, with growth moder-
ating from 1988. Through November, M2 expanded at a 4-1/2 percent rate
from the fourth quarter of last year, down 3/4 of a percentage point from
Money and Debt Growth
(percent)
well as by the lagged effects of the year-long rise in interest rates and
opportunity costs that came to an end in March. Within the year, M2
growth showed a pronounced pattern: through midyear higher interest rates
and unusually large personal tax payments held the aggregate below its
target range; subsequent rate declines and a rebuilding of liquid balances
boosted M2 to just below the midpoint of its annual range. The pattern
was even more pronounced for M1, given its greater interest elasticity;
this aggregate declined at around a 5 percent rate in the first half of
the year before rebounding in the second. On balance M1 is about un-
changed over the year, and growth of its velocity likely equalled the
fastest pace in three decades. Events in the thrift industry have not had
much effect on the overall level of M2, although growth was skewed heavily
towards its bank deposit and money market mutual fund components. By
contrast, M3 growth this year--at 4 percent, a bit above the lower bound
of its 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent range--has been damped considerably by the
liquidation of thrift assets and infusions of funds by the RTC. Although
banks probably absorbed some of these assets, many mortgages and mortgage-
backed securities apparently were acquired by other investors and thus not
financed by M3 liabilities. The expansion of nonfinancial debt
decelerated about in line with GNP this year, and it is expected to finish
the year about 8 percent above its level in the fourth quarter of 1988,
near the midpoint of its 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent monitoring range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
September QIV '88
pe to pe to pe
September October November November November
Money and Credit Aggregates
Reserve measures
2
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
n.a. - not available.
pe - preliminary estimate.
1. Through October.
2. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
NOTE: Monthly reserve measures, including excess reserves and borrowing, are
calculated by prorating averages for two-week reserve maintenance periods that overlap
months.
Policy Alternatives
(9) Three policy alternatives are presented below for Committee
consideration. The specifications of alternative B involve federal funds
continuing to trade in the 8-1/2 percent area in association with adjust-
ment plus seasonal borrowing of $150 million. Under alternative A, the
federal funds rate would decline to the 8 percent area accompanying a
decline in adjustment plus seasonal borrowing to $100 million. Federal
funds would return to the 9 percent area under alternative C, associated
with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $200 million. The differences
in the borrowing levels among the three alternatives, $50 million, is only
half that contained in recent bluebooks. The low level to which seasonal
borrowing has fallen, together with the continued close proximity of
adjustment borrowing to frictional levels, implies that borrowing probably
has become even more unresponsive to the spread between the funds rate and
the discount rate.5  Uncertainties in the relationship between the funds
rate and borrowing, even more of a problem at such low levels of
borrowing, continue to call for flexibility in the Desk's approach to the
borrowing objective.
(10) Money growth paths from November to March associated with
each alternative are shown in the table below. (More detailed data appear
in the table and charts on the following pages.) Boosted by earlier
declines in interest rates, M2 growth under all the alternatives would
continue fairly strong, running through the first quarter at or above the
upper end of its tentative 3 to 7 percent target cone for 1990, though
within the associated parallel band. The outlook for M3 continues to be
clouded by considerable uncertainties about thrifts. One source of uncer-
tainty pertains to the rate at which solvent but capital-deficient in-
stitutions pare assets in order to meet new FIRREA capital requirements.
Another is the near-term activity of the RTC; absent provision for working
capital early next year, RTC's scope for completing deals and replacing
high-cost funds in the first quarter may be limited. As noted above, both
RTC activity and S&L asset runoffs appear to have diminished substan-
tially, but we expect these factors to become more important in the months
ahead, retarding M3, though not to the degree of late summer and early
fall.6 As a consequence, M3 growth is projected to continue below that
of M2, leaving this aggregate in March in the middle portion of its
tentative range.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from November
to March
Implied growth from
Q4 '89 to March
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
(11) The markets have built in some additional easing of policy
in the near term, and as federal funds continue to trade around 8-1/2
percent under alternative B, money market rates might firm a little.7
Any tendency for rates to rise is likely to be tempered if incoming infor-
mation points to sluggish economic growth, consistent with the staff fore-
cast, so that markets retain but push back their expectations of the next
easing step. Bond yields are likely to stay around current levels under
these circumstances. Bond prices could rally should more definite pros-
pects for substantial deficit reduction emerge from the upcoming Adminis-
tration budget as well as the implications of developments overseas for
future defense expenditures. With policy unchanged, the dollar might show
little further depreciation, unless key foreign central banks tighten
policies further.
(12) Under alternative B, M2 would expand at an 8 percent annual
rate over the November-to-March period, near the pace of recent months.8
Growth would continue to be buoyed by previous declines in market interest
rates, causing a further reduction in the velocity of this aggregate at a
concentrated in its more liquid components, whose opportunity costs have
narrowed the most. Small time deposits could strengthen a little now that
RTC no longer is providing additional funds to replace high-cost deposits.
rency deposits in the United States beginning in January will have much
impact on the monetary aggregates. Such deposits will be excluded from
the aggregates, and the amount of shifting to foreign currency accounts
from dollar deposits in the aggregates is expected to be small.
In these circumstances, intervened thrifts may continue to bid more ag-
gressively to retain or replace maturing brokered deposits, as they have
in recent weeks, prompting other depository institutions to raise their
offering rates. While most of the small time deposits would come from
other M2 sources, some might be diverted from outside M2, given the more
favorable deposit rates. Growth in the M1 component would be expected to
be around 6 percent over the November-to-March period, sustained by in-
flows to OCDs and some augmenting of demand deposits around year-end to
meet compensating balance requirements. By March, M2 would have grown
significant changes in the funds rate, M2 subsequently would be expected
to moderate to within its tentative annual target cone in the third
(13) M3 is expected to grow at a 5-1/2 percent annual rate under
alternative B, in line with its faster pace of October and November.
Growth of this aggregate may decelerate over the quarter, damped by run-
offs of assets at capital-deficient thrifts as well as by a resumption of
RTC activity at insolvent institutions. Credit growth at banks should
remain close to the pace of recent months; these institutions will con-
tinue to fill some of the void in residential and consumer installment
lending and acquisitions of mortgage securities caused by the withdrawal
of the thrift industry.
(14) Debt of private nonfinancial sectors is expected to continue
to grow around the slower pace that has come to prevail in the latter part
of 1989. To some extent this may result from a more cautious attitude of
lenders facing not only mounting problems in junk bond and real estate
markets but also the possibility of greater credit difficulties by house-
hold and business borrowers more generally as income growth slows.
Residential mortgage borrowing should continue to expand around its recent
pace, buoyed by the modest recovery in housing activity in response to
reduced mortgage rates. Elsewhere in the household sector, consumer cre-
dit growth is expected to strengthen a bit, reflecting a near-term re-
covery in spending on durables. With the financing gap unchanged and
restructuring activity damped, business borrowing should remain around the
reduced pace of recent months. The federal government will continue to be
a heavy user of credit to finance a still-large federal deficit in the
first quarter. Over the November-to-March period, growth of domestic
nonfinancial debt is expected to be around 7 percent, placing the debt
aggregate in the lower portion of its tentative 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent
monitoring range for 1990.
(15) The easing of policy under alternative A would be a little
more than now seems to be anticipated by market participants over coming
weeks. In response to a drop in the federal funds rate to the 8 percent
area, money market interest rates would decrease about 3/8 percentage
point, with the three-month bill trading around 7-1/4 percent. Bond rates
should move lower, especially if market participants viewed the economy as
being fairly weak so that such a measure would not appreciably raise the
risk of higher inflation, though judging from the tepid response of bond
markets to the putative easing around Thanksgiving, any declines might be
small. The dollar could weaken significantly further.
(16) With the further drop in interest rates, growth in M2 would
strengthen under alternative A to a 9 percent annual rate over the Novem-
ber-to-March period, placing this aggregate noticeably above the upper end
of its tentative growth cone. In the absence of a subsequent tightening
of policy, expansion of M2 would be likely to remain quite strong for some
time, especially if the lower interest rates fed through to greater spend-
ing and demand for money than in the staff forecast. Under alternative A,
growth in M3 would firm to a 6 percent rate over the November-to-March
period, a bit above the midpoint of its tentative 1990 range. A decline
in market rates might not boost M3 in line with previous experience, since
higher prices on mortgages and mortgage-backed securities could encourage
the sale of assets by thrifts.
(17) Alternative C would restrain M2 growth to around the upper
bound of its 1990 growth cone by March, putting it on a track toward the
middle of its tentative range; such a move would seem to increase the odds
on more noticeable progress toward price stability, with assistance from a
stronger dollar, albeit with greater risk of an economic downturn. The
accompanying slowdown in M3--to an expected 5 percent annual rate over the
November-to-March period--would cause this aggregate to drift downward in
the lower half of its tentative 1990 growth range. A tightening of policy
would come as a surprise to market participants, and short-term interest
rates would rise by more than the 50 basis point increase in the federal
funds rate. Bond rates initially would rise, though this increase might
be retraced if markets came to see the move as part of a longer-term
strategy to restrain spending and prices. An aspect of this restraint
would be a transition period that involved a weaker outlook for profits,
downward pressure on various asset prices, and an intensification of
strains in certain vulnerable areas of the financial system, with
implications for intermediaries and other lenders.
Directive Language
(18) Draft language for the operational paragraph, including the
standard options and updating, is shown below.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. Taking account of progress toward price
stability, the strength of the business expansion, the
behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments in
foreign exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly
(SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint might (WOULD) or
slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint (MIGHT) would
be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
growth of M2 and M3 over the period from NOVEMBER THROUGH
MARCH [DEL: September through December] at annual rates of about
____ AND ____ [DEL: 7-1/2 and 4-1/2] percent, respectively. The
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears
to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve
conditions during the period before the next meeting are
likely to be associated with a federal funds rate
persistently outside a range of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 7 to 11] percent.
Monthly
Dec 88
Jan 89
Feb 89
Mar 89
Apr 89
May 89
Jun 89
Jul 89
Aug 89
Sep 89
Oct 89
Nov 89
December 18, 1989
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
I Shot -Trm_ _ Lon-Tmn
I CDs I I money
federal Treasury ils secondary I comm market I bank
tunds secondary makt market paper I muual prime
I corporate I I conventional nome mongages
U S government conslant A utiliy I municipal I secondary I
matuty yields recently Bond I market I primary marketI user I .. r r I ne rl r 1 tlri r t I - an f t a a
offering both FRMs and ARMs with the same number of discounl points
p preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Bank Reserves, Money and Credit Aggregate Measures clas FOMC
Seasonally adjusted DEC. 18, 1989
B___________ nk reserv' Money stock mepilur« pnd liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt
Period nonborrowed I otal monetary Ml M2 M3 L total loans U.S. other' total'
base and government'
I I I I I _investments_ ____
LEVELS ISILLIONS) :
ANNUALLY 14TH qTR.)
MONTHLY
1988-NOV.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV. p
discontinuities.
p-preliminary
Sirlctly Confldentlal (FR).
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Cs... FOMC
Small Money martr l Largei
Otter Overniht denJm- mutual hnds, NSA deonmi. Tern Term Short- Bm.ners
Period Cunrency deposits deposits Euredollwr NSA deposits time purpou lions time NSA' NSA' bonds Treasury cil paper' tma.e
NSA' depets' n d broIner only dpos I I I I ecurilti
dealer' I
I 4 l r I I t ,o f OI 4 , t
LEVELS (tBILLIONS) :
ANNUALLY (4TH QTR.)
MONTHLY
1968-NOV.
i 480.3
APR.
AY
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV. p
p-pr liminary
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS ON SECURITIES1
December 18, 1989 Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Memo: LEVEL (bil.$)6
December 13
*1- 7 . .. -
Treasurv hills
Redemp-
tions (-)
Net
purchases2
. -
Net
change
-- 663
-- 233
- 4,876
-- 947
i. Change from end-of-period to end-of-period.
2. Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts.
3. Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts,
short-term notes acquired in exchange for maturing bills.
maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing coupon issues.
within
1-year I 1-5
and
Excludes
cou 
ons
Net purchases
SRedemp-
over 10 I tions (-)
purchase sale transactions (+).
6. The levels of agency issues were
as follows:
Net
change
Federal
agencies
redemptions
(-)
t 44
Net change
outright
holdings
total
Net RPs 5
(-) of Treasury and agency securities.
sale-purchase transactions (-), and matched
