Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
December 14, 1990
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC December 14, 1990
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) At the beginning of the intermeeting period the Desk imple-
mented a slight easing of reserve market conditions, intended to be as-
sociated with the federal funds rate decreasing around 1/4 percentage
point to the area of 7-1/2 percent. The funds rate responded sluggishly,
however, with the "effective" rate averaging about 20 basis points above
that level in the first full maintenance period after the November meet-
ing. The relatively high effective rate initially reflected cautious
reserve management by banks and the settlement of the midquarter refund-
ing, and later the increasing premiums paid by foreign banks, particularly
Japanese institutions, which were bidding strongly for overnight funds in
unreceptive markets. Policy was eased again on December 7, on the heels
of the November employment report, which showed surprisingly large job
losses and only modest wage gains, and in light of continuing weakness in
the monetary aggregates. Since then, federal funds have averaged around
the expected 7-1/4 percent. Premiums paid by Japanese banks have narrowed
as concerns about year-end pressures abated somewhat [discussed in para-
graph (3) below] and reserves have been more abundant relative to depress-
ed demands for excess reserves.
(2) Market interest rates declined on balance over the inter-
meeting period, in some cases substantially, as policy eased and evidence
mounted that the economy was contracting significantly. Short-term rates,
which, at the time of the November meeting, already incorporated expecta-
tions of a slightly more accommodative policy, retreated 20 to 40 basis
points. Bond yields are off by comparable amounts; with most of the drop
occurring since the November employment data were released. Mortgage
rates have retreated 1/2 percentage point over the last month to around
resolution of the Middle East situation contributed to a rise in broad
stock indexes of about 3 percent. Bank stocks have done better, buoyed by
the reduction in reserve requirements.
(3) In the first half of the intermeeting period, concern about
a liquidity squeeze over year-end intensified. In bank funding markets,
three-month Eurodollar and domestic CD rates rose some 40 basis points in
the last week of November. At that time, Japanese banks reportedly paid
as much as 30 percent in the forward market for federal funds over the
turn of the year, and domestic banks saw quotes of 15 percent or more,
though they did little buying. Commercial paper rates, especially on
lower-rated issues, also rose substantially relative to Treasury bill
rates in this period. Expectations already had been widespread that year-
end credit could be especially scarce this year as institutional investors
purged their portfolios of lower quality names, shifting demands toward
banks just when those lenders would be trying to minimize assets to bol-
ster capital ratios. Potential year-end borrowers, and in particular the
Japanese banks, apparently began to focus on this problem in earnest after
Thanksgiving, and sought to secure funding in advance. In the event, this
scramble for financing quickly abated and spreads on bank instruments
relative to Treasuries more than retraced their earlier increases. The
highest graded commercial paper rates also have fallen substantially rela-
tive to Treasuries, but tiering in this market has increased on balance
since the November meeting. The retreat in rates was assisted by the
announcement of lower reserve requirements, which was perceived as freeing
up valuable liquidity around year-end, and, in concert with some leaning
to the generous side in the provision of reserves by the Desk, as signall-
ing an intent to provide ample funds through this period. Still, markets
remain quite sensitive to the potential for year-end disruptions and in
recent days spreads have widened some, and Japanese banks are paying as
much as 20 percent for funds over the end of the year.
(4) Despite the easing of U.S. monetary policy, the dollar's
weighted average foreign exchange value is up about one percent on balance
since the last FOMC meeting, apparently supported in part by precautionary
demands for dollars in view of concerns about the availability of dollar
funding over year-end. The dollar appreciated more against the yen and
sterling; the decrease in oil prices along with expectations of slowing or
negative economic growth sparked large bond market rallies in these and
other countries. In Japan bond yields fell about 70 basis points, while
short-term rates there edged lower. The dollar rose less against the
mark, which was generally firm on the basis of continuing very strong
economic growth in Western Germany and heightened expectations of further
tightening of monetary policy. Three-month interest rates moved up about
amount, less than in other major countries.
(5) M2 contracted slightly in November, leaving this aggregate
slightly below the path anticipated by the Committee at its last meet-
ing. Money market fund shares declined, as did overnight RPs; the
former seemed to be associated with investors returning to the capital
markets, especially through stock and bond funds, and the latter was prob-
ably related to recent declines in securities holdings at large banks.
Still, the continued weakness of core deposits, despite the fall in oppor-
tunity costs to their lowest levels of the year, was the predominant
influence damping M2. Weak nominal income growth this quarter likely
accounts in part for the depressed demands for M2, especially as house-
holds hold down saving in order to cushion the effect of declining dis-
posable income on consumption.
(6) November's runoff deepened the already considerable weakness
of M2; for the year M2 is expected to expand only 3-3/4 percent, down from
its 1989 growth rate and well below the middle of its target range (see
table below). Expansion of M2 has been held down by the slower growth of
income in 1990; in addition, velocity increased nearly 1 percent, despite
declines in short-term interest rates. One development damping the ef-
fects of lower market interest rates on M2 was wider opportunity costs
than historically have been associated with observed movements in interest
rates. In light of the thrift resolution process and the reluctance of
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'89
to
September October November November
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
pe - preliminary estimate.
1. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
banks to extend credit, depositories as a whole had no need for increased
liabilities, and they offered relatively less attractive deposit rates to
discourage retail inflows. Nonetheless, opportunity costs did narrow and
the lower opportunity costs that prevailed should have reduced velocity;
staff models of money demand overpredict M2 growth by 2 percentage points
this year. The reasons for this are unclear. From the depositor's per-
spective, claims on depositories may look less attractive if there are
concerns about the health of depositories and the possibility of deposit
contracts being abrogated in a failure. A shift out of M2 is consistent
with the unusually high volume of net noncompetitive tenders for Treasury
securities this year. Households also may be restraining liquid asset
accumulation to limit indebtedness as the return on deposits falls rela-
tive to the cost of debt; household indebtedness this year has grown slow-
ly relative to spending. And demand deposits have declined further in
less on deposits to compensate banks for services and continue to find
ways to economize on clearing balances.
Growth of Monetary and Debt Aggregates
(Q4 to Q4, percent)
(7) M3 contracted slightly again in November and has expanded
only 1-1/2 percent in 1990, just above the lower limit of a target range
that the Committee reduced by 1-1/2 percentage points in July. The be-
havior of M3 is directly related to the slump in depository credit.
Depository liabilities in M3 have contracted this year, in line with lend-
ing, and all of the net inflows to M3 are attributable to currency and
money market mutual funds.
(8) Evidence about private borrowing trends in recent months is
mixed, though no real strength is apparent and lenders remain very cau-
tious. Some pickup has been seen in business credit in recent weeks,
boosted by a surge in bond issuance by investment grade borrowers in
response to the drop in long-term rates. However, commercial paper has
been declining since the middle of October, as some quality borrowers have
turned to bonds and some less favored issuers have opted to tap their bank
lines in the face of mounting investor resistance to their paper. Accord-
ingly, bank C&I loans grew at a 5-3/4 percent rate in November, after two
months of decline. Banks apparently have continued to tighten lending
terms and raise margins, in part by keeping the prime rate unchanged in
the face of lower funding costs. Consumer borrowing probably has remained
subdued; consumer loans at banks, adjusting for securitization, registered
minimal gains in November. Municipal borrowing has been brisk in recent
days in response to the bond market rally, though activity in November was
sluggish. Credit stress is spreading in the municipal sector, as state
and local budget situations worsen. Federal borrowing has continued
strong, with a lull in thrift-related spending offsetting a widening bud-
get gap elsewhere.
(9) Robust federal borrowing boosted the growth of nonfinancial
debt to 7 percent for the year, the midpoint of its range. However, a
significant portion of the federal borrowing has simply financed acquisi-
tions of thrift assets via the RTC; without this factor debt growth would
have been 6-1/2 percent. Private debt growth is likely to come in at only
reduced demands for credit account for much of the slowing, credit
restraint also likely was a factor, having an appreciable effect on bor-
rowing for some real estate purposes and also on corporate restructuring;
the decline in net equity retirement accounts for a sizeable share of the
deceleration in private debt growth this year.
Policy Alternatives
(10) Two near-term policy alternatives are presented below for
Committee consideration. Under alternative B, federal funds would con-
tinue to trade in the 7-1/4 percent area and adjustment plus seasonal bor-
rowing would initially be specified at $100 million.3 Under alternative
A, the funds rate would decline to the vicinity of 6-3/4 percent. Alter-
native A could be implemented through a reduction in the borrowing assump-
tion of only $25 million to $75 million or through a half-point cut in the
discount rate combined with the same borrowing assumption as specified for
alternative B.4
(11) Implementing alternative A through a reduction in borrowing
would bring the funds rate below the discount rate and borrowing to fric-
tional levels. While technically feasible, this method of easing would
have some drawbacks. For one, moving the federal funds rate below the
discount rate might add to market uncertainties; it could prompt specula-
tion about whether this unusual situation portended a near-term discount
rate change, in part to restore more normal rate relationships, or whether
it represented a permanent realignment of the discount rate at a penalty
to market rates. In addition, the federal funds rate probably would be-
come a little more volatile. Increases and decreases in borrowing can
provide a safety valve, partly offsetting the effects on the federal funds
reduction is half the difference between alternatives A and B in recent
bluebooks.
rate of unexpected shifts in supply and demand for reserves. The poten-
tial for such offsets, with their muting effect on funds rate variations,
is already quite limited, given the damped responses of borrowing to funds
rate fluctuations associated with the current low level of discount window
usage. Funds rate volatility would tend to increase a bit if borrowing
were reduced to implement alternative A. In any case, over the intermeet-
ing period the Desk's task will be complicated by uncertainties both about
year-end effects on required and excess reserve demands and about the
impact of the reserve requirement change on demands for excess reserves.
The potential for volatility in the funds rate under alternative A would
be reduced a little if instead this alternative were implemented through a
(12) Securities markets appear to be anticipating another small
policy adjustment at some point in the coming intermeeting period, though
not necessarily immediately after the meeting. Hence, market interest and
exchange rates would not react much to the unchanged reserve conditions of
alternative B, at least initially. Moreover, expectations of further ease
likely would be sustained if incoming data confirm the markets' impression
of a significant economic downturn. Although borrowers and lenders
already have made substantial adjustments to their portfolios in anticipa-
tion of year-end pressures, strains still could emerge at times in coming
weeks. In January, with the threat of year-end pressures and portfolio
adjustments behind them, banks may reduce the prime rate. Were current
reserve conditions to be maintained through the intermeeting period in the
face of weak economic data, markets might begin to reassess the Federal
Reserve's intentions, and interest and exchange rates might edge higher--
although favorable effects on inflation expectations would work to moder-
ate any such rise in bond rates.
(13) With the easing of the funds rate by 1/2 percentage point
under alternative A, other short-term market rates would decline, but by
smaller amounts given current market expectations. However, the prime
rate likely would be reduced, perhaps promptly, by the full 1/2 percentage
point. The policy easing also might make lenders a bit more willing to
extend credit to marginal borrowers, in part as lower interest rates im-
prove the economic outlook and borrowers' prospective creditworthiness.
Bond yields would continue to move lower, but the extent of the rally
would depend in part on the reaction in foreign exchange markets. The
dollar would decline, especially if investors saw the action, coming on
the heels of recent easing moves, as evidence of an inclination toward a
more aggressive easing posture by the Federal Reserve. The reaction of
foreign exchange and other financial markets to alternative A may depend
on how it is implemented. However, any tendency for a discount rate cut
to have an independent announcement effect would be muted in the current
circumstances, given perceptions that for technical reasons an easing of
this magnitude would necessarily involve a discount rate cut.
(14) Projected growth of the monetary aggregates under the two
alternatives is shown in the table below. (Detailed data appear on the
table and charts on the following pages.) Monetary growth rates seem
unusually difficult to forecast in current circumstances. The uncer-
tainties about the relationship of money demand to income and opportunity
costs, so evident in recent months, are likely to persist. In addition,
changes in the regulatory environment--including reduced reserve require-
ments on certain liabilities, higher deposit insurance premiums, and the
phase-in of capital standards--will be affecting to an unpredictable
extent bank and thrift decisions with respect to the size of their asset
portfolios and the composition of and offering rates on their liabilities.
Alt. A Alt. B
Growth from November
to March
(15) In the staff's judgment, M2 growth under the unchanged
funds rate of alternative B will pick up to a 3-1/2 percent pace from
November to March, placing the aggregate just above the lower bound of the
cone associated with the Committee's provisional growth range of 2-1/2 to
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
Levels in billions
1990 October
November
December
Monthly Growth Rates
1990 October
November
December
Quarterly Ave. Growth Rates
1990 Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Sept 90 to Dec. 90
Nov. 90 to Mar. 91
Dec. 90 to Mar. 91
ster money balances in the first quarter. In addition, money market
mutual funds and, to a lesser extent, retail deposits are expected to
respond to the drop in their opportunity costs brought about by the de-
clines in short-term market rates over recent months. Even so, M2 growth
on a quarterly average basis would edge up to only a 2-3/4 percent rate in
the first quarter, which would be below the projected pace of nominal GNP
and represent a reversal of the decline in M2 velocity experienced this
(16) Some of the acceleration in M2 under alternative B would
show through to M3. Nonetheless, M3 expansion would be held to a 1/2
percent rate from November to March, displaying only slightly less weak-
ness than in recent months and coming in below the one percent lower bound
of the Committee's provisional growth range for 1991. A variety of fac-
tors are expected to continue to limit growth in this aggregate. Thrift
credit is projected to contract further; bank credit expansion, though
likely to pick up after the turn of the year, should remain subdued, espe-
cially if further losses in loan portfolios continue to put pressure on
capital positions. In the near term, banks are likely to use some of the
reserve balances released by the drop in reserve requirements to pay down
managed liabilities and shrink their footings. For a time, this scale
effect should dominate the longer-term impact of the reduced reserve cost
of issuing nonpersonal time deposits and borrowing from own foreign
branches. Finally, the hike in the insurance premium from 12 to 19-1/2
basis points on domestic deposits at commercial banks may marginally deter
bank intermediation and encourage a shifting of large time deposits into
term RPs or offshore. Of course, M3 would be little affected on net by
such shifting since term RPs and term Eurodollars owned by U.S. residents
are included in M3.
(17) Debt of nonfederal sectors is projected to grow at only a
recent estimated pace, despite a pickup in corporate borrowing associated
with merger-related financing, reflecting weak demand in an environment of
continued credit stringency. Household borrowing is expected to slow
further as mortgage demands drop off with the housing slump. With federal
debt growth remaining around 10 percent, overall domestic nonfinancial
debt is anticipated to post about a 6 percent growth rate from November to
March, placing this aggregate in the middle portion of the Committee's
provisional monitoring range of 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for 1991.
(18) Selection of alternative A would provide added impetus to
M2 growth but would affect M3 and credit expansion only a little, at least
over the next few months. Opportunity costs on retail balances would fall
further, lifting M2 growth to a projected 5 percent rate over the November
to March period. By March, M2 would be near the midpoint of the pro-
visional range for next year. With banks slightly more inclined to lend,
M3 growth would be stimulated a bit: Its expected 1 percent rate of
growth from November to March would place this aggregate at the lower
bound of its tentative annual range.
Directive Language
(19) Draft language for the operational paragraph, including the
usual options and updating, is shown below. In light of the large number
of recommendations for a discount rate reduction from Reserve Bank boards
of directors, wording is given in brackets in the first sentence should
the Committee wish to make reference in the directive to a possible
change in the discount rate. This suggested wording is very similar to
that used by the Committee in comparable situations in the past. Of
course, the policy record would explain the Committee's approach to
implementation and its rationale. In the second sentence, given the
evidence of a downturn in business activity, it is suggested that the
phrase "trends in economic activity" be substituted for "strength of the
business expansion."
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to decrease slightly (SOMEWHAT)/
MAINTAIN/INCREASE SLIGHTLY (SOMEWHAT) the existing degree of
pressure on reserve positions [TAKING ACCOUNT OF A POSSIBLE
CHANGE IN THE DISCOUNT RATE]. Taking account of progress
toward price stability, the TRENDS IN ECONOMIC ACTIVITY,
[DEL: strength of the business expansion,] the behavior of the
monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and
domestic financial markets, slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater
reserve restraint (WOULD) might or (SLIGHTLY) somewhat lesser
reserve restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable in the inter-
meeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are
expected to be consistent with growth of both M2 and M3 over
the period from NOVEMBER THROUGH MARCH [DEL: September through
December] at annual rates of about ____ AND ____ [DEL: 1 to 2] percent,
December 17, 1990
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Shon-Term lnno-Term
| I CDs | money I corporate I conventional home mongages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm market I bank U.S government constant A utility I municipal secondary I
funds secondary market market I paper mutual I prime maturity yields I recently Bond market primary market
____ -- m 1 r 3-m th 1-month fund I loan 3-vear I 10 year -vear o ered Buyer fixed-rate fixed- rae I ARM
Monthly
Dec 89
Jan 90
Feb 90
Mar 90
Apr 90
May 90
Jun 90
Jul 90
Aug 90
Sep 90
Oct 90
Nov 90
p -- preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II 
FO MC
Seasonally adjusted DEC. 17, 1990
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
in M2 in M3 only nvestments
ANN. GROWTH RATES (%) :
ANNUALLY (Q4 TO Q4)
LEVELS ($BILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Class II FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted DEC. 17, 1990
LEVELS I$BILLIONS) :
ANNUALLY (4TH QTR.)
HONTHLY
1989-NOV.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV. p
r r T r -T .. ,
Currency
Demand
deposits
Other
checkable
deposits
RPs and
Eurodollars
NSA'
MMDAs
Savings
deposits
Small
denomi-
nation
time
Money market
mutual funds
general Institu-
purpose lions
and broker/ only
dealer'
denomi-
nation
time
deposits
Term
Eurodollars
Savings
bonds
Short-
term
Treasury
securities
Commer-
cial paper'
accep.
t anc es
December 14, 1990
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Weekly
October 3
October 10
October 17
October 24
October 31
November 7
November 14
November 21
November 28
December 5
December 12
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)7
December 12
- 5,115
- 1,883
- 5,796
- 3,365
- 1,732
- 287
- 4,197
- 631
- 933
- 3,341
- 2,923
- 151
Net change
outright
holdings
total 5
Net RPs
December 12
