Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC June 29, 1990
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Since the May meeting of the FOMC, open market operations
have continued to be directed toward maintaining unchanged pressures on
reserve positions, and the federal funds rate has remained close to 8-1/4
percent. The borrowing assumption was raised to $350 million immediately
after the meeting and was increased by another $100 million in two steps
in response to the continued upswing in seasonal borrowing. In two of the
three complete maintenance periods since the last meeting, actual adjust-
ment plus seasonal borrowing ran well above the specified level. In one
case, the overage reflected an operational problem at a money center bank
that brought it to the window over a long holiday weekend. In the other,
the Desk elected not to meet a large projected reserve deficiency on the
last day of a maintenance period, owing to a concern that, with federal
funds trading below 8-1/4 percent and the release of weak retail sales
figures that morning, the market might misread a move to add reserves as a
sign of a policy easing. In the maintenance period completed last Wednes-
day, seasonal borrowing was $329 million, and adjustment credit dropped
back to $54 million.
(2) Long-term interest rates are down about 1/4 percentage point
on balance over the past seven weeks in response to evidence of more soft-
ness in the economy. Markets also were buoyed by statements suggesting
better prospects of an accord on substantial reductions in the federal
deficit. With the economy weaker, the view became more prevalent that the
next Federal Reserve move would be an easing; nevertheless, no policy
action was seen as imminent, and most short-term interest rates have re-
mained close to their mid-May levels. Quality spreads in both long- and
short-term markets are generally unchanged. In equity markets, the DJIA
reached a record high when bond rates hit their lows in mid-June, but by
the end of the month the index had fallen 2 percent from its high and was
only fractionally above its level at the time of the May meeting.
(3) Expectations that monetary policy would not be easing in the
near term appeared to support the dollar through much of the intermeeting
period, as did political developments in the Soviet Union and Japan. The
dollar fell later in the period, partly in response to prospects for lower
interest rates associated with possible budget deficit reduction. The
weighted average foreign exchange value of the dollar against G-10 cur-
rencies was about unchanged on balance over the period. It appreciated
against the yen and continental European currencies, but declined against
the Canadian dollar and by nearly 4 percent against sterling, which bene-
fited mainly from official indications that the U.K. would be joining the
exchange rate mechanism of the EMS, perhaps as early as this fall.
. The Desk
purchased in the market $573 million against DM for the Treasury's
account, initiating a program to reduce U.S. foreign currency balances by
$2 billion, some portion of which may be done directly with foreign
authorities. Foreign interest rates declined slightly, on average, but
rose in Japan and, especially, in France--two countries that faced
downward pressure on their currencies.
(4) After declining in May, M2 is estimated to have increased
modestly in June, while M3 was about unchanged. Both aggregates showed
essentially no growth from March to June, falling well short of the 4 and
respectively.2  Relative to their annual target cones, M2 is now somewhat
above, and M3 somewhat below, the lower bounds. In part, the weakness of
these aggregates reflected the direct or indirect effects of the faster
pace of RTC activity. That agency acquired $20 billion in assets in the
process of resolving thrifts, in effect substituting government debt for
thrift liabilities, many of which would be in M3. With thrift assets
declining and bank credit growth moderate, total assets at depository
institutions and associated funding needs showed essentially no growth
over the second quarter, stalling M3 growth.
(5) The quickened pace of the thrift cleanup in the second
quarter also has affected M2. The ready availability of deposit bases
from failed thrifts and the reduced funding needs of capital-constrained
thrifts have helped restrain interest rates on deposits. Unusually low
retail deposit rates relative to Treasury rates prompted households to
reallocate portfolios away from monetary assets; sizable increases in
noncompetitive tenders at bill and note auctions suggest that a portion of
this year is presented in a memorandum, "The Behavior of the Monetary
Aggregates in the First Half of 1990," which was distributed to the
Committee earlier this week.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Mar. QIV'89
to to
Apr. May Junep  JuneP Junep
Money and credit aggregates
Reserves measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
n.a. - not available.
p - preliminary.
1. March to May.
2. Through May.
3. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
NOTE: Monthly reserve measures, including excess reserves and borrowing,
are calculated by prorating averages for two-week reserve maintenance
periods that overlap months.
these funds has been redirected toward the Treasury market.3 In addi-
tion, the behavior of money market mutual funds was an important component
of the slowing in M2. These funds, which had been experiencing huge in-
flows, dropped sharply in May and recovered only a bit in June. Their
weakness apparently was related to the buoyancy of the stock and bond
markets, which drew investors into longer-term and equity instruments.
Nevertheless, overall M2 growth was unexpectedly slow even taking into
account the higher opportunity costs and an apparent slowdown in nominal
income and consumption growth in the second quarter. Velocity rose at an
estimated 3-1/2 percent rate, about 2 percentage points more than might
have been expected from the change in opportunity costs.
(6) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is estimated to
have risen a bit faster than nominal GNP in the second quarter, maintain-
ing its growth at the 7-percent midpoint of its 1990 monitoring range.
Federal debt has been boosted by the funding needs of the thrift bailout,
but growth of the debt of most other sectors has been more subdued in
recent months. Household borrowing has been lagging well behind last
year's pace, with consumer credit running at just under a 2 percent rate
through April and more recent evidence from commercial banks indicating
continued weak increases. Available data--including real estate loans at
banks and home sales and construction--suggest that mortgage credit growth
also has slowed. Borrowing by nonfinancial firms in long-term markets
rebounded in June. Business borrowing from banks and in the commercial
paper market resumed in June after contracting in the previous month.
(7) The extent to which this year's slowdown in private sector
debt growth can be attributed to a shift in credit conditions is an open
question. Much of the slackening owes to consumer and home mortgage
credit; it is unlikely that these types of loans have been significantly
affected by a constriction of credit supplies by depository intermedi-
aries, in part because such credit is easily securitized, though lenders
generally may be reacting to perceptions of higher risks in a soft econ-
omy. In surveys, bankers continue to report increasing willingness to
lend to consumers, though by a narrower margin than previously, and infor-
mation from auto finance companies suggests only a modest tightening of
terms. In the case of home mortgages, price and non-price terms to bor-
rowers appear little changed in recent months, suggesting that the re-
orienting of mortgage flows away from the thrift industry continues to
proceed with minimal disruption. For businesses, the cost of borrowing
likely has risen so far this year, reflecting not only the general in-
crease in market rates since the end of 1989, but also the large number of
downgradings--implying that, with quality spreads little changed, more
companies have to pay higher premiums for funds. At banks, there is some
evidence of a widening of spreads and a tightening of terms on loans to
other-than-investment-grade businesses. In many cases, this owes to the
economic climate in the particular industry or region where the borrower
is located. For example, banks report a particularly acute reluctance to
extend credit to finance commercial real estate or highly leveraged trans-
actions. In addition, however, it appears that bank lenders have become
more sensitive to asset-quality issues, perhaps partly in reaction to
increased losses on past loans or to a perception that regulators and the
financial markets are evaluating intermediaries' balance sheets more
harshly. Certainly, the major banking organizations downgraded by private
credit rating agencies in recent weeks and months have experienced adverse
impacts on their funding costs. Capital costs also have risen, constrain-
ing lending activity at a time when asset write-downs and poor profit-
ability have impaired capital positions.
Alternative Long-Run Strategies
(8) As background for the Committee's consideration of ranges
for money and credit growth in 1990 and 1991, the table below presents
three alternative longer-run strategies. The baseline strategy, strategy
I, embodies the staff's greenbook projection for 1990 and 1991 and an
extension through the mid-1990s of the logic underlying that forecast--the
maintenance of a modest amount of slack in the economy and gradual decel-
eration of prices. Alternative strategies II and III embody somewhat
tighter and easier monetary policies, indexed by M2 growth 1 percentage
point slower and faster, respectively, than the baseline. The extension
past 1992 and the outcomes from the alternatives are based on simulations
using the Board's large-scale econometric model. The paths for M2 beyond
to normal over time as the contraction of the thrift industry abates and
depository institutions, banks in particular, become more willing to
absorb the public's core deposits, in line with historical relationships.
The pickup in money growth under all the alternatives mainly reflects the
restoration of more normal velocity behavior, and not a more stimulative
policy over time.
(9) In the baseline strategy, the economy continues to expand
below its potential growth rate through 1991, as real interest rates are
above their long-run equilibrium levels. Accordingly, pressures on re-
sources are relieved, as indicated by the rise in the unemployment rate to
(QIV level)
Unemployment rate
moves up to the growth of potential output, but with real rates remaining
relatively high, the degree of slack in 1992 is preserved for the remain-
der of the projection period, and as a result costs and prices decelerate.
After a few years, nominal interest rates begin to drift down roughly in
keeping with the decline in inflation. As a consequence, M2 growth re-
mains around 6 percent despite the decline in growth in nominal income.
(10) In the tighter alternative, strategy II, greater progress is
made in lowering inflation. By 1995, the inflation rate is down to 2 per-
cent, more than a percentage point below the baseline. The additional
progress is achieved through higher nominal and real interest rates and
the accompanying firmer dollar over the next few years, which hold output
growth below that of potential for a longer period of time, with unemploy-
ment rising to 7 percent. The more rapid decline in inflation under this
strategy enables nominal interest rates to fall below baseline levels over
the final years of the projection period. In the model used for the simu-
lation, inflation expectations are adaptive, reflecting only current and
previous price movements. Progress in lowering inflation could be achiev-
ed even more quickly, while the degree of slack in resource markets could
be lessened, if the pursuit of the tighter strategy itself were to have a
salutary effect on inflation expectations--that is, a policy credibility
effect--so that wage and price decisions were aligned more closely with
diminished growth in nominal demand.
(11) Monetary policy in the easier alternative, strategy III,
fosters economic growth sufficient to limit the increase in the unemploy-
ment rate, which remains at or below the assumed natural rate. Combined
with a weaker dollar, this degree of pressure on resources implies
inflation remaining around a 4-1/2 percent annual pace before drifting
higher later in the period. Interest rates decline initially, but to
restrain monetary growth in the context of faster nominal GNP expansion,
interest rates would need to move higher in the latter half of the period.
By the mid-1990s, nominal rates would return to current levels, above
those in the baseline and tighter alternatives, though real interest rates
would still be lower.
(12) The table below presents inflation rates derived from two
alternative sets of simulations of the P* model. The upper panel uses the
money growth rates of the three strategies discussed above. These money
growth rates cycled through the P* model yield substantially more
restraint on prices than they do in the greenbook forecast with the large-
scale model extensions. This is because the P* model assumes velocity
tending back toward its historical average level, whereas the earlier
simulations incorporate the staff's expectation of a permanent upward
shift in M2 velocity over the next two years. In the lower panel the P*
model has been adjusted to incorporate the same permanent velocity shift
embodied in the large-scale model exercise. With this adjustment, the
inflation rates in the P* model show the same basic patterns as in the
large-scale model simulation, though price pressures are somewhat less in
the P* model. However, in the baseline simulation of the large model,
inflation would be expected to decelerate further after 1995 because the
unemployment rate is above the natural rate; the adjusted P* model sug-
gests no further drop in inflation because the price level equals P* at
the end of 1995.
P* Model Simulations of Inflation
Prices: GNP fixed-
weight price index
A. With no adjustment
of model for velocity
shifts
B. With adjustment of
model for velocity
shifts
Long-Run Ranges
(13) The table below gives projections of growth in money and
debt believed to be consistent with the greenbook forecast for the economy
for 1990 and 1991. For the balance of 1990 and in 1991, the growth of the
aggregates is expected to be affected by many of the unusual factors that
restrained money growth in the first half of 1990. These include a con-
tinued high level of RTC activity with associated deposit transfers and
government assumption of thrift assets, further downsizing by marginally
solvent thrifts, and constraints on growth of credit at banks, which are
expected to remain cautious lenders in a sluggish economy and under pres-
sure with regard to the amount and cost of their capital. The combination
of these factors should continue to hold down the appetite of depositories
for funds, restraining M3 directly and M2 as well, partly through low
deposit offering rates. Because these forces have few precedents, there
is substantial uncertainty about their nature, their persistence, and
their effects on money and other variables. With little experience to go
on, staff has placed some weight on the behavior of money of the second
quarter. This is reflected in somewhat slower projected growth rates for
both M2 and M3 than would be expected on the basis of past relationships
of money with income, market interest rates, and total credit growth.
Projections of Money and Debt Growth
(14) Money growth is expected to strengthen somewhat over coming
quarters as some of the forces depressing money growth abate gradually
and depository institutions and depositors adapt. Thrift assets should
shrink about as rapidly in the second half of the year as in the second
quarter, but the pace of asset runoffs should diminish somewhat next year.
RTC is expected to maintain its current pace of resolutions through 1991,
but might not have to take as large a proportion of assets onto its bal-
ance sheet on the assumption that the most impaired thrifts are dealt with
this year. The expansion of bank credit, though limited, is expected to
rebound moderately in the second half of 1990 and 1991, perhaps as lower
deposit offering rates enhance lending margins. Nonetheless, total expan-
sion of depository credit will continue to be extraordinarily weak and M3
is expected barely to increase over the second half of 1990--ending the
year well below the lower end of its current range--and to increase only
(15) The pickup in M2 relative to its second-quarter pace is
expected to be somewhat more pronounced. Core deposit inflows, though
strengthening a bit, are expected to remain quite sluggish in the second
half of 1990; banks are expected to reduce deposit rates, as they have in
June, to improve margins and keep M2 deposit inflows, augmented by depos-
its purchased from thrifts, in line with moderate credit growth. However,
money market mutual funds, after declining in the second quarter, are
expected to be fairly robust. Money funds already have leveled off in
recent weeks, perhaps reflecting a waning of portfolio reallocations into
bond and stock funds. Money funds also should absorb some of the demand
for M2 assets left unsatisfied by the banks and thrifts as deposit rates
are depressed relative to yields available on money funds. The faster M2
growth over the balance of this year would keep this aggregate within,
though near the lower end of, its current range. In 1991, M2 growth
should be bolstered by slightly faster income growth. Nevertheless, the
expansion of core deposits is expected to remain somewhat below the pro-
jected growth of income, though by a declining margin as lower offering
rates on deposits eventually serve as an inducement to substitute retail
deposits for managed liabilities or to extend credit.
(16) On balance, M2 growth is projected to be 4-1/2 percent in
tary restraint, placing moderate downward pressure on inflation on the
staff forecast, operating through both the credit mechanism and real in-
terest rates. But, owing to the velocity shift, the slow growth of M2
overstates the degree of monetary restraint. The counterpart of the
velocity shift is the redirection of credit flows out of depositories,
which by and large occurred at low cost and thus has relatively small
effects on spending. As can be seen on the charts, M2 velocity is pro-
jected to rise 2 percent in 1991 to an unusually high level. The rise in
M3 velocity is even more unusual in relation to its historical downward
trend (see chart). M2 shortfalls relative to the standard M2 demand and
offering rate models amount to 2-1/2 percentage points in 1990 and 1-1/2
percentage points in 1991.
(17) Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to con-
tinue to expand at around a 7 percent pace over the quarters just ahead
before decelerating next year to 6-1/2 percent as federal borrowing moder-
ates. The slowing of federal borrowing owes to deficit reduction measures
and RTC activities, which are expected to be financed increasingly through
the proceeds of asset sales. RTC borrowing adds 3/4 percentage point to
growth of the debt measure in 1990 and 1/2 percentage point in 1991. Debt
of nonfinancial sectors increases around 6 percent over the balance of
porations should continue growing around the reduced rate of the first
half of this year; the less favorable climate for corporate restructuring
leads to some reduction in borrowing to finance share retirements, while
weak profits and small advances in capital expenditures boost external
financing needs. In the household sector, borrowing is expected to remain
well below the pace of recent years as slow growth in consumer spending,
especially on durables, holds down expansion in consumer credit and rela-
tively weak real estate activity restrains mortgage borrowing.
(18) Against this background, the table below presents the cur-
rent ranges for 1990 and one alternative to take account of the shift in
velocity embodied in the staff forecast.
Money and Debt Growth in 1990
(QIV to QIV percent change)
Current
Range Alternative Projection
(19) The staff forecasts for M2 and debt fall within their cur-
rent ranges. M2 however, could well fall short of the range, and reten-
tion of this range might imply that the Committee would seriously consider
easing policy in such a case. If the risks were thought to be on the side
of a weaker economy, which would show through to M2 growth, the Committee
might want to retain this range and resist money falling below the range.
If, however the Committee thought there was a good chance that it would
not want to react to an M2 shortfall--because such a shortfall was more
likely to represent a further shift in money demand or a needed element of
additional restraint should spending and inflation turn out to be undesir-
ably strong--then it might want to adjust the M2 range downward, as in the
alternative presented. It seems highly probable that M3 will undershoot
its current range, with most of the weakness reflecting the contraction of
the thrift industry and the ready replacement of their home mortgage ac-
tivities through the mortgage securities market. In these circumstances,
the Committee could reduce the M3 range as a technical matter to take
account of the ongoing shift in credit flows, or it could announce to
Congress that it was deemphasizing the M3 range, in light of the thrift
effects, the size of which are highly uncertain.
(20) Many of the same issues present themselves in considering
ranges for 1991. The alternatives for M2 and M3 given below are the same
as given for 1990, but with a possible reduction in debt growth as well.
As in 1990, a reduction in the M2 range would take account of the expected
shift in its demand, and symbolize the Committee's commitment to disinfla-
tion, with the lower bound providing more scope in the context of the
demand shift to resist a resurgence in spending and inflation pressures.
Likewise, the M3 range might be lowered on account of the expected con-
tinued shrinkage of thrifts. Either the current or alternative ranges for
debt would easily encompass the staff's forecast. Carrying the 1990
ranges for M2 and M3 into 1991 might be especially appropriate at this
time since the usual uncertainties about conditions in the economy at the
end of 1990 are compounded by the difficulties of predicting the behavior
of monetary velocities. In addition, M2 growth close to the 7 percent
upper end of the existing range may be appropriate if there were a
substantial and sustained tightening of fiscal policy. In these circum-
stances, a more accommodative monetary policy, involving lower interest
rates and more rapid money growth, might be consistent with meeting the
Committee's objectives.
Money and Debt Growth in 1991
(QIV to QIV percent change)
Current
1990 Range Alternative Projection
M2
M3
Debt
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(21) Three near-term alternatives for monetary policy are pre-
sented below for Committee consideration. Under alternative B, federal
funds would continue to trade around 8-1/4 percent in association with
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window starting out at
$450 million. Alternative A embodies an expected federal funds rate of
incorporates a funds rate of 8-3/4 percent and borrowing of $500 million.
With seasonal borrowing typically rising another $75 million to its peak
in August, increases in the borrowing specification likely would be needed
as the intermeeting period progresses to keep the borrowing allowance
consistent with the expected funds rate under each alternative.
(22) Under alternative B, market interest rates probably would
vary around current levels. The structure of interest rates does not
appear to have built in strong convictions of a near-term adjustment to
monetary policy, but does contain a hint of a 1/4 percentage point decline
in the funds rate by fall. This impression could persist for some time,
if incoming data conform to the greenbook forecast of continued slow
economic growth and no visible change in price trends. Under these cir-
cumstances, the foreign exchange value of the dollar also should remain
around recent levels, absent unexpected repercussions of the economic and
monetary union in Germany or policy moves by other major trading partners.
Both interest and exchange rates could be affected, however, by develop-
ments regarding prospective federal borrowing. Unless RTC activity slows
appreciably after midyear, which the staff does not believe likely, Trea-
sury borrowing could raise federal debt to its current statutory ceiling,
possibly as soon as early August, adding uncertainty to the credit markets
by potentially disrupting the midquarter refunding. The approach of the
debt ceiling also could heighten expectations of an imminent budget
accord, and intensify speculation on a possible shift in monetary policy.
(23) Growth rates for the monetary aggregates projected to accom-
pany the three alternatives are presented in the table below. (The table
and charts on the following pages show more detailed data.) These growth
rates reflect the staff's assessment that the thrift restructuring and
other factors have reduced the path of money growth consistent with any
given combination of income and interest rates. Thus, even under the
essentially stable interest rates of alternative B, the staff now foresees
M2 increasing at a 3 percent annual rate from June to September, only a
little faster than in June, leaving this aggregate 3-1/2 percent at an
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from June
to September
Growth from QIV'89
to September
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
annual rate above its QIV 1989 base. 5 M2 velocity is projected to climb
at a 3-3/4 percent annual rate in the third quarter, about the same as in
the second quarter. Owing primarily to the continued rapid pace of RTC
activity, M3 is projected to grow at only a 1 percent rate from June to
September under alternative B, remaining well below its current range.
(24) Total domestic nonfinancial debt is seen as growing from
June to September at a 7 percent annual rate, keeping this aggregate
around the midpoint of its 5 to 9 percent annual range. However, the debt
of nonfederal sectors is projected to grow at around a 6 percent rate over
the third quarter, reflecting the impact of the sluggish outlook for
spending, some constriction in credit availability, and a more conserva-
tive attitude toward borrowing in this environment. Projected federal
debt growth from June to September remains at just over 8-1/2 percent,
incorporating continued heavy RTC activity.
(25) Under alternative A, the 1/2 percentage point drop in the
federal funds rate could be expected to show through nearly in full to
other money market rates, as market participants generally do not antici-
pate such an action in the period just ahead. This alternative also could
spark a bond market rally; given the market outlook for sluggish economic
activity, investors' inflation concerns probably would not be much inten-
sified by the choice of alternative A. The value of the dollar could be
expected to weaken on foreign exchange markets in response to the drop in
U.S. interest rates relative to returns abroad.
(26) Under alternative A, rates of return on retail deposits,
especially small time accounts, may be somewhat more responsive than
normal to declines in market rates, considering the already ample avail-
ability of retail deposits relative to the flat projected level of deposi-
tory credit. Even so, the public's opportunity costs of holding M2 bal-
ances would be expected to decline enough to stimulate growth in M2 to a
banks would not be expected to pick up much in response to the decline in
short-term rates in current circumstances of diminished willingness to
extend certain types of credit. Thus, an easing of monetary policy would
be less likely to work through increased money and credit supplies at
intermediaries, and would work more importantly through the movement of
rates in securities and foreign exchange markets. M3 from June to
September would be expected to expand at only a 1-1/2 percent rate,
placing growth from the fourth-quarter base of its annual range through
September at 1-1/4 percent.
(27) The tightening of monetary policy under alternative C would
not accord with the prevailing expectations of investors, and interest
rates across the maturity spectrum, along with the exchange value of the
dollar, would ratchet higher. The rise in longer-term yields could be
restrained by concerns about the resilience of economic activity, espe-
cially given the likelihood of some further tightening of credit avail-
ability, as well as by the implied lessening of future inflationary pres-
sures. The associated widening of opportunity costs, as market interest
rates rise relative to deposit and money fund rates, would serve to damp
M2 to a 1-1/2 percent rate of growth over the June-to-September period,
dropping that aggregate to around the lower end of its current range. M3
would be anticipated to slow to only a 1/2 percent pace over these months.
Directive Language
(28) Presented below for Committee consideration is draft
directive language relating to the ranges for 1990 and for 1991. The
first paragraph below is in usual form, including the standard options for
adjusting the ranges. In light of the high probability that M3 will run
below its current range, an alternative paragraph (29) is presented for
consideration in the event that the Committee would want to explain in the
directive the reasons for a decision to allow M3 growth to fall below its
range or to set a lower range for that aggregate. Draft wording for the
operational paragraph, with the usual options and updating, is presented
in paragraph (30).
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability,
promote growth in output on a sustainable basis, and con-
tribute to an improved pattern of international transac-
tions. In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee
REAFFIRMED at THIS [DEL: its] meeting THE RANGES IT HAD
ESTABLISHED in February [DEL: established ranges] for growth of M2
and M3 of 3 to 7 percent and 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent,
respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1989 to
the fourth quarter of 1990. [IN FURTHERANCE OF THESE
OBJECTIVES, THE COMMITTEE AT THIS MEETING RAISED/LOWERED
THE RANGES IT HAD ESTABLISHED IN FEBRUARY FOR GROWTH OF M2
AND M3 TO RANGES OF ____ TO ____ AND ____ TO ____ PERCENT
RESPECTIVELY, MEASURED FROM THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1989 TO
THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1990.] The monitoring range for
growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was ALSO
MAINTAINED [DEL: set] at 5 to 9 percent [WAS (ALSO) RAISED/
LOWERED TO ____ TO ____ PERCENT] for the year. FOR 1991 THE
COMMITTEE AGREED ON TENTATIVE RANGES FOR MONETARY GROWTH,
MEASURED FROM THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1990 TO THE FOURTH
QUARTER OF 1991, OF ____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR M2 AND ____ TO
____ PERCENT FOR M3. THE COMMITTEE PROVISIONALLY SET THE
ASSOCIATED MONITORING RANGE FOR GROWTH OF TOTAL DOMESTIC
NONFINANCIAL DEBT AT ____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR 1991.] The
behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be
evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and developments
in the economy and financial markets.
(29) Alternative if Committee decides to reduce the 1990 range
for M3 or permit growth below the range:
...... In furtherance of these objectives the
Committee reaffirmed at this meeting the range it had
established in February for M2 growth of 3 to 7 percent,
measured from the fourth quarter of 1989 to the fourth
quarter of 1990. The Committee also retained the monitor-
ing range of 5 to 9 percent for the year that it had set
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt. With
regard to M3, the Committee recognized that the ongoing
restructuring of thrift depository institutions had de-
pressed its growth relative to spending and total credit,
though to an uncertain extent. Taking account of the
outlook for unusually strong M3 velocity, the Committee
[that growth of M3 below the range for 1990 was
likely to be consistent with its objectives for
prices and the economy]
[to reduce the 1990 range to ____ to ____ percent].
For 1991 .... etc. (from top of page 27).
(30) Operational paragraph:
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/main-
tain/INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. Taking account of progress toward price
stability, the strength of the business expansion, the
behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments in
foreign exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly
(SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint (WOULD/ MIGHT) or
slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT)
be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
growth of M2 and M3 over the period from JUNE [DEL: March] through
SEPTEMBER [DEL: June] at annual rates of about ____ AND ____ 4 and 3
percent respectively. The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic
Operations that reserve conditions during the period before
the next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal
funds rate persistently outside a range of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 6 to 10]
ADOPTED LONGER-RUN GROWTH RATE RANGES FOR THE MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES
rcent annual rates; numbers in parentheses are actual growth rates as reported
period in February Monetary Policy Report to Congress)
at end of policy
QIV 1978 - QIV
QIV 1979 - QIV
QIV 1980 - QIV
QIV 1981 - QIV
QIV 1982 - QIV
QIV 1983 - QIV
QIV 1984 - QIV
QIV 1985 - QIV
QIV 1986 - QIV
QIV 1987 - QIV
V 1988 - QIV
IV 1989 - QIV
n.s.--not specified.
n.s
n.s
Bank Credit or
Domestic Non-
financial Debt
(8.8) 6
*Growth rates in parentheses are QIV 1989 to June 1990, except QIV to May for debt.
1. Targets are for bank credit until 1983; from 1983 onward targets are for domestic
nonfinancial sector debt.
2. At the February 1979 meeting the FOMC adopted a QIV'78 to QIV'79 range for Ml of 1-1/2
to 4-1/2 percent. This range anticipated that shifting to ATS and NOW accounts in New
York State would slow Ml growth by 3 percentage points. At the October meeting it was
noted that ATS/NOW shifts would reduce M1 by no more than 1-1/2 percentage points. Thus,
the longer-run range for M1 was modified to 3-6 percent.
3. The figures shown reflect target and actual growth of Ml-B in 1980 and shift-adjusted
M1-B in 1981. M1-B was relabeled M1 in January 1982. The targeted growth for Mi-A was 3-
1/2 to 6 percent in 1980 (actual growth was 5.0 percent); in 1981 targeted growth for
shift-adjusted M1-A was 3 to 5-1/2 percent (actual growth was 1.3 percent).
4. When these ranges were set, shifts into other checkable deposits in 1980 were.expected
to have only a limited effect on growth of M1-A and MI-B. As the year progressed,
however, banks offered other checkable deposits more actively, and more funds than
expected were directed to these accounts. Such shifts are estimated to have decreased Ml-
A growth and increased M1-B growth each by at least 1/2 percentage point more than had
been anticipated.
(Footnotes are continued on next page)
(Footnotes continued)
June 29, 1990
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long Term
S I | CDs | | money | | corporate I I conventional home mortages
Sfederal I Treasury bills secondary comm market | bank U.S government constant | A utility municipal I secondary I
funds secondarymarket market paper | mutual prime maturtyylelds I recently I Bond | maiket pilmary market
S___ -mnlvh | -mon |th |fund - hloanr offered I-Buye.i| fixed rate |i edt rate I ARM
Monthly
Jun 89
Jul 89
Aug 89
Sep 89
Oct 89
Nov 89
Dec 89
Jan 90
Feb 90
Mar 90
Apr 90
May 90
p -- preliminary data
I I:
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II 
F O M C
Seasonally adjusted JUN. 29, 1990
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
in M2 in M3 only investments
QUARTERLY AVERAGE
1989-3rd QTR.
1989-4th QTR.
1990-1st QTR.
1990-2nd QTR. pe
MONTHLY
1989-JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
LEVELS ($BILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
MEEKLY
1990-MAY
derived by averaging end-of-month levels of adjacent months, and have been
adjusted to remove
L
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Class II FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted JUN. 29, 1990
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds denomi- Short- Bankers
Demand checkable RPI and Savings nation general Institu, nation Term Term Savings term Commer- accep
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars MMDAs deposits time purpose lions time RPs Eurodollars bonds Treasury cial paper' tances
NSA' deposit' and broker only deposits' NSA' NSA' securities
LEVELS ($BILLIONS) :
ANNUALLY (4TH QTR.
MONTHLY
1989-MAY
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
subtracted from small time deposits.
APR.
MAY
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjustedJuly 2, 1990
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasury coupons Federal Net change
. Net puchases 3 agencies outright
Period Net Redemp- Net within 1 Red-ap- Net redemptions holdings
Memo: LEVEL (bil.$)
June 27
and
Excludes
purchase sale transactions (+).
6. The levels of agency issues were
as follows:
June 27
- - - - - - --
