Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
August 17, 1990
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC August 17, 1990
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Pressures on reserve positions were eased slightly in mid-
July in response to indications that conditions in credit markets had
tightened further. With money growth lagging and activity showing no
signs of picking up, such a tightening was viewed as potentially exerting
undue restraint on an already sluggish economy. In an effort to offset
the effects of this influence, the borrowing assumption was reduced by $50
million to $400 million and the federal funds rate dropped by 1/4 percent-
age point to near 8 percent, where it generally has remained over the
balance of the intermeeting period.1
(2) Largely in reaction to the System's easing of reserve condi-
tions, short-term interest rates dropped about 30 basis points between the
July FOMC meeting and the end of that month. The decline in rates also
seemed to reflect some expectation of an additional easing in response to
data portraying a weaker trajectory for the economy. Bond yields were
unchanged on balance through the end of July. But the Iraqi invasion of
Kuwait at the beginning of August and the prospect of higher energy prices
propelled long-term rates upward in volatile trading. The rise in rates
was spurred by concerns about inflation, in light of the experience of the
the financial and economic outlook and pessimism about prospects for a
budget accord. Bond yields are up as much as 1/2 percentage point since
the end of July and broad measures of stock prices, some of which had
reached record highs earlier in the intermeeting period, are down about
dipped briefly when the events in the Middle East prompted an apparent
increased preference for liquidity, have backed up recently, partly on
disappointing inflation readings taken before the jump in oil prices. On
balance since the July meeting, most money market rates are down 15 to 25
basis points. Although Treasury securities benefited from a flight to
quality for a time in early August, there has been little net change in
spreads between money market rates, or between rates in longer-term
(3) The easing of short-term interest rates in the United States
and some signs of tightening abroad, along with expectations that these
divergent trends would continue, appeared to contribute to the decline in
the dollar on foreign exchange markets since the last Committee meeting.
Short-term interest rates rose about 1/4 percentage points in both Japan
and in Germany over the period. Long-term rates in those countries in-
creased 80 and 25 basis points, respectively, and their stock markets
posted substantial losses after the runup in oil prices. The dollar's
depreciation, which was interrupted for a time after the invasion of
Kuwait, totalled about 5-1/4 percent on a weighted average basis over the
intermeeting period. The price of gold surged above $400 per ounce in
recent weeks, likely reflecting both safe-haven motives and inflation
The U.S.
Treasury accounted for about $400 million
against marks.
These purchases along with some made earlier enabled the Treasury to un-
wind on July 31 a $2 billion warehousing operation with the System, leav-
ing $7 billion outstanding on that facility.
(4) Money growth remained sluggish in July. M2 increased at a
June-to-September period. Both aggregates remained in the lower portions
of their annual ranges. M1 and M2 growth in July was held down--by
about 3-1/2 and 1 percentage points, respectively--by the introduction of
a reserve-avoidance practice at one bank holding company. Even
abstracting from this effect, however, M2 growth in July remained low
relative to econometric model forecasts. One possible contributor to this
weakness was the flurry of RTC activity at the end of June, working its
way through deposit flows and asset stocks. Data for early August suggest
in effect, sweeping OCDs into large time deposits each night, thereby
reducing transaction deposits and required reserves.
that growth in the aggregates is rebounding. Apart from the cessation of
the shift in OCDs to large time, the strengthening of M2 in August could
be reflecting the narrowing of opportunity costs on money assets, as
short-term market interest rates have dropped markedly from their peaks in
the spring. In addition, the sharp fall in prices in capital markets
reportedly prompted large transfers from bond and stock funds into money
market mutual fund shares.
(5) The growth of private sector credit in July remained at the
more moderate pace established this year. Borrowing by nonfinancial busi-
nesses evidently slackened last month: Gross bond issuance dropped back
from June's high level, outstanding commercial paper declined, and C&I
loans edged down. Responses to the Federal Reserve's latest survey of
senior loan officers provide additional evidence that banks have become
increasingly selective in recent months in granting credit to businesses
and have tightened both price and nonprice terms further. The tightening
of terms seems to have spread to larger firms; banks have become espe-
cially selective on commercial real estate loans. Only a few banks, how-
ever, reported any tightening of standards for single-family home mort-
gages, and banks on balance signalled another small increase in their
willingness to make consumer loans. Nevertheless, household borrowing
appears to have been quite soft. Consumer installment credit barely edged
up in June, and consumer loans at banks remained weak in July, even ab-
stracting from the securitizations that removed large blocks of credit
card receivables from bank balance sheets. Similarly, what little current
information is available suggests that mortgage credit growth has remained
noticeably below last year's pace. By contrast to the other nonfinancial
sectors, federal debt growth has stayed rapid, boosted by the funding
needs of the thrift bailout. As a result, the debt aggregate apparently
has remained around the midpoint of its 5 to 9 percent annual range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'89
to
May June July July
Money and credit aggregates
Reserves measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
n.a. - Not available.
1. Through June.
2. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
Policy Alternatives
(6) The three usual options for monetary policy over the coming
intermeeting period are discussed below beginning on page 9. The choice
among those options is complicated by the potential adverse effects on
U.S. economic performance of the recent surge in oil prices and by uncer-
tainties about their future course. An increase in the price of imported
oil transfers real income and wealth to foreign suppliers, reducing domes-
tic demand, and thereby tending to depress real output. The shift in
demand cannot be offset by policy actions without additional adverse price
consequences; higher energy prices constitute a supply shock that presents
less favorable attainable combinations of economic activity and inflation
in the short run. Price pressures arise not only directly from the rising
prices of final energy products, but also indirectly as higher costs for
energy inputs are passed through to prices of other goods and services.
Price effects will be amplified if heightened inflationary expectations or
pressures to recoup real wage losses add an upward thrust to nominal labor
costs. Finally, for as long as energy supplies are reduced, labor produc-
tivity and the economy's potential output associated with a fully employed
labor force will be lowered, with the amount of the reduction dependent on
the adaptability of the capital stock to less energy-intensive production
(7) In the face of the less favorable set of inflation and out-
put choices, and of uncertainty about how the economic responses would
evolve--especially should the higher oil prices persist--one approach
might be to try to limit the odds of either a cumulating shortfall of
output or a sustained acceleration in inflation. This objective would be
fostered by maintaining growth of nominal spending along the path pre-
viously thought consistent with policy objectives. This strategy has
self-correcting characteristics over time. For example, a large increase
in prices would necessarily involve an offsetting sizeable shortfall in
output, and the resulting slack in the economy would over time counter any
tendency for inflation to accelerate; the deceleration of inflation in
turn implies a strengthening in the rate of change of output, ultimately
limiting its shortfall, as nominal income growth is maintained. As it
happens, simulations of the staff's large-scale macro model suggest that
nominal GNP can be maintained along its baseline path by following essen-
tially the same monetary policy as in the absence of the oil price shock.
To a first approximation, the same path for short-term interest rates in
the face of a $10 per barrel increase in the price of oil would lower real
output 1 percent after a year and raise the GNP deflator 1 percent (though
the increase in the CPI would be appreciably greater). With the same
pattern of nominal GNP and opportunity costs, the public's demand for M2
also would be unaltered.
(8) Should the Committee wish to place more weight on countering
risks of recession, seeking to ensure continued moderate economic growth,
it could run an easier policy than otherwise. Such a policy would accept
not only a once-and-for-all increase in the price level associated with
higher oil prices but also the risk of some ratcheting up of inflation
expectations and inflation itself for an extended period. On the other
hand, if the Committee saw greater risks of a substantial pickup in
inflation or attached more importance to avoiding significant deviations
from a path toward price stability, a tighter policy than otherwise would
be appropriate. Under this policy, economic slack would be greater,
especially in the near term, but this would establish a downtrend in the
inflation rate sooner. These alternatives would be most relevant should
oil prices be expected to persist at their current high levels, or to go
higher. A sense that oil price increases might reverse fairly soon would
argue for tempering any such policy response to the oil shock.
(9) The three short-run monetary policy alternatives presented
below embody unchanged, decreased, and increased pressures in the reserve
market. Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to trade around
seasonal borrowing at the discount window of $500 million. Under alterna-
tive A, the drop in the federal funds rate to 7-1/2 percent would accom-
pany a reduction in borrowed reserves to roughly $450 million, while the
about $550 million in borrowing. With adjustment borrowing likely to
remain subdued, as generally has been the case this year, and with sea-
sonal borrowing anticipated to begin its normal annual downtrend later in
the intermeeting period, technical reductions in the borrowing specifica-
tion may be needed to keep the federal funds rate around its intended
trading area under each of the alternatives.
(10) Projected growth rates for the monetary aggregates associ-
ated with the alternatives are indicated in the table below. (The table
and charts on the following pages show more detailed data.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from June
to September
Growth from Q4'89
to September
(11) Market participants no longer seem to be expecting a near-
term easing in policy, and short-term rates would be unlikely to move
substantially on balance with federal funds remaining near 8 percent under
alternative B. Absent a significant change in oil prices, long-term
interest rates may stay around recent elevated levels. Scope for a rally
in bond markets seems to exist should a budget accord involving signif-
icant deficit reduction be reached after all, counter to current investor
skepticism. The exchange value of the dollar would be unlikely to retrace
much, if any, of its decline since the last Committee meeting.
(12) M2 growth is expected to pick up in August and September to
a 5-1/4 percent average rate, bringing its expansion from June to a 4 per-
cent rate, 1 percentage point faster than the pace specified by the Com-
mittee at its last meeting. In addition to the special factors producing
more rapid growth of OCDs and money market funds in August relative to
July, the acceleration in M2 owes to the narrowing of opportunity costs
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 Ml
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
over recent months. Even so, weak credit growth at depository institu-
tions is likely to continue to foster lower offering rates on small time
deposits and restrain growth of core deposits. Later in the quarter, the
RTC is expected to undertake a spate of resolutions, and the renewal of
transfers of deposits to banks should result in additional abrogations of
brokered deposit contracts and more downward pressure on offering rates.
Quarterly average growth of M2 would be held to only 2-1/2 percent, and M2
velocity this quarter would increase at a 3 percent rate, the same as in
the second quarter; the increases in velocity in both quarters are about
(13) Under alternative B, M3 over August and September is pro-
jected to expand at a 3-1/2 percent average rate, implying growth of 2-1/2
percent from June to September. The pickup in M3 does not reflect a pro-
jected acceleration in credit at depository institutions. Rather, it re-
flects some strength in elements of this aggregate that are not direct
funding sources to such institutions--money market mutual funds and term-
Eurodollar deposits.5 Bank lending is projected to stay subdued as banks
continue to exercise extra caution in extending credit, while thrift
balance sheets will shrink further, especially as RTC activities pick up
over the balance of the quarter. Even so, the debt of nonfederal sectors
an upward revision to projected M3 growth for 1990--from 1-1/2 to 2
percent.
is projected to continue to grow at a 6 percent rate over the third
quarter, about in line with nominal income. Federal debt growth, on the
other hand, is expected to balloon to a 14 percent annual rate over the
three months, as RTC working capital needs boost federal marketable
borrowing to a record $68 billion level (n.s.a.). Total domestic non-
financial debt growth as a consequence is projected at 7-3/4 percent over
the three months, keeping this aggregate around the midpoint of its annual
(14) The easing of reserve market conditions under alternative A
would engender a like-sized decline in short-term interest rates. The
response of long-term interest rates to an easing is unclear. If incoming
information suggests sluggish economic growth or tighter credit condi-
tions, inflation concerns may not be heightened further by the policy
easing, and bond yields would fall. However, especially in the context of
the oil price shock, if the easing were interpreted as signalling greater
concern by the FOMC with maintaining output growth than with containing
inflation, the decline in the dollar could be particularly sharp, and bond
yields could rise. M2, and to a lesser extent M3, would be a bit stronger
under alternative A than with an unchanged funds rate; the staff projects
growth rates from June to September of 4-1/2 percent for M2 and 2-3/4
percent for M3.
(15) Under alternative C, a considerable backup in short-term
rates would appear likely, as a monetary policy tightening would fly in
the face of market expectations. Long-term rates might rise only a
little, as the increase in real interest rates would be at least partly
offset by a lessening in inflation expectations. The moderation in
inflation expectations would accompany a further downward adjustment of
market participants' outlook for real economic activity--as the effects of
higher real rates were reinforced by an even more cautious attitude of
lenders--and evidence that the Federal Reserve was leaning against the
price effects of the oil shock. The dollar could find renewed strength on
foreign exchange markets as interest differentials moved in favor of
dollar investments. M2 and M3 growth over the third quarter would be
restrained to 3-1/2 and 2-1/4 percent, respectively.
Directive Language
(16) Draft language for the operational paragraph, including the
usual options, is shown below.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. Taking account of progress toward price stability,
the strength of the business expansion, the behavior of the
monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and
domestic financial markets, (SOMEWHAT) slightly greater re-
serve restraint (WOULD) might or somewhat (SLIGHTLY) lesser
reserve restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable in the inter-
meeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are
expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the
period from June through September at annual rates of about
___ AND ____ [DEL: 3 and 1] percent respectively. The Chairman may call
for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the period
before the next meeting are likely to be associated with a
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of ____ TO
____ [DEL: 6 to 10] percent.
August 20, 1990
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short Term I Long Term
S CDs ) money corporate I conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary I comm market bank US government constant A ulliy J municipal I secondary I
funds secondary market marketl paper mutual prime malurtly yields recently Bond markel primary market
p -- prelUmnary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II
Seasonally adjusted AUG. 20, 1990
Money stock measures end liquid asets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontranmactlons total loah U.S.
Period Mi M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
INN. GROWTH RATES 1%) :
ANNUALLY (Q4 TO Q4)
LEVELS ($BILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMCComponents of Money Stock and Related Measures
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted AUG. 20, 1990
. Small Money market Large
Demand checkable RPs and Savings nation general Institu' nation Term Term Savings term Commer- accp-
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars MMDAs deposits time purpose tions time RPs Eurodollars bonds Treasury cial paper' ances
NSA' deposits' and broker/ only deposits' NSA' NSA' securities
MONTHLY
1989-JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY p
nstitutions are subtracted from small time deposits.
ET CRUnGS IN g8Tra KDIMS or sa CRITIES1
August 20, 1990 Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRI'.TLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasury coupon.s Fedral Net change
epu tont purchases ton ) agencies outright
Memo: lEL (bil.$)
August 15
Change from end-of-period to end-of-period.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts,
short-term notes acquired in exchange for maturing bills.
maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing coupon issues.
purchase sale transactions (+).
6. The levels of agency issues were
as follows:
Aug. 15
securities.
(-), and matched
- - -
