Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
February 2, 1990
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC February 2, 1990
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) The federal funds rate eased from 8-1/2 percent to the vicin-
ity of 8-1/4 percent immediately after the December FOMC meeting, follow-
ing the decision at that meeting to seek a slightly more accommodative
stance of policy. Funds traded near 8-1/4 percent throughout the inter-
meeting period, except for some firming in the last week of the year owing
to reserve shortfalls and year-end pressures. Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing ran above the $125 million allowance during the intermeeting
period, averaging $309 million over the three completed maintenance
periods. Initially, the above-path borrowing reflected the reserve short-
falls and a propensity for larger institutions to borrow over the long
holiday weekends. Most recently, borrowing by the Bank of New England has
boosted adjustment credit considerably.1 Abstracting from borrowing by
this institution, adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaged $160 million
in the statement period ending January 24, and $125 million through the
first eight days of the current maintenance period.
(2) Conditions in capital markets deteriorated over the inter-
meeting period, as bond yields surged about 1/2 percentage point and stock
indexes plunged nearly 8 percent from highs registered at the start of the
year. Bond yields began to rise right after the December meeting as in-
coming information on the economy and prices was seen as pointing away
from recession and as suggesting little if any moderation in underlying
inflation trends. As a result, investors apparently reevaluated prospects
for an extended period of policy easing. By mid-January, tightening mone-
tary policy abroad and published reports that certain Board members would
not support easing policy at that time sparked a backup in short-term
rates and pushed long-term rates up further. A striking aspect of inter-
est rate developments during the intermeeting period was the parallel
surge in bond yields worldwide--about 50 basis points in Germany and near-
ly 100 basis points in Japan, where political worries also came into play.
As in the United States, these developments partly reflected growing ex-
pectations of a bias toward a less accommodative monetary policy in the
context of heightened concerns about inflation. In addition, however, the
historic changes now taking place in Europe may have signalled the pros-
pect of significantly greater economic opportunities there, as evidenced
by the relatively strong performance of the German stock market. A re-
direction of global asset demands, particularly out of Japan, to take
advantage of the higher expected real returns associated with those
opportunities would be consistent with investors requiring higher real
returns in U.S. markets and elsewhere, as well as with the observed
weakening of both the dollar and the yen against continental European
(3) Spreads between private and Treasury rates narrowed over the
intermeeting interval, except in the junk bond market where they were
relatively constant. Returns on private instruments at the 3-month matur-
ity declined about 1/4 point and the 3-month Treasury bill rate rose about
and both investment-grade bonds and mortgage instruments. Some narrowing
might have been expected on the basis of the passing of year-end pres-
sures, and the usual lags of rates on private paper behind Treasury
yields. But the extent is somewhat surprising, especially in light of
concerns about commercial banks' real estate portfolios and the deterio-
rating condition of a number of highly leveraged borrowers. Supply con-
siderations may have contributed: Corporate and municipal borrowing
dropped to unusually low levels, especially in bond markets; at the same
time attention began to be given to the possibility of considerable addi-
tional government borrowing to support the thrift bailout, and the private
sector has had to absorb greater amounts of bills as Federal Reserve and
foreign official holdings ran down.
(4) The decline in the dollar against the mark amounted to 3-1/4
percent. However, the dollar was relatively firm against the currencies
of Japan and Canada.
; the Desk sold $600 million
against the yen. On a weighted-average basis, the dollar fell 2-1/2 per-
cent over the intermeeting period.
(5) Growth in M2 slowed in January, owing primarily to a decline
in transaction deposits.2 M2 expanded at about a 5 percent rate last
month, bringing growth over December and January to 6-1/2 percent, below
the 8-1/2 percent pace expected at the December FOMC meeting. As of
January, M2 stood just below the upper end of its tentative 1990 range.
Growth of the nontransaction component of M2 in January moderated somewhat
from its rapid pace of late 1989, despite a pickup of inflows to money
market mutual funds, which reportedly benefitted from flows out of weaken-
ing stock and bond markets. Demand deposits plunged at a 9 percent annual
rate, after a 4 percent growth rate in December, and OCDs grew at only a
deposits have been especially weak over time, and have retreated to their
June 1989 level despite the subsequent policy easing.3  Still, with cur-
rency surging at a 14 percent annual rate in January, M1 eked out a
(6) M3 increased at around a 3-1/4 percent rate in December and
January--compared with the 5-1/2 percent pace expected by the Committee--
and is slightly below the lower limit of its tentative 1990 range.5
Runoffs of managed liabilities at thrifts accelerated in December and
January relative to November. Commercial bank managed liabilities in M3
dropped over the two months; bank credit declined in December--the first
decrease in 10 years--and the modest increase in January was funded
through continued brisk inflows of core deposits.
(7) In line with the weakness in bank credit, nonfinancial debt
growth likely slowed around year-end. The business sector has trimmed
borrowing the most, particularly in the area of highly leveraged transac-
tions, where activity has been slashed by softer business conditions and
tighter standards at lenders. Bond issuance has slackened with the rise
in interest rates, and C&I lending at banks contracted between November
and January. Commercial paper issuance has remained brisk, however, per-
haps reflecting the long delay in lowering the prime rate. (C&I lending
does appear to have rebounded and commercial paper issuance weakened some
in the weeks since the prime was cut.) Federal debt growth slowed tem-
porarily in December and January, and bond issuance also has eased in the
municipal sector so far this year. The expansion of consumer credit
strengthened in December, as weak auto-related borrowing was offset by
increased balances held on credit cards; at banks, growth of consumer
credit was well maintained into January. Mortgage borrowing appears to
have expanded at about a steady 9 percent rate in the fourth quarter.
However, bank real estate lending slowed in January, perhaps reflecting
the recent backup in interest rates and a tightening of nonprice terms for
commercial lending.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Nov. QIV'89
to to
Nov. Dec. Jan.p  Jan.p  Jan.p
Money and credit agqregates1
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
p - preliminary.
1. Data on the monetary aggregates incorporate the results of the 1990 bench-
mark and seasonal review.
2. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
Long-run strategies
(8) As background for Committee consideration of the ranges for
money and credit for 1990, the table below presents three alternative
longer-run strategies for monetary policy through 1994 and their conse-
quences for output and prices. Strategy I is the baseline forecast, en-
compassing the staff greenbook projections and associated policy assump-
tions for 1990 and 1991, with an extension through 1994 based on the
staff's large-scale econometric model, simulated with a presumed policy
objective of gradual progress toward price stability over time. In this
model, inflation expectations are formed on the basis of past inflation
and embody no independent "credibility effects" concerning Federal Reserve
intentions. Strategies II and III embody somewhat tighter and easier
monetary policies, respectively, as indexed by M2 growth 1 percentage
M2
I (baseline)
II (tighter)
III (easier)
Prices: GNP fixed-
weight price index
I
II
III
Real GNP
I
II
III
Unemployment rate
I
II
III
to QIV percent
(fourth-quarter level)
point above or below the baseline scenario. The outcomes associated with
these two strategies are derived as deviations from the baseline using the
econometric model.
(9) Under the baseline strategy policy imposes enough restraint,
through moderate upward movement in nominal and real interest rates, to
keep real GNP growth below its potential through 1991 and until 1992.
This induces a gradual increase in the unemployment rate to 6-1/4 percent
by 1992, somewhat above its assumed natural rate of 5-1/2 to 5-3/4 per-
cent. The added slack, which is maintained through the projection hori-
zon, fosters an easing of the inflation rate beginning in 1992, although
the assumption that the exchange value of the dollar stabilizes in 1992
after a period of moderate depreciation also contributes. Inflation is
reduced by about 1/3 percentage point per year, getting down to 3-1/4
percent by 1994. The slowing in inflation and nominal GNP after 1992
occurs despite a slight pickup in M2 growth, which is boosted by a drop in
nominal rates in those years (in line with the drop in inflation), and as-
sociated small decreases in velocity.
(10) Under the tighter policy of strategy II, inflation is
brought down more rapidly, but at the cost of temporarily greater slack in
the economy. The slower M2 growth of this strategy requires a more force-
ful increaes in nominal short-term interest rates through 1991. With the
accompanying higher real values of both interest and exchange rates rela-
tive to the base case, both real domestic demand and net exports are more
restrained, and the unemployment rate is farther above its natural rate.
Inflation decelerates 1/2 percentage point in 1993 and in 1994, ending up
at 2 percent, more than 1 percentage point below its pace in the base
case. By 1994, nominal interest rates have fallen a bit below their base
case levels, given the moderation in inflation. Were the results of the
early tightening under this alternative to strengthen people's convictions
about the Federal Reserve's commitment to attain price stability, nominal
interest rates would be still lower and progress against inflation could
be achieved with less slack in the economy.
(11) The easier policy of strategy III accommodates real GNP
near its potential after 1990, keeping the unemployment rate below 6 per-
cent, in the vicinity of its natural rate. Inflation increases a little
through 1992 owing to a more rapid depreciation of the dollar, before
stabilizing just below 5 percent. After declining this year, nominal
short-term interest rates would need to rise in 1991 and 1992 to hold M2
expansion to only 1 percentage point above the base case, given the faster
nominal GNP growth.
(12) Inflation rate predictions derived from the staff's P* model
are presented below for the same three M2 growth strategies. By the end
of the forecast horizon, the results of the P* model are essentially the
same as those of the simulations reported above. The pattern of price
movements in the intervening years is somewhat different, however. Infla-
tion is slightly lower in the near term in the P* simulations than in the
large-scale model simulations, likely owing to the influence of assumed
dollar depreciation on price forecasts in the judgmental projection that
provided the baseline for the latter projections. Moreover, the P* model
gives a somewhat different flavor than the other simulations for inflation
in 1995 and beyond. In the baseline case, the price level is equal to P*
at the end of 1994, implying no downward pressures on inflation at that
time; but in the large-model simulation the unemployment rate at the end
of 1994 is above its natural rate, which is consistent with a further
slowing of price increases.
P* MODEL SIMULATIONS
(QIV to QIV percent change)
Prices: GNP fixed-
Long-run ranges
(13) The table below shows the tentative ranges adopted last July
for growth of money and the debt of nonfinancial sectors over 1990, along
with three alternatives. (Appendix B gives the ranges and outcomes for
money and debt growth since 1978.) Alternative II might be considered
roughly equivalent to the current tentative ranges, with technical adjust-
ments to take account of the effects of thrift restructuring on M3 and of
ebbing equity retirements on debt growth, both of which are larger than
contemplated when the tentative ranges were adopted. Alternative I would
allow for a somewhat easier policy and alternative III somewhat tighter.
TENTATIVE AND ALTERNATIVE 1990 RANGES
Tentative Memo: Staff
Ranges Alt. I Alt. II Alt. III Forecast
Percent Growth
from QIV '89
to QIV '90
(14) M2 would be expected to grow about 6-1/2 percent in 1990
under the greenbook forecast of 5-3/4 percent nominal GNP growth, with
interest rates remaining around recent levels. The lagged effects of
decreases in market interest rates through the end of last year should
continue to boost M2 demand early in 1990, accounting for the slight de-
cline in velocity for the year (shown on chart 1).7 The increase in M2
is in the middle of the range of model forecasts. However, the M2 projec-
tion is subject to some downside risk from thrift restructuring. As
thrifts are closed in 1990, substantial amounts of core deposits are ex-
pected to shift to commercial banks; in reaction, banks may trim rates on
retail deposits, which would restrain M2. The M1 component of M2 is ex-
pected to increase 4 percent in 1990.8 The rise in M1 velocity would be
a little more than its underlying trend, despite the carryover effect of
lower interest rates; demand deposits are projected to continue their
relatively weak performance, which may reflect ongoing shifts from com-
pensating balances to fees to pay for bank services.
(15) M3 will be substantially affected by the shrinkage of the
thrift industry. The extent and effect of the restructuring is difficult
to foresee. At this time, the staff projects that total assets at SAIF-
insured institutions could decline on the order of $130 billion this year,
as compared with a previous trend of asset growth that would have implied
a $60 to $70 billion increase. Some of these assets will be absorbed by
the RTC as it resolves institutions, and be financed, we assume, by
government or agency debt, not by liabilities in M3. Banks are likely
to acquire a substantial portion of assets that would otherwise have been
held by thrifts, but the bulk, even of those assets outside the RTC, will
end up with other holders. The staff expects growth in bank credit out-
side of mortgage assets to moderate a little further in 1990, as demand
eases off with the slowing in nominal income growth and as capital re-
quirements and concern about credit quality reduce the incentives to
supply credit. On net the total of credit intermediated through depos-
itories likely will remain quite subdued in 1990. The damping of associ-
ated funding needs will be mirrored in substantial runoffs of managed
liabilities, including those in M3, holding the growth of M3 once again
below that of M2. M3 is projected to grow 4 percent over 1990, up a
little from 1989, as the pickup in funding from M2 core deposits replaces
some non-M3 managed liabilities as well as those in M3.
(16) Growth of the debt of nonfinancial sectors is projected to
slow to 7 percent in 1990 from 8 percent in 1989. To a degree, this re-
flects greater caution in granting credit in the face of a soft economy
and rising credit difficulties. This effect is most apparent in the
reduced pace of corporate restructurings, which account for close to half
of the deceleration. The restructuring of the thrift industry, which is
greatly affecting the channels of mortgage financing, is not expected to
have a major impact on the cost and availability of residential mortgage
credit, though there reportedly are dislocations in access to construction
financing. Diversified lenders are likely to continue to fill the gap
left by the thrifts, as they apparently did in the second half of 1989,
when spreads of rates on mortgages over Treasury issues remained constant
over the second half of the year in the face of major decreases in thrift
mortgage holdings. Federal government borrowing should decelerate in 1990
as the budget deficit narrows; the latter development is contingent on RTC
working capital being raised outside the federal sector.10 On balance, the
slowing of debt growth is not much more than the slowing of nominal GNP,
and the velocity of debt (see chart 2) is projected to continue to de-
(17) As noted above, alternative II could be considered equiv-
alent to the tentative ranges adopted in July. The staff projection of
nominal GNP and associated M2 growth over 1990 is little different than in
July, so that keeping the 3 to 7 percent range for that aggregate implies,
as it did last July, about the same greater scope for a tighter than for
an easier policy relative to that in the staff forecast. The reductions
in the M3 and debt ranges do not reflect a tighter policy stance. In the
case of debt the decrease is roughly comparable to the staff's reduced es-
timate of net equity retirements, rather than a decrease in funds to
finance spending. The reduction in the M3 range recognizes that a smaller
share of mortgage flows will be financed by depository institutions. The
decline in the M3 range of only 1/2 percentage point represents only 1/4
of the estimated effect of the rechanneling of flows on M3 growth. In the
absence of the thrift restructuring, the staff likely would be projecting
about 6 percent M3 growth, unchanged from that projected last July.
(18) The higher upper end of the M2 range in alternative I allows
greater scope for an easier monetary policy should the Committee wish to
foster a stronger economy in 1990 (more in line with strategy III) albeit
with less chance of making progress on inflation in later years. In addi-
tion, the higher upper end of the range would provide room for a more
expansionary policy to counter an unexpected shortfall in aggregate de-
mand. For example, simulations with the model suggest that 7-1/2 percent
M2 growth for the year, and a drop of about 1 percentage point in interest
rates, would be needed to achieve the fourth-quarter level of real GNP in
the staff forecast if there were a 1/2 percent shortfall in demand in the
first half of the year. The lowered M3 and debt ranges still would allow
for considerably more rapid M3 and debt growth than in the staff forecast,
and thus are consistent with the faster M2 possible under this
(19) Alternative III would lower all the ranges from their tenta-
tive levels, and might be considered most consistent with strategy II
above, intended to make more certain progress in slowing inflation.
Although the tentative M2 range would allow for a substantially tighter
policy than assumed in the forecast, the 6-1/2 percent upper limit of the
M2 range of alternative III conveys an intention to respond promptly and
forcefully to any tendency for inflation pressures to intensify. The M2
range of this alternative also would tend to constrain any easing response
to a weaker economy, signalling a willingness to take risks on that side
to better assure a lessening of price pressures. The M3 and debt growth
ranges would be reduced by 1 percentage point to allow room for the slower
growth that might be associated with a tighter policy, given expectations
for sluggish growth in these measures under the staff forecast.
Short-run policy alternatives
(20) Three short-run alternatives are given below for Committee
consideration. Alternative B involves federal funds continuing to trade
in the 8-1/4 percent vicinity, in association with adjustment plus sea-
sonal borrowing of $150 million. The 7-3/4 percent funds rate for al-
ternative A appears roughly consistent with $100 million of borrowing,
while the 8-3/4 percent funds rate of alternative C would be accompanied
by about $200 million of borrowing. The borrowing levels for all three
alternatives abstract from any special-situation adjustment borrowing by
the Bank of New England, but incorporate an upward technical adjustment of
$25 million in part to take account of the initial stages of the typical
upswing in seasonal borrowing from January lows. Further adjustments
likely will need to be made later in the intereeting period as seasonal
borrowing continues to rise. Under alternative B, adjustment credit may
average only $75 million, not far above the frictional amount, as the
reluctance of depositories to tap the window for such credit is rein-
forced by questions about the general health of the banking industry that
are raised by developments in the real estate and LBO lending areas and by
the problems of the Bank of New England. The Desk would be expected to
continue to exercise flexibility in its approach to the borrowing assump-
(21) The anticipated paths for the monetary aggregates from
December to March for the three alternatives are shown in the table
below.11 (More detailed data appear in the table and charts on the fol-
lowing pages.) Under all the alternatives, the outlook for M2 and M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from Dec.
to March
growth from December to March appears weaker than at the time of the last
FOMC meeting. The easing at that meeting has not shown through in Trea-
sury bill rates as it has in private short-term rates, limiting declines
in average opportunity costs on M2 balances. In addition, nominal income
has been revised down, and the shortfall in demand deposits is showing
through into the broader aggregates. The staff now foresees the level of
M2 in March in the vicinity of, rather than noticeably above, the 7 per-
cent upper bound of its tentative annual growth rate range under all the
alternatives. Based on the experience in December and January, the out-
look is for less buoyant bank credit and larger declines in thrift managed
liabilities than foreseen at the last FOMC meeting. As a result, M3 by
March is predicted to be around the 3-1/2 percent lower bound of its ten-
tative range under the alternatives, rather than around the midpoint.
This projection assumes that the RTC will be relatively inactive until
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Billions of dollars
Actual Level
-*--- Estimated Level
* Projected Level
The ranpe or 1990 Is Ithe Iltw
- ame *dop4ed a th Juiy a Mne.
I 1 I I I I I I I 1 I I I I I I I I I I I
O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D
very late in the quarter and that capital-impaired thrifts continue to
scale down their assets at the trend seen over the second half of last
(22) Under alternative B, the continuation of the federal funds
rate around 8-1/4 percent would accord with current market expectations
for the near term. At some point, the narrow spreads between Treasury
bills and private paper will widen, but any tendency for this to occur as
runoffs of official accounts abate will be offset to a degree by large
bill issuance through the end of March and by the continued potential of a
further increase to finance RTC working capital. Treasury bond yields may
edge down once the mid-quarter refunding issues are distributed, espe-
cially if foreign interest appears to be holding up. However, without a
surprise in macroeconomic fundamentals or monetary policy, only limited
scope for a flattening of the Treasury yield curve seems in prospect.
Increases in bond yields since the last FOMC meeting have restored the
more typical upward-sloping term structure, apparently on the basis of
expectations that federal funds trading not far from current levels will
be consistent with continued economic expansion and underlying inflation
persisting at its recent pace.
(23) Growth in M2 under alternative B is expected to strengthen
in February and March from its January pace, owing largely to a rebound in
transaction deposits. Demand deposits in particular should recover ap-
preciably after their sharp January slide considering the presumed in-
crease in desired holdings in response to the fall in short-term interest
rates over the second half of last year. M1 expansion would be brought
up to a 6-3/4 percent pace over February and March. Together with a
slight pickup in its nontransaction component, M2 is projected to grow at
a 7-3/4 percent rate over the two months, and 7 percent from a December
base. M2 would continue to outpace nominal GNP in the first quarter,
implying a contraction of its velocity at a 1-1/2 percent rate.
(24) Under alternative B, M3 would grow at a 3-1/2 percent rate
from December to March. Thrift assets continue to run off rapidly. Bank
credit expansion, though picking up a little, is expected to remain moder-
ate, and bank issuance of managed liabilities to continue subdued in the
face of stronger core deposit growth. Inflows to institution-only money
market mutual funds should pause after the bulge in January, as their
yields move down into more normal alignment with market rates. Overall
debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to grow at an 8 percent
rate from December to March, placing this aggregate a bit below the mid-
point of its 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 percent tentative monitoring range. In the
federal sector, borrowing quickens over the balance of the quarter, while
the average growth of the overall debt of the other sectors should about
maintain the estimated January pace.
(25) The policy easing embodied in alternative A, with the funds
rate moving to 7-3/4 percent, would induce a nearly comparable decline in
other short-term interest rates. The lowering of U.S. short-term rates
would cause a sharp downward adjustment in the foreign exchange value of
the dollar. Nonetheless, some declines in bond rates are probable, as
investors scale down their forecasts of the intermediate-term path of
short rates. But the declines would be muted to the extent that the
policy easing and accompanying dollar depreciation were to intensify con-
cerns about future inflation pressures and the scope for further policy
easing. M2 demands would be boosted, to perhaps an 8-1/2 percent average
rate of growth over February and March, bringing December-to-March growth
to 7-1/2 percent and leaving M2 a bit above the 7 percent upper end of its
tentative range. M3 would rise at a 4 percent rate over the two months,
rapidly enough to engender a December-to-March growth rate of 3-3/4 per-
cent and place this aggregate a little above its 3-1/2 percent tentative
lower bound.
(26) By contrast, the 1/2 percentage point increase in the funds
rate under alternative C would restrain December-to-March growth of M2 and
M3 to 6-1/2 and 3-1/4 percent, respectively, positioning them just below
the upper bound and at the lower bound of their respective tentative
ranges by March. Most short-term rates would rise in tandem with the
federal funds rate; some widening of risk premiums could occur if reces-
sionary concerns reemerged, given already heightened attention to credit
problems. Such concerns, along with a sense that policy might be more
focused on achieving price stability, would tend to damp the rise in bond
yields. Higher interest rates and lower expected inflation could prompt
an upward movement in the exchange value of the dollar.
Directive language
(27) Presented below for Committee consideration is draft lan-
guage relating to the Humphrey-Hawkins ranges for 1990 and to the operat-
ing paragraph for the intermeeting period.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability,
promote growth in output on a sustainable basis, and con-
tribute to an improved pattern of international transactions.
In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at THIS [DEL: its]
meeting [DEL: in July reaffirmed the ranges it had] established
RANGES in February for growth of M2 and M3 of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 3
to 7] percent and ____ TO ____ [DEL: 3-1/2 to 7-1/2] percent, respec-
tively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1989 [DEL: 1988] to the
fourth quarter of 1990 [DEL: 1989]. The monitoring range for growth
of total domestic nonfinancial debt also was SET [DEL: maintained]
at ____ TO ____ [DEL: 6-1/2 to 10-1/2] percent for the year. [DEL: For 1999,
on a tentative basis, the Committee agreed in July to use the
same ranges as in 1989 for growth in each of the monetary
aggregate and debt, measured from the fourth quarter of 1989
to the fourth quarter of 1999.] The behavior of the monetary
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light of
movements in their velocities, developments in the economy
and financial markets, and progress toward price level
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to decrease slightly (SOMEWHAT)/
MAINTAIN/INCREASE SLIGHTLY(SOMEWHAT) the existing degree of
pressure on reserve positions. Taking account of progress
toward price stability, the strength of the business expan-
sion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates, and develop-
ments in foreign exchange and domestic financial markets,
slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint (WOULD)(MIGHT)
or slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT)
be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with growth
of M2 and M3 over the period from [DEL: November] DECEMBER through
March at annual rates of about ____ AND ____ [DEL: 8-1/2 and 5-1/2]
percent respectively. The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic
Operations that reserve conditions during the period before
the next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal
funds rate persistently outside a range of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 6 to 10]
