Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
September 28, 1990
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC September 28, 1990
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Open market operations since the last Committee meeting have
continued to be directed toward maintaining unchanged pressures on reserve
conditions, with the expectation that federal funds would trade around
funds traded generally in that area, although the rate spiked well above
that level late on the last day of each of these periods. On two of those
days, the Desk refrained from meeting projected reserve needs because
federal funds were trading below 8 percent and markets were looking for
signs of an easing of policy; the third instance arose from an unexpected
shortfall in reserves. Largely reflecting the resulting heavy borrowing
on those days, adjustment plus seasonal borrowing over the intermeeting
period has averaged appreciably above the path of $500 million.1 So far
in the current maintenance period, federal funds generally have traded
somewhat above 8 percent. Pressures apparently arose from positioning in
advance of the quarter-end statement date interacting with emerging cau-
tious reserve management policies by money center banks worried about
potential funding difficulties in the wake of heightened market concerns
about bank soundness.
(2) Concerns about the condition of banks intensified in recent
days after reports of large losses and dividend reductions at several
institutions and continued indications of a weak outlook for real estate
markets and the economy more generally. Shifting perceptions of risk were
reflected in a sharp increase over the intermeeting period in spreads
between Treasury securities and private instruments in short-term markets,
with Treasury bill yields falling as many as 40 basis points while returns
on commercial paper and CDs rose about 1/8 percentage point. In addition,
spreads on the longer-term debt of money center banks widened consider-
ably, and share prices of these banks fell about 18 percent on average.
Treasury bond yields moved higher on balance through most of the inter-
meeting period, tracking oil prices, whose increase was seen as leading to
higher inflation. In the last few days, however, Treasury bond yields
have retraced that rise amid optimism about the budget negotiations and
concerns about financial fragility. Investment-grade corporate bonds were
little changed on balance over the period, but with higher oil prices also
presaging a sluggish real economy, spreads on below-investment-grade bonds
widened significantly and broad stock price indexes moved down more than 5
(3) The dollar has shown little net change on a weighted average
basis, remaining near the lower levels reached by the last FOMC meeting.
The dollar has declined by 5-1/2 percent against the yen since that meet-
ing as Japanese short- and long-term rates rose by 35 and 50 basis points,
respectively, in response to a tightening of monetary policy and to in-
dications of continued robust economic growth. However, the dollar
appreciated against sterling, which eased off when it became clear that,
contrary to expectations, the United Kingdom was not going to enter the
exchange rate mechanism of the EMS in September, and against the Canadian
dollar, where an easing in monetary policy brought short-term rates down
by one-half percentage point. On average, short-term interest rates
abroad were about unchanged, while long-term rates rose by 20 basis
(4) M2 accelerated in August to a 6-1/2 percent rate and is
estimated to have about maintained that pace in September. As a result,
M2 expansion in the June-to-September period has been about 1 percentage
point above the 4 percent rate expected by the Committee, though remaining
a little below the midpoint of its annual range. The recent strength of
M2 seems attributable largely to the uncertainty engendered by the invas-
ion of Kuwait and the consequent spike in oil prices. M2 received its
greatest boost from a surge in money market mutual funds, as investors
apparently switched out of the stock and bond markets. In addition, cur-
rency growth surged in August and remained at a high level in September as
demands from the Middle East were added to already strong flows to South
America.2  By contrast, the retail deposit component of M2 has strength-
ened relatively little in recent months, increasing at only a 2-1/2 per-
cent rate over August and September.
(5) The strength of M2 showed through to M3. There was a pause
through early September in RTC activity and its associated damping effects
on M3; this aggregate was bolstered as well by considerable inflows to M3-
type money funds. The pickup in M3 growth was restrained, however, by
large increases in government balances at banks. Some of these deposits
were used to reduce managed liabilities, although a large share of them
seemed to have funded lending to government securities dealers. M3 growth
over August and September averaged 3-1/2 percent, about in line with the
Committee's expectations, bringing expansion thus far this year to around
(6) Growth of private credit likely has remained subdued in the
last couple of months, reflecting both weak demand and adverse supply
conditions. In bond markets, issuance by businesses and states and
municipalities has been discouraged by rising rates; markets have been
particularly unreceptive to below-investment grade business borrowers, and
quality spreads in tax-exempt markets also have widened. Postponed bond
issuance by better-rated businesses has been reflected in strength in
commercial paper, but non-merger-related business borrowing at banks con-
tinues to be very sluggish. Little credit seems to be available for com-
mercial real estate, and slowing loan growth in this area has contributed
to a moderation in total real estate lending. On the other hand, consumer
loans adjusted for securitizations have picked up, expanding at an 8 per-
cent pace in recent months. Federal government borrowing accelerated
sharply in the third quarter, swollen by needs to finance expected RTC
expenditures, helping to maintain growth in total nonfinancial debt around
the 7 percent middle of its annual range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'89
to
July Aug. Sept. pe Sept. pe
Money and credit aggregates
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
pe - Preliminary estimate.
n.a. - Not available.
1. Through August.
2. Reserves data for September incorporate assumptions of $500 million of
periods that overlap months.
Policy Alternatives
(7) Three policy alternatives are given below for consideration
by the Committee. Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to
trade around 8 percent. Under alternatives A and C, federal funds trading
would center around 7-1/2 and 8-1/2 percent, respectively. In view of the
decline in the demand for seasonal credit that typically occurs during the
fall, borrowing under alternative B would initially be specified at $450
million, a reduction of $50 million from the current level, and the
assumption probably would need to be lowered another $50 to $100 million
over the intermeeting period. Under alternatives A and C, the initial
specification for borrowing would be $400 million and $500 million,
respectively. Desk operations over the intermeeting period may need to
take account of continued cautious reserve management by banks concerned
about potential funding difficulties; those banks may want to carry a
larger cushion of excess reserves and would be especially eager to avoid
being seen at the discount window.
(8) Financial market conditions over the intermeeting period
will depend not only on the course of monetary policy and the market
response to the usual array of macroeconomic and price data, but also on
developments in three important areas of particular uncertainty. The
first is the situation in the Persian Gulf and its implications for oil
prices. Other things equal, bond yields and oil prices probably will
continue to tend to move together, as the effects on inflation prospects
and perhaps uncertainty dominate the impact of opposite changes in real
rates associated with economic activity. Major changes in the outlook in
this area also may affect money growth and risk premiums by feeding back
on demands for liquidity and safety.
(9) Reports of progress in budget negotiations have already
contributed to a bond market rally in recent days, and further price gains
are likely to follow an agreement that implied a significant degree of
fiscal restraint over several years. The reaction of the bond market may
reflect expectations about the System's response as well, for market par-
ticipants would expect a monetary policy easing to be forthcoming after
such an accord. Thus, other short-term interest rates also are likely to
drop, even before any decline in the federal funds rate. On the other
hand, if the budget stalemate continued with a resulting sequester--or
possibly a deferral of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings process--uncertainty
about the ultimate direction of fiscal policy would be prolonged, con-
tributing to volatility in financial markets. The potential reversion of
the debt ceiling to a lower level on October 3 is a further complicating
factor, which would disrupt Treasury financing and contribute to market
(10) Finally, there is some risk that concerns about the health
of banking and other financial institutions could intensify. The rapidity
and size of the drop in bank stock and debt prices suggest that consider-
able negative news about these institutions already has been discounted,
and some of the market movement of recent days may reflect institutional
investors' reluctance to hold bank paper over the quarter-end statement
date. Still, markets remain skittish, and even in the absence of new
information confidence could erode further. With funding sources even
more expensive and additional pressures on capital constraining asset
growth, affected institutions would likely curtail credit further and
raise the price and nonprice terms on loans. Monetary growth patterns
could be affected as well. Should banks encounter increasing resistance
in raising uninsured funds, they could take steps to secure more stable
funding by bidding more aggressively for retail deposits, especially small
time deposits. These actions would lead to higher growth of M2 for a
time, but M3 growth would be depressed somewhat further as banks cut back
on asset expansion.
(11) It appears that the expectation of an immediate easing of
monetary policy is no longer so prevalent in the markets, although some
relaxation still seems to be anticipated over coming months, partly
reflecting an expected budget accord. The market response to unchanged
policy under alternative B will depend crucially on budget developments
in coming days. Should an inadequate agreement appear to be in train,
rates could reverse some of the declines of recent days, but there would
be no effect from holding monetary policy unchanged. As noted above,
however, a significant budget agreement would extend the recent market
rally and engender expectations of near-term policy action. In this case,
maintaining unchanged money market conditions for an extended period would
disappoint these expectations and cause rates to back up.
(12) Barring an immediate, credible agreement that had already
reduced interest rates, the decline in the federal funds rate under alter-
native A would be expected to show through in other money market interest
rates. Private rates might drop a little more than those on Treasury
bills if the lower rates were seen as lessening financial stresses. With
market participants generally viewing the economy as weak, some decline in
bond yields may accompany this policy action. In the absence of a cred-
ible budget agreement or a lessening of tensions in the Middle East, any
bond market rally would be quite limited, however, if the easing raised
questions about the System's commitment to containing inflation. The
dollar could come under renewed downward pressure in response to the
reduction in U.S. interest rates.
(13) The tightening of monetary policy under alternative C would
be seen under current circumstances as signalling an aggressive stance
against the inflationary consequences of the oil shock. Such a tightening
is not anticipated by market participants. Given concerns about financial
fragility, yields on private obligations could rise significantly, while
the increase in bill rates could be limited by greater demands for safe
assets. Perceptions that the central bank would not permit inflation to
rise permanently as a result of the oil shock would hold down any increase
in yields on longer-term instruments.
(14) Growth in the monetary aggregates expected under the three
alternatives is presented in the table below, along with implied growth on
a fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter basis. (Detailed data are presented on
the table and charts on the following pages.) Under all three alterna-
tives, growth of money over the final three months of the year is expected
to be somewhat slower than in August and September. With regard to M2,
both the increased demand for U.S. currency in the Middle East that devel-
oped in the wake of the invasion of Kuwait and the flight from capital
markets into money fund shares are assumed to diminish over the remainder
of the year. In addition, the recent pickup of RTC activity is expected
to restrain deposit growth in the near term, as occurred in similar cir-
cumstances at the end of the second quarter.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from Sept.
to Dec.
Growth from Q4'89
to Q4'90
(15) Under alternative B, with some reversal of recent declines
in bill rates, opportunity costs are not expected to be a significant
influence on M2 growth over the next few months. Still, velocity would
decline at a 2 percent annual rate since the 4 percent growth of M2 from
September to December under this alternative would imply quarterly average
growth of 4-3/4 percent. Money demand is not expected to react much over
coming months to the sharp decline in nominal GNP growth in the fourth
quarter; such a decline would not be seen as indicative of the behavior of
permanent income, and nominal consumption spending is expected to remain
strong. Under alternative A, the drop in opportunity costs would boost
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Billions of dollars
Actual Level
- - - Estimated Level
* Projected Level
S
#
##
#S
-/
I
I 
'
I I I I I I I I I I I I I
O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J
demand for M2, further depressing velocity. Velocity would still decline
under alternative C, though by less as opportunity costs widened with the
rise in short-term market interest rates. Under all three alternatives,
M2 would end the year a little below the midpoint of its 1990 range.
(16) The slower growth of M3 reflects both softer demands for
credit at depositories owing to weaker economic activity in the near term
and continued restraint on lending by banks and thrifts. Under alterna-
tive B, M3 is projected to expand at a 2 percent rate over the September-
to-December period, nearly a percentage point less than over the preceding
three months. Although slightly faster or slower growth rates would be
expected under alternatives A and C, under all three alternatives this
aggregate would be appreciably above the lower bound of its annual range.
(17) Overall, the pace of lending in the months ahead is
expected to remain relatively slack. Credit supply constraints are likely
to continue to have their major effect on commercial real estate. In the
household sector, home mortgage borrowing is likely to remain damped by
depressed housing activity, and consumer credit should decelerate with the
decline in spending on consumer durables. Although small businesses and
those below investment grade may feel the effects of intensifying problems
of the banks, investment grade borrowers should retain ready access to
funds. Nonetheless, corporations may continue to delay bond issuance
until long-term interest rates decline, to some extent substituting com-
mercial paper issuance. The financial condition of some state and local
governments may limit access to markets, reducing borrowing. In contrast,
federal borrowing should remain heavy, even if there were to be a sig-
nificant budget package, bolstered by RTC expenditures and the boost in
the deficit engendered by the weak economy. The growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt is expected to fall to a 5-1/2 percent pace for the
September-to-December period, bringing the increase over the year to about
of the 5 to 9 percent monitoring range for this aggregate.
Directive Language
(18) Draft language for the operational paragraph, including the
usual options and updating, is shown below.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/main-
tain/INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. Taking account of progress toward price
stability, the strength of the business expansion, the
behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments in
foreign exchange and domestic financial markets, slightly
(SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint (WOULD) might or
(SLIGHTLY) somewhat lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT)
be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
growth of M2 and M3 over the period from [DEL: June through]
September THROUGH DECEMBER at annual rates of about ____
AND ____ [DEL: 4 and 2-1/2] percent respectively. The Chairman may
call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions
during the period before the next meeting are likely to be
associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside
a range of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 6 to 10] percent.
October 1, 1990
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
.n...u..l ... L..--. ...... i
CDs | I money
federal Treasury bills secondary comm I market I bank
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime
Monthly
Sep 89
Oct 89
Nov 89
Dec 89
Jan 90
Feb 90
Mar 90
Apr 90
May 90
Jun 90
Jul 90
Aug 90
Scorporate I convenlional home mortgages
US govelnment constant A utility municipal I secondary
p - premlnmary dais
-II
I--~- '---L-(-- L (------iL-I-- L I--LII ' I ' ' ' ' ' I I
hiaft lr I - - -
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Strictly Confidential (FR)
Seasonally adjusted OCT. 1, 1990
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontranmactiont total loans U S
Period Ml M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
in M? in M3 only Investments
LEVELS ($BILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Class II 
F OM C
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted OCT. 1, 1990
Period Currency
Demand
deposits
MONTHLY
1989-AUG.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
Other
checkable
Overnight
RPs and
Eurodollars
NSA'
Savings
deposits
Small
denomi-
nation
time
Money market
mutual funds
general Institu.
purpose tions
and broker/ only
dealer
it 9
Large
denomi-
nati6n
time
Term
Eurodollars
Savingt
bonds
Short-
term
Treasury
securities
Commer-
cial paper'
Bank er
accep-
tances
I I 
I
I I 
I
I I1 ' II
t i 
-- :
September 28, 1990
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Weekly
July
July
July
July
August
August
August
August
August
September
September
September
Memo: LEVEL (bil $) 7
September 26
- -248
- 2,104
- -172
- 200
- 150
