Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) June 28, 1991
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The stance of monetary policy has remained unchanged since
the May FOMC meeting: Federal funds have continued to trade around 5-3/4
percent--as they have since the cut in the discount rate at the end of
April--and the formal allowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing was
changed only for technical reasons. The borrowing allowance was raised in
several steps, to its current level of $325 million, in line with the
pickup in seasonal borrowing. Over the intermeeting period, borrowing
consistently ran a bit above the allowance as adjustment credit showed
increased strength; the buildup of seasonal credit, however, was somewhat
below its usual early-summer gradient.1
(2) Growing evidence that the business-cycle trough had passed
raised interest rates all along the yield curve through most of the inter-
meeting period. Against a backdrop of economic data releases supporting
the notion that the economy was recovering and statements by Federal
Reserve officials in the same vein, the structure of rates began to
reflect a chance of a tightening before year-end. Most recently, investor
skittishness has reemerged, especially with respect to bank paper in the
wake of reports of increased problems with asset quality. In this
environment, yields on Treasury securities have been bid down, leaving
them little changed to 20 basis points higher over the intermeeting
period. Spreads on bank obligations have widened, as have those on lower-
rated commercial paper in response to a default by Columbia Gas.
(3) With U.S. interest rates tending higher amid clearer signs
of an emerging economic recovery here, the weighted average exchange value
of the dollar rose about 5-1/4 percent over the intermeeting period. The
dollar appreciated 7 percent against the mark, but was little changed
against the yen, which itself was supported by stronger-than-expected
economic data for Japan that fostered a sense that the anticipated easing
of Japanese monetary policy would be postponed. Interest rates in Japan
rose 10 to 20 basis points. Despite the Bundesbank's nudging up of RP
rates, most market interest rates in Germany were down slightly until the
end of the period, when bond yields jumped on fears of a reintroduction of
the withholding tax on interest income. These fears, along with turmoil
in Yugoslavia, contributed to downward movement of the mark late in the
the Desk sold $50 million in mid-May
(4) M2 growth, now estimated at a 3-1/4 percent rate for the
March-to-June period, fell short of the 4 percent pace specified by the
Committee at the May meeting. Although the bounceback in May from the
tax-related weakness in money in April turned out to be stronger than had
been expected, renewed weakness appeared in June, with M2 growth at just a
its, lifting M1 to a 13-3/4 percent annual rate of growth for the month.2
A slowdown in M1 in June showed through to M2, and its effect on the
broader aggregate was reinforced by the ongoing deceleration of that
aggregate's nontransaction component. Although inflows to liquid non-
transaction deposits stayed very strong in June in response to the sub-
stantial narrowing in their opportunity costs in recent months, small time
deposits ran off at an accelerating rate. Much of this runoff no doubt
represented a redirection toward the liquid components of M2 as the rate
advantage of retail CDs waned, but part of it likely was a net drag on the
aggregate as, for example, investors moved into capital market instruments
in an effort to maintain yields on funds released by maturing time depos-
its. Certainly, inflows to bond and stock mutual funds were very heavy in
May and, for bond funds, are said to have continued strong in June as
well. The attractiveness of these longer-term market investments also was
reflected in money fund shares, which were about flat. While the unusual
strength of portfolio shifts into longer-term instruments may explain some
of the recent weakness in M2, the causes of much of this shortfall remain
(5) After two months over which it posted a slight net decline,
bank credit is estimated to have risen a bit in June, buoyed by a pickup
in acquisitions of securities and a cessation of the runoff in loans.
Nevertheless, overall depository funding needs likely continued to
decrease, with the decline in thrift assets apparently accelerating as the
RTC stepped up its resolution activity. Largely as a result, M3 fell
slightly in June and was about unchanged for the entire March-to-June
period, compared with the 2 percent growth rate specified in the most
recent directive.
(6) Preliminary data indicate that C&I loans continued to drop
at a substantial rate in June, and commercial paper of nonfinancial firms
again ran off, albeit at a slower pace than in May. In part, the weakness
in these components reflected a redirection of credit demands toward the
bond market, as issuers apparently considered bond yields to be near
cyclical lows. However, overall debt growth of nonfinancial firms is
estimated to have been quite sluggish in the second quarter, likely
restrained by the runoff of business inventories and drop in associated
funding needs. In addition, the rapid pace of gross equity issuance,
combined with a slowdown in merger-related reductions in equity, probably
damped firms' borrowing. Gross debt issuance by state and local govern-
ments increased markedly in June: The continued robust pace of long-term
issuance was augmented by a slug of short-term funding, a portion of which
was necessitated by revenue shortfalls in certain localities. In the
household sector, borrowing appears to have increased a bit in recent
months, owing primarily to a resumption in consumer credit expansion; in
June, growth of consumer credit at banks (adjusted for securitization) was
the highest in several months. The overall debt aggregate is estimated to
have accelerated to about a 5-3/4 percent rate in May, and there is little
reason to think that June strayed far from that pace.
(7) From the fourth quarter of last year through June, M2 grew
at a 4 percent annual rate, a bit below the midpoint of its annual target
range. M3 growth also, at a 2-1/2 percent pace, was slightly below the
midpoint of its range. The rate of increase for both these aggregates is
about as had been expected by the staff at the time of the February FOMC
meeting. While nominal income was weaker than projected in February, the
effects on M2 were about offset by subsequent policy easings, which
narrowed opportunity costs on money assets. M2 velocity declined in the
first half at a 1-1/4 percent annual rate. However, the drop in V2 was
less (and M2 growth weaker) than implied by the staff econometric model of
money demand. The model overprediction, which had been built into the
staff forecast, lessened from that in the second half of 1990, but its
persistence indicated the presence of a continuing upward velocity shift,
likely related to the ongoing redirection of credit flows away from depos-
itories together with the appetite of asset holders for the higher yields
of longer-term investments. The growth of M3 was boosted by a surge in
issuance of large CDs by U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks,
after removal of the reserve requirement on these instruments. The
branches and agencies have been using the funds to pay down other types of
liabilities, funnel funds offshore, and re-book assets previously held
offshore to the United States.3 Instead of the earlier expectation for
the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors to be just below the middle of
its 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent monitoring range at midyear, it is tracking the
bottom edge of its annual cone. This miss may have reflected not only the
slower pace of economic activity, but also a more cautious attitude by
borrowers toward taking on debt. Certainly, net equity retirements are
running well below projections, damping that source of credit demand. On
the supply side, the marked narrowing of yield spreads in securities mar-
kets suggests credit availability for many borrowers improved over the
first half; however, the prime rate has remained relatively high and banks
restrictive in granting credit.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'90
to
May June June
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve measures
Nonborrowed reserves2
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
Alternative Long-Run Strategies
(8) Four alternative long-run strategies for monetary policy are
presented below as background for consideration of the annual ranges for
the aggregates. Strategy I, the baseline, assumes that policy seeks to
make gradual progress toward price stability by promoting a moderate pace
of output growth over the next several years, maintaining a small degree
of slack in resource utilization. It adopts the greenbook forecast for
macro-econometric model. The economic outcomes for strategies II, III,
and IV are derived from the baseline using the econometric model.4
Strategy II contemplates a tighter policy, indexed by M2 growth slower by
make more progress toward price stability. Strategy III is more stimula-
tive than the baseline policy, with money growth faster by 1 percentage
point at an annual rate, in order to assure a more robust economic expan-
sion. Strategy IV has the same five-year money growth as the baseline to
provide the same long-run restraint on inflation, but frontloads that
growth to assure a stronger pace of output growth in the initial years of
the expansion. One consideration taken into account in constructing the
money paths for each strategy was the ongoing downward shift in M2 demand,
which has been assumed to continue through 1993, albeit at a diminishing
Alternative Strategies
(QIV to QIV percent change)
(baseline)
(tighter)
(easier)
(easier/tighter)
Prices: GNP fixed-
weight price index
Real GNPIIIII
Unemployment rate
(QIV level)Real GNPI
IIIIIIVUnemployment rate
(QIV level)
I
II
III
IV
(9) Under the baseline strategy, M2 would expand at a 5-1/2
percent rate throughout the forecast period. The assumed growth of money
is consistent with some monetary restraint. Indeed, over the next few
years flat M2 growth implies increasing restraint as the money demand
shift abates. Real interest rates move higher over the first few years
and remain at those elevated levels in 1994 and 1995. Nominal interest
rates decline over the last two years as inflation abates, boosting the
demand for money relative to income. This strategy keeps the unemployment
rate from falling below 6 percent and maintains downward pressure on
inflation, which would fall to about a 2-3/4 percent rate by 1995.
(10) The tighter monetary policy of strategy II produces a
sharper decline in inflation. Achieving the slower M2 growth of this
strategy would require higher nominal short-term interest rates from now
into 1993, averaging roughly 1/2 percentage point above the baseline.
Nominal rates fall below the baseline later in the simulation period, but
real interest rates are higher throughout. The higher real interest rates
would have relatively little impact on economic developments this year,
given the usual lags. Therefore, real GNP growth each year would be sig-
nificantly below that of the baseline and below the expansion of the
economy's capacity, pushing up the unemployment rate to over 7 percent by
the end of the period. The higher real interest rates of this strategy
would be expected to produce a modest appreciation of the dollar, rein-
forcing the restraining effects of slack aggregate demand on domestic
prices; these combined forces pull inflation down to 1-1/4 percent by
(11) The easier policy of strategy III stimulates output and
employment in the near term and makes some progress against inflation over
the next few years. However, that progress is largely a consequence of
the slowing already in train, and inflation accelerates later in the
period. Early on, nominal interest rates would have to drop about a half
point to get the higher money growth, and would remain below the baseline
through 1993. The implied lower real interest rates and more rapid money
growth of this strategy result in a steep decline of the unemployment rate
over the projection period, bringing it below the natural rate by late
but would be on an upward trend, boosted a little by a declining dollar.
(12) Strategy IV has the basic tenor of policy under the base-
line, but it is more activist, with changes in money growth and interest
rates intended to raise the odds on healthy output growth initially but to
restore the downward tilt to inflation over time once the expansion is
well underway. Money growth is 1 percentage point faster than the
baseline for the next four quarters, but that excess is offset subse-
quently with slower growth for a time, leaving the level of money from
mid-1994 the same as in the baseline. To achieve this path for money, the
federal funds rate would have to be about 1/2 percentage point below
baseline for the first four quarters of the period, but then would have to
rise by a percentage point, and remain above the baseline for the much of
the remainder of the period. Under this strategy, the unemployment rate
drops sooner and farther than in the baseline, before edging up in
response to later monetary restraint. Because the average degree of slack
in resource use over the five-year period is smaller than in the baseline,
the progress against inflation is a little less.
(13) The table below presents inflation rates derived from the
P* model simulated under the four strategies.6 Two variants of the model
are employed. One variant uses the historical long-run average of veloc-
ity; results from these simulations are presented in the upper panel.
This model, without adjustment for velocity shifts, in effect views the
slow money growth of the past few years as implying more monetary strin-
gency than under the staff forecast, placing current P* 3-1/2 percent
below actual prices. As a result, it indicates a much sharper drop of
inflation than in the staff forecast, to the 2 percent range under base-
line money by 1992; however, 2 percent is below the long-run, steady-state
inflation rate that would be associated with 5-1/2 percent M2 growth, and
inflation begins to cycle higher in 1995. The simulations presented in
the lower panel assume that equilibrium velocity shifts up by the same
percentages as M2 demand was assumed to shift in the simulation with the
large-scale model. The baseline simulation with adjustments for velocity
shifts indicates that P* is currently about 1 percent below the actual
price level, providing a moderate downward thrust to inflation in the near
term. Inflation in this simulation initially declines a bit more quickly
than in the staff forecast. By 1992, however, P* is equal to the price
level, and with 5-1/2 percent money growth, P* rises above the price level
subsequently, causing inflation to turn up in the later years of the
simulation. To achieve continuing disinflation over the whole simulation
period in the adjusted P* model, the slower money growth of the tighter
strategy II is required.
P* Model Simulations of Inflation
GNP fixed-weight price index
(QIV to QIV percent change)
With no adjustment for
velocity shifts
I
II
III
IV
(baseline)
(tighter)
(easier)
(easier/tighter)
With adjustment for
velocity shifts
II
III
IV
velocity in 1990, 1 percent
in 1993. No shifts are
Long-Run Ranges
(14) The last two columns of the table below present projections
of money and debt aggregates consistent with the outlook for the economy
and interest rates contained in the greenbook. Also shown are the current
ranges for 1991 and actual growth rates through June.
Money and Debt Growth
(Percent change, annual rate)
Actual
Current QIV 1990
Staff
Projections
Projections for 1991 and 1992
(15) M2 is expected to accelerate to a 5-1/2 percent rate over
the second half of 1991, bringing growth for the year to about 5 percent.
Expansion of this aggregate should be stimulated by the anticipated pickup
of nominal GNP growth to a 7-3/4 percent pace over the second half. With
short-term market rates assumed steady, opportunity costs will widen as
offering rates on liquid deposits fall further in lagged adjustment to
earlier declines in market rates. The rise in opportunity costs will
restrain the aggregate's growth, contributing to a rise in its velocity at
more than a 2 percent annual rate over the rest of the year (see chart).
In addition, the likely persistence of a steep yield curve also should
keep long-term market instruments, such as bond funds, an attractive out-
let for some maturing small time deposits that had much higher rates when
originally issued. By early next year, opportunity costs cease rising and
their depressing effects on M2 demands die out. As the rate of nominal
income expansion scales back to 6 percent over 1992, M2 is seen as sus-
taining a 5-1/2 percent growth rate. This projection assumes that the
shortfall in M2 growth relative to model projections, although continuing,
tends to abate gradually, as restraint on credit supplies at depositories
unwinds with the economic recovery.
(16) M3 is projected to grow at around a 3 percent rate through
next year, influenced by offsetting forces. On the one hand, bank credit
is anticipated to strengthen with the economic recovery, enlarging bank
financing needs.7  On the other hand, thrift credit is likely to decline
more rapidly as RTC activity moves into higher gear. Moreover, issuance
of large CDs by branches and agencies of foreign banks is expected to slow
over the forecast horizon, as more of the adjustment to the change in
relative borrowing costs caused by the reduction in reserve requirements
is completed.
(17) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to
accelerate over the second half of the year to a 6-1/2 percent rate,
spurred by a surge in federal borrowing. The federal deficit will widen
over the remainder of the year, augmented in part by enlarged RTC resolu-
tion activity and reduced payments by foreign governments to the Defense
Cooperation Account. Nonfederal debt growth rises only gradually in the
staff projection, and the debt of these sectors is projected to expand
less rapidly than their spending. Restraint on debt growth will continue
to be imparted by some lingering reluctance of lenders to extend credit to
less than top-quality borrowers. Given relatively wide spreads between
rates charged and rates paid by intermediaries, borrowers should be more
prone to finance additional spending out of assets than by taking on more
debt. Consumer installment credit growth moves slightly higher, while
expansion in household mortgage debt stays at about the estimated pace of
this quarter. Nonfinancial business debt growth should strengthen a
little over the second half, primarily because of renewed short-term
borrowing associated in part with the anticipated turn to inventory
accumulation over the second half. For 1992, overall debt growth remains
at 6-1/2 percent. Nonfederal debt growth continues to firm, though to a
pace still below that of nominal GNP. Business borrowing increases as
greater capital spending further widens the financing gap and as merger
activity reawakens; household debt acquisition also continues to pick up
slightly. As an offset, federal debt growth ebbs with a slackening in RTC
funding needs, but remains in double digits.
Ranges for 1991
(18) This bluebook does not present alternatives to the current
ranges for the current year at the midyear meeting only when the aggre-
gates have shown signs of markedly diverging from the established annual
ranges owing to special factors thought to be unrelated to economic per-
formance. That is not the case this year. The monetary aggregates are
projected to remain in the middle portions of their existing ranges over
the balance of the year, and their growth is expected to be consistent
with economic recovery continuing into next year accompanied by reduced
inflation pressures. Those ranges also should be adequate to allow for
needed reactions to unexpected economic or financial developments or to
accommodate adjustments to the Committee's longer-term strategy, perhaps
along the lines outlined above.
(19) So far this year, domestic nonfinancial debt is growing
only at the lower bound of its range, but the staff anticipates a speed-up
in growth over the rest of the year sufficient to bring this aggregate
well up into the bottom half of its range. Moreover, the aggregate's
position in its range reflects the unusual restraint on private credit
formation, as well as slow growth in nominal spending. Indeed, this
weakness relative to the announced range warrants careful monitoring for
any implications about spending plans and the availability of credit.
From that point of view, a downward revision to the range could be misin-
terpreted as signalling complacency about the credit slowdown.
Ranges for 1992
(20) The table below presents three alternative sets of ranges
for growth of the monetary and debt aggregates over 1992. Alternative II
replicates the current 1991 ranges, while alternative I raises and alter-
native III lowers the current ranges by 1/2 percentage point.
Money and Debt Growth over 1992
(QIV to QIV percent change)
Memo:
Alt. II Staff
Alt. I (1991 Ranges) Alt. III Projection
(21) Alternative II is broadly consistent with staff forecasts
for money, economic activity, and prices, and therefore with the baseline
strategy of gradual reductions in inflation. M3 and debt are projected at
the midpoint of their alternative II ranges, but M2 is projected to be
well up in its range. In the case of M2, this range might imply that the
Committee was less willing to tolerate surprisingly strong than surpris-
ingly weak nominal income growth. This feature may be viewed as espe-
cially appropriate after the initial stages of economic expansion, when
with higher levels of resource utilization, unanticipated strength in
demand could undermine the disinflationary process. On the other hand, if
economic activity proves weaker than the staff forecast, prompting a
monetary policy easing, alternative II could constrain further easing
somewhat; the resulting stimulus of lower opportunity costs could bring
growth of M2 near the upper bound of its range rather quickly.
(22) If the risks to the outlook were viewed as weighted on the
side of weaker-than-expected production, employment and inflation pres-
sures, or if the staff's greenbook forecast were judged to embody an
insufficient economic recovery, the higher growth rates of alternative I
could be selected. Thus, this alternative would line up roughly with the
easier strategy discussed above, with its emphasis on assuring expansion
sufficient to reduce the margin of unutilized resources. Alternative I
also could be preferred if, given an acceptable economic forecast, the
bluebook projection for M2 growth were viewed as too low. This view could
be buttressed by the notion that an economic recovery should improve the
quality of bank assets, leading to a faster unwinding of restraint on bank
lending and of the associated reluctance of banks to attract retail
deposits. Accordingly, the previous shortfall of M2 growth relative to
typical experience could be seen as more likely to reverse than to
(23) Alternative III, on the other hand, could be justified if
the odds were seen concentrated on the side of a more robust economic
recovery than in the staff forecast, with the attendant risk that less
progress would be made against inflation, or if the slowing of inflation
over time in the baseline forecast were itself viewed as inadequate. The
tighter long-term strategy discussed above is readily encompassed within
the current alternative II range. But alternative III would seem more
consistent with the spirit and intent of that strategy, since reducing the
ranges another 1/2 percentage point would underscore the Committee's com-
mitment to the attainment of price stability. The upper bound of the M2
range for 1992 would be brought within 1/2 percentage point of the staff
projection, implying the need for a prompt tightening of policy should
unexpected strength in nominal spending further raise M2. The reduced
lower bound also could imply considerable tolerance for slower-than-
expected M2 growth before a policy easing would be triggered, either
because the Committee would tolerate slower expansion of income or because
continued problems of banks and thrifts are reflected in further rechan-
nelling of credit flows outside depositories and even greater strength in
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(24) Three near-term alternatives for monetary policy are pre-
sented below for Committee consideration. Under alternative B, federal
funds would continue to trade around 5-3/4 percent. Initially, the al-
lowance for adjustment and seasonal borrowing would remain at $325 mil-
lion.8  Under alternative A, the federal funds rate would decline to
around 5-1/4 percent. This reduction could be accomplished either by
providing nonborrowed reserves sufficient for adjustment and seasonal
borrowing to decline to about $275 million or by cutting the discount rate
by 1/2 percentage point from its current level of 5-1/2 percent.9 Alter-
native C incorporates a funds rate of 6-1/4 percent and borrowing of about
$375 million. Growth rates for the monetary aggregates projected to ac-
company the three alternatives are shown in the table below. More detail-
ed data are presented in the tables and charts on the following pages.
(25) Under alternative B, market interest rates would probably
remain near their current levels. Market rates appear generally to incor-
porate a consensus view of no change in the stance of monetary policy over
the rest of the summer. Market participants, however, seem to expect the
economic rebound over the next few months to be weaker than presented in
the greenbook. If economic data turn out to be consistent with the green-
book, some upward pressure on interest rates could occur, though that
disadvantage of limiting the ability of the discount window to absorb
fluctuations in reserve supply and demand, thereby causing the funds
rate to become a little more volatile.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from June
to September
Growth from Q4'90
to September
pressure would be offset if data also continue to indicate good inflation
performance. The foreign exchange value of the dollar also is not
expected to show much change from its current level under this alterna-
(26) Alternative B embodies the staff projections for money and
debt consistent with the nominal GNP and unchanged interest rates of the
greenbook forecast. With the pickup in GNP, M2 would accelerate to a
up to the middle of its long-run range in September. On a quarterly
average basis, M2 would expand at a 4-1/2 percent rate during the third
quarter which, given the staff projection of an 8 percent increase in
nominal GNP, implies that velocity would rise at a 3-1/2 percent rate.
This increase reflects, in part, the rise in opportunity costs as deposit
rates decline, as well as lags in the adjustment of money holdings to a
marked change in income growth. M3 is expected to increase at a 3 percent
rate from June to September under alternative B, keeping this aggregate a
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
little below the midpoint of its annual range. The pickup in M3 relative
to the last three months reflects a rise in overall borrowing, including
from banks, as the economy recovers. Total nonfinancial debt is projected
to increase at a 6-3/4 percent annual rate over June to September, raising
this aggregate well into the lower bound of its monitoring range by Sep-
(27) Alternative A would provide more assurance of a pickup in
the growth of the monetary aggregates, and by implication in the growth of
the economy as well later this year and in early 1992. The staff pro-
jects that M2 growth would be at a 6-1/2 percent rate from June to Septem-
ber under alternative A. By September, M2 would be a little above the
midpoint of its annual range. The further easing of monetary policy
contemplated under alternative A would catch market participants by
surprise, and short-term market interest rates would drop considerably.
Bond yields are unlikely to fall much, absent favorable inflation news.
The value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets likely would decline
(28) Alternative C also would catch market participants un-
awares, and short-term interest rates likely would adjust upward rather
sharply. Bond yields also would rise, but by considerably less than
short-term rates if market participants came to the view that the Federal
Reserve was taking the opportunity to make more decisive progress against
inflation. The foreign exchange value of the dollar might well increase
considerably further under this alternative. M2 would expand at only a
falling off over the quarter. M2 would still be below the midpoint of its
range in September and would be headed for a lower position in its range
by year-end, with the effects of higher interest rates reinforced by some
restraint on nominal spending. M3 probably would expand at a 2-1/2 per-
cent rate over the June-to-September period, keeping this aggregate a
little below the midpoint of its range.
Directive Language
(29) Presented below for Committee consideration is a draft of
the directive paragraph relating to the ranges for 1991 and for 1992.
With regard to the first sentence in the paragraph, which states the
Committee's general policy objectives, the Committee may wish to delete
the phrase "a resumption of." The deletion essentially would restore the
previous language and would be consistent, of course, with a view that a
recovery is underway.
(30) Draft wording for the operational paragraph, with the usual
options and updating, is presented in the second paragraph below.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability, promote
[a resumption of] sustainable growth in output, and contribute
to an improved pattern of international transactions. In fur-
therance of these objectives, the Committee REAFFIRMED at THIS
its meeting THE RANGES IT HAD ESTABLISHED in February
established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2
percent and 1 to 5 percent, respectively, measured from the
fourth quarter of 1990 to the fourth quarter of 1991. [IN
FURTHERANCE OF THESE OBJECTIVES, THE COMMITTEE AT THIS MEETING
RAISED/LOWERED THE RANGES IT HAD ESTABLISHED IN FEBRUARY FOR
GROWTH OF M2 AND M3 TO RANGES OF ____ TO ____ AND ____ TO ____ PERCENT
RESPECTIVELY, MEASURED FROM THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1990 TO THE
FOURTH QUARTER OF 1991.] The monitoring range for growth of
total domestic nonfinancial debt ALSO was MAINTAINED set at
PERCENT] for the year. FOR 1992 THE COMMITTEE AGREED ON
TENTATIVE RANGES FOR MONETARY GROWTH, MEASURED FROM THE FOURTH
QUARTER OF 1991 TO THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1992, OF ____ TO ____
PERCENT FOR M2 AND ____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR M3. THE COMMITTEE
PROVISIONALLY SET THE ASSOCIATED MONITORING RANGE FOR GROWTH OF
TOTAL DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEBT AT ____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR 1992.
With regard to M3, the Committee anticipated that the ongoing
restructuring of thrift depository institutions would continue
to depress THE its growth OF THIS AGGREGATE relative to spend-
ing and total credit. The behavior of the monetary aggregates
will continue to be evaluated in the light of progress toward
price level stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. Depending upon progress toward price stability,
trends in economic activity, the behavior of the monetary
aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and domestic
financial markets, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater reserve re-
straint (MIGHT/WOULD) or somewhat (SLIGHTLY) lesser reserve
restraint might (WOULD) be acceptable in the intermeeting per-
iod. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from [DEL: March
through] June THROUGH SEPTEMBER at annual rates of about ____ AND
____ {DEL: 4 and 2] percent, respectively.
ADOPTED LONGER-RUN GROWTH RATE RANGES FOR THE MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES
(percent annual rates; numbers in parentheses are actual growth rates as reported
period in February Monetary Policy Report to Congress)
QIV 1978 - QIV
QIV 1979 - QIV
QIV 1980 - QIV
QIV 1981 - QIV
QIV 1982 - QIV
QIV 1983 - QIV
QIV 1984 - QIV
QIV 1985 - QIV
QIV 1986 - QIV
QIV 1987 - QIV
IV 1988 - QIV
QIV 1989 - QIV
QIV 1990 - QIV
at and of policy
Domestic Non-
financial Debt
(8.8) 6
n.s.--not specified.
*--Growth rates in parentheses are QIV'90 t:o June 1991, except QIV to May for debt.
1. Targets are for bank credit until 1983; from 1983 onward targets are for domestic
nonfinancial sector debt.
2. At the February 1979 meeting the FOMC adopted a QIV'78 to QIV'79 range for M1 of 1-1/2
to 4-1/2 percent. This range anticipated that shifting to ATS and NOW accounts in New
York State would slow Ml growth by 3 percentage points. At the October meeting it was
noted that ATS/NOW shifts would reduce M1 by no more than 1-1/2 percentage points. Thus,
the longer-run range for M1 was modified to 3-6 percent.
3. The figures shown reflect target and actual growth of M1-B in 1980 and shift-adjusted
M1-B in 1981. M1-B was relabeled Ml in January 1982. The targeted growth for Ml-A was 3-
1/2 to 6 percent in 1980 (actual growth was 5.0 percent); in 1981 targeted growth for
shift-adjusted Mi-A was 3 to 5-1/2 percent (actual growth was 1.3 percent).
4. When these ranges were set, shifts into other checkable deposits in 1980 were expected
to have only a limited effect on growth of Ml-A and M1-B. As the year progressed,
however, banks offered other checkable deposits more actively, and more funds than
expected were directed to these accounts. Such shifts are estimated to have decreased Ml-
A growth and increased Ml-B growth each by at least 1/2 percentage point more than had
been anticipated.
(Footnotes are continued on next page)
July 1, 1991
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Monthly
Jun 90
Jul 90
Aug 90
Sep 90
Oct 90
Nov 90
Dec 90
Jan 91
Feb 91
Mar 91
Apr 91
May 91
I I CDs I moy I
edeal I trasuy wM | seconary comm I marke I bank
funds I scondaty marke I marke | papr mutual I pme
I I oporte cowenlonal home rmornags
S US gowrnmnrt constan A iy municipa secondary
maturityyelds c I ey Bond markel I prmary mar
p -- prelrnmlry data
l-rehS Tn I Imo-Tuni
Strictly Confidential (FR).
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted JUL. 1, 1991
ANN. GROTH RATES (1% :
ANNUALLY (04 TO I41
QUARTERLY AVERAGE
1990-3rd QTR.
1990-4th QTR.
1991-1st QTR.
1991-2nd QTR. pe
MONTHLY
1990-JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
LEVELS ISBILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
NEEKLY
1991-HAY
Money slock measures and liquid assets
nonlraniactions
M2 components M
in M3 only
S Bank credi I Domestic nonfinancial debt'
total loans
and
U.S.
government' other'
- t - 4 + I - * - I - 4 -
derived by averaging end-of-month levels of adjacent months, and have been adjusted to remove
in M
Strictly Confidential (FR).
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Class FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted JUL. 1, 1991
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds denomi- Short- Bank* s
Demand checkable RPs and Savings nation general Institu- nation Term Term Savings term Commor. acc*r
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodottars MMOAIS dposi.ts time purpose tions time RPs Eurodollars bonds Treasury cial paper' tances
LEVELS 1$BILLIONSI :
ANNUALLY (4TH QTR.I
MONTHLY
1990-MAY
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR.
MAY
nstitutions are subtracted from snall time deposits.
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
November
December
mFebn m
Much
Apri
MAy
Wek
April
Apr 10
Aprl 17
Aprl 24
My I
wv aumy 22
My 29
June 5
June 12
June 19
June 26
Memo: LEVEL (I ) 6
Ju.r 26
- 200
- 150
- 25
- 4.150
- 1,450
- 5.180
- -3263
