Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC October 2, 1992
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The degree of reserve pressure was left unchanged after
the August 18 FOMC meeting, with federal funds expected to continue to
trade around 3-1/4 percent. However, on September 4, in response to a
weak employment report and in the context of money growth that had
picked up to only a modest rate, the Desk signalled an easing of the
intended federal funds rate to 3 percent. The actual federal funds rate
averaged around 15 basis points above intended levels during the inter-
meeting period. Higher rates owed chiefly to unexpectedly large drains
of nonborrowed reserves by market factors, especially the Treasury
balance as individual nonwithheld tax payments came in above projections
during the second half of September. And earlier this week,
quarter-end pressures added to tightness in the funds market. Addition-
ally, at times early in the period when the dollar was under substantial
downward pressure in volatile foreign exchange markets, the Desk at
times exercised particular caution in providing reserves to avoid gener-
ating expectations of further ease.
(2) Short-term market interest rates declined 15 to 45 basis
points over the intermeeting period, reflecting the System easing in
early September and the recent emergence of expectations of further
policy action in light of the continued sluggish economic expansion.
Intermediate-term yields also fell, but at the longest end of the matur-
ity spectrum rates were unchanged on balance over the intermeeting
period. The policy easing and generally weak economic data tended to
reduce bond yields, but greater concerns about the fiscal outlook and
increased uncertainty--perhaps arising in part from foreign exchange
market turmoil and policy changes abroad--acted as a counterweight.
Broad stock price indexes generally declined 2 to 4 percent on balance
over the period.
(3) Exchange markets were turbulent over the intermeeting
period and bilateral dollar exchange rates moved by widely varying
amounts. Nonetheless, on a weighted-average basis the dollar was
unchanged on balance over the period.2 The dollar weakened early in
the period, partly in response to expectations of Federal Reserve eas-
ing. On Friday, August 21, and on the following Monday the Desk inter-
vened to purchase a total of $500 million against marks
In mid-September
the dollar moved sharply higher as turmoil in European currency markets
both prompted some safe-haven buying of dollars and resulted in interest
rate reductions in Germany. In recent days, reduced strains within the
European Monetary System and heightened expectations of further ease by
the Federal Reserve have prompted renewed declines in the dollar.
(4) Tension within the EMS gave rise to
, major adjustments in monetary
policies, and the withdrawal of sterling and the lira from the exchange
rate mechanism. The Bundesbank lowered its Lombard and discount rates
Germany have declined about 85 basis points. Reacting to these de-
clines, short-term interest rates also fell on balance in Switzerland,
the Netherlands, and Belgium. Following a sharp but short-lived
increase in interest rates to bolster the pound, the Bank of England
lowered interest rates in association with its suspension of the pound's
membership in the ERM; on net, over the intermeeting period, official
rates in the U.K. fell 1 percentage point. In contrast, rates were
raised in Italy and in France to defend currency values. Interest rates
in Japan are little changed since the FOMC meeting. The Canadians
raised interest rates
Averaging across these disparate interest rate
movements, short-term rates abroad have risen somewhat over the inter-
meeting period, but long-term rates have declined.
(5) The monetary aggregates strengthened over the past two
months, although both of the broad aggregates remain somewhat below
their target cones. M2 rose at around a 3 percent rate in both August
and September, marking a considerable turnaround from the declines
posted on balance from March through July. M3 growth also turned posi-
tive, averaging 2 percent in August and September. For the June-to-
September period, M2 and M3 expanded at 1-3/4 and 1 percent rates,
respectively, roughly consistent with the Committee's expectations for
growth over the June-to-December period of 2 and 1/2 percent, for M2 and
M3. On a quarterly average basis, M2 was unchanged in the third quarter
and, based on the Greenbook projection for GDP, M2 velocity rose at a 4
percent rate--again well in excess of what might have been expected from
previous changes in market interest rates.
(6) While M2 growth remains unusually subdued, its pickup over
the past two months does appear to reflect the cumulative effects of
declines in market interest rates and the related drop in opportunity
costs since the end of June. Demand deposit growth, already strong,
accelerated further in the last two months, likely owing to the effects
of lower money market yields on earnings credit rates for compensating
balances and on incentives to economize on cash balances. In September,
a rise in mortgage refinancing activity associated with the previous
decline in mortgage rates also boosted demand deposits. Liquid house-
hold deposits, including other checkable deposits, accelerated over
August and September; although depository institutions have reduced
rates on liquid deposits quickly this year, opportunity costs on such
deposits still have declined. With currency growth strengthening as
well, apparently owing in part to foreign demand. M1 growth averaged
M2-type money market mutual fund shares extended their declines, prob-
ably owing in part to flows into bond and stock mutual funds; those
flows remained strong in August and reportedly in September. Although
large time deposits continued to contract in the last two months, the
runoff at commercial banks slowed, perhaps owing to faster growth of
bank credit.
(7) Bank credit expanded at 5-1/2 percent rates in both August
and September, up from less than 1 percent over the previous two months.
The turnaround in bank credit was attributable to a strengthening of
loans, which ran off more slowly in August and increased in September.
Last month, business loans expanded for the first time since last
October. With the prime rate, at 6 percent, remaining unusually high
relative to bank funding costs, the increase in business loans appeared
to reflect stronger demand rather than any significant easing of supply
restraint. Business financing needs seem to have remained modest in
recent months and stronger loan demand may have owed in part to a moder-
ation in issuance of bonds and stocks by nonfinancial firms. In the
household sector, overall credit demands, while perhaps picking up a
bit, also seem to have continued weak. Adjusted for securitizations,
consumer loans at banks expanded at a slower pace in August and Septem-
ber than in the previous two months, as did home equity loans. Mortgage
refinancing activity, however, has remained strong, and net mortgage
growth may have picked up a little. In municipal bond markets, issuance
has been rapid, but most of the proceeds have been used for refinancing.
Altogether, growth of the debt of nonfederal sectors has strengthened a-
little in recent months, but it remains below the pace of spending.
While federal borrowing tailed off in September, it had remained heavy
through August, helping to lift growth of nonfinancial sector debt from
the fourth quarter of 1991 to 4-3/4 percent, a little above the bottom
of its 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent monitoring range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
June QIV'91
to to
Aug. Sept. Sept. Sept.
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial
debt 4.5 -- 4.6 4.81
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 251 287 -
Excess reserves 935 1015 -
Policy Alternatives
(8) Two alternatives are presented below for the Committee's
consideration. Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to
trade around 3 percent, in association with an initial assumption for
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $200 million.4  Under the
easier policy stance of alternative A, the expected federal funds rate
would be cut to 2-1/2 percent. Although moving the funds rate below the
discount rate is technically feasible, implementing this alternative
through a reduction of at least 1/2 point in the discount rate would
accord with the usual practice of keeping the expected funds rate at or
above the discount rate. With a 1/2 percentage point drop in the dis-
count rate, for example, an initial borrowing assumption of $200 million
would be retained under alternative A.
(9) Projected growth rates of the monetary aggregates under
the two policy alternatives appear on the table below. (The table and
charts on the following pages give more detailed data.) The differences
between the money growth paths in alternatives A and B over the next
three months are relatively small, as the near-term responsiveness of
demands for M2 to declines in short-term interest rates is likely to
continue to be damped. This lack of responsiveness arises from the
relatively strong effects of a steeper yield curve and lower short-term
rates on the attractiveness of capital market instruments and from the
prompter adjustment of deposit rates relative to both market rates and
loan rates. Growth in M2 and M3 over June to December would be about in
line with the Committee's expectations for this period expressed in the
last directive. Both aggregates would fall short of the lower bounds of
their annual ranges by about 1/2 percentage point under either alterna-
tive.5 The similar outcomes for the year projected in the two alter-
natives reflect both the reduced near-term interest elasticity and the
lateness in the year.
Alt. A Alt. B
Growth from September to
December
M2 2-3/4 2
M3 1-1/4 1
M1 14-1/2 12-1/2
Growth from June to December
Growth from 1991:Q4
to 1992:Q4
M2 2 1-3/4
M3 1/2 1/2
M1 14 13-1/2
(10) The spate of weak incoming economic information since
late last week has reestablished market expectations that another
easing of reserve conditions may well be imminent, involving an an-
ticipated further decline in the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage
point. Under these circumstances, selection of the unchanged reserve
conditions of alternative B would initially induce some backup in
interest rates across the maturity spectrum and some rise in the ex-
change value of the dollar. This upward pressure would be muted to
the extent that market participants viewed any policy action as merely
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. A Alt. B
Levels in billions
1992 July
August
September
October
November
December
Monthly Growth Rates
1992 July
August
September
October
November
December
Quarterly Ave. Growth Rates
1991 Q4
1992 Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Jun 92 to Dec 92
Sep 92 to Dec 92
Q2 92
Q3 92
Q4 92
Sep 92
Dec 92
Billions of dollars
Actual Level
------ Growth From Fourth Quarter
* Short-Run Alternatives
SI 1
i' * A
* B
.-- 5%
-- 930
-- 910
-------------------- 0% - 890s
I I I I I I I f I I I I I I I
O N O J F M A M J
J A S O N D J
postponed. The market's expectations of an eventual ease would be
strengthened should incoming data confirm the tepid expansion and
disinflationary trends in the Greenbook forecast. That forecast en-
compasses the possibility of some decline in short-term rates over
coming months, but keeping the funds rate at 3 percent over the six
weeks of the intermeeting period would not necessarily be inconsistent
with that possibility. In any event, a decline in long-term rates
could eventually develop even at an unchanged funds rate as evidence
of disinflation takes firm enough hold to offset skittishness about
fiscal policy; indeed, failing to meet market expectations about
policy easing could well strengthen perceptions that the disinflation
trend will be sustained.
(11) Under alternative B, M2 is projected to grow at a
last two months. Monetary growth will be boosted for a time by addi-
tions to demand deposits associated with prepayments on mortgage-
backed securities arising from robust refinancings and to OCDs from
the reclassification of sweep accounts However,
nominal income growth is projected to moderate in the fourth quarter.
Moreover, despite the special factors and lingering effects of pre-
vious policy stimulus, projected M2 growth stays below that of nominal
GDP because of the probable persistence of the forces that have been
boosting M2 velocity for some time. In particular, the further de-
clines in liquid deposit rates in prospect, in combination with a
still steep Treasury yield curve, will continue to encourage shifts
into bond and stock mutual funds from M2 balances. In addition, the
gap between consumer loan rates and deposit rates will stay wide by
historical standards, tending to foster a further rechannelling of
funds away from M2 and toward household debt repayment or avoidance.
The growth in M2 velocity in the fourth quarter of nearly 1 percent
would bring its expansion over this year to 2-1/2 percent. Were the
federal funds rate to be maintained at 3 percent beyond the Committee
meeting in November, M2 growth in the first quarter probably would be
on a trajectory below the Committee's tentative 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent
range, with continued sizeable velocity increases.
(12) Under alternative B, the staff foresees M3 growth of
August and September. Institution-only money funds have lost the rate
advantage they temporarily enjoyed relative to market instruments
immediately after recent policy easings. Furthermore, the runoffs of
large time deposits at banks as well as thrifts are expected to pick
up again. Bank credit growth is seen as moderating from its pace of
recent months as the unusually rapid pace of security acquisitions
drops off, meaning bank needs for net new financing should abate.
Bank lending terms and standards will probably remain quite restric-
tive, possibly easing only a little, and demands for business and
consumer credit at banks seem likely to remain very subdued.
(13) Overall credit demands will remain modest in the face
of continuing concerns about economic prospects, and they will be
concentrated in longer-term markets as balance sheets continue to be
strengthened. The slightly stronger pace of borrowing by nonfederal
sectors that has developed over the summer is expected to persist.
Borrowers may be a bit less intent on paying down debt given improving
financial situations and cash flows, and credit supply conditions
should remain stable or improve slightly as capital positions of
intermediaries become more comfortable. From August to December,
business debt is expected to grow slowly, with increases in internal
funds nearly matching the rise in capital spending. Household debt
also is foreseen to grow slowly, with its expansion wholly attribut-
able to mortgage borrowing; incentives to prepay or avoid consumer
debt should keep this component about flat after its previous sus-
tained runoff. The rate of expansion of federal debt on a seasonally
adjusted basis is running temporarily to the low side following the
unexpected buildup in cash balances in September. As a result, total
debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to slip off to only
a 4-1/2 percent rate, leaving growth over the four quarters of this
year around the 4-1/2 percent lower bound of its annual monitoring
(14) The immediate 1/2 percentage point drop in the federal
funds rate under alternative A would exceed the market's expected
change. Short-term market interest rates would decline by as much as
maintaining an unusually wide spread over funding costs. The dollar
probably would depreciate somewhat further; since the policy easing
would occur in a situation of persistent macroeconomic slack and ongo-
ing disinflation, the decline in the dollar is most likely to be con-
tained. In such circumstances, long-term market rates probably would
move still lower, pulled down by the weight of a reduced expected path
for short-term rates over at least the intermediate term.
(15) Under alternative A, M2 and M3 likely would grow at
rates of 2-3/4 and 1-1/4 percent over the September-to-December
interval. The two aggregates should be on a somewhat steeper trajec-
tory into next year, raising the odds that they would be within their
tentative ranges in the early months of 1993. In addition to the
limited stimulus to M2 demands arising from the reduction in oppor-
tunity costs, spending by then should have begun to respond to the
monetary policy easing embodied in alternative A. Real interest rates
would be lower than under alternative B, though actual declines in
real rates may be limited by a continued ebbing of inflation expec-
tations. Although some kinds of spending may now be less responsive
to interest rates, lower rates still would speed balance sheet
strengthening, buoy wealth, and support net exports.
Directive Language
(16) Draft language for the operational paragraph including
the usual options and updating is presented below.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/main-
tain/INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly
(SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint might (WOULD) or
slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint (MIGHT)
would be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from
SEPTEMBER June through December at annual rates of about
____ [DEL: 2 and 1/2] ____ percent, respectively.
October 5, 1992
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Monthly
Oct 91
Nov 91
Dec 91
Jan 92
Feb 92
Mar 92
Apr 92
May 92
Jun 92
Jul 92
Aug 92
Sep 92
Weekly
Jun 17 92
Jun 24 92
Jul 1 92
Jul 8 92
Jul 15 92
Jul 22 92
Jul 29 92
Aug 5 92
Aug 12 92
Aug 19 92
Aug 26 92
Sep 2 92
Sep 9 92
Sep 16 92
Sep 23 92
Sep 30 92
Daily
Sep 25 92
Oct 1 92
Oct 2 92
o - nreliminarv data
Strictly Confidential (FRI.
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Clss II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted OCT. 5, 1992
Money stock measures and liquid asets _ Bank credit omestic nonfinancial debt'
npntransactlons total loans U.S.
Period MI M2 components M3 L and government' othr' total'
ANN. GROWTH RATES (.) I
ANNUALLY (Q4 TO Q4)
QUARTERLY AVERAGE
1991-4th QTR.
1992-1st QTR.
1992-2nd QTR.
1992-3rd QTR. pe
MONTHLY
1991-SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
LEVELS (SBILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
WEEKLY
1992-AUG.
SEP. 7
14 p
21 p
discontinuities.
p-preliminary
pe-preliminary estimate
by reclassifications.
average basis, derived
by averaging end-of-month levels of adjacent months, and have been adjusted to remove
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures clas 1II OMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted OCT. 5, 1992
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denoml. mutual lunds denomi. Short. Bankers
Demand checkable RPl and Savings nation general Institu- nation Term Term Savings term Commer- accep.
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars deposits' time purpose tlon time RPs Eurodollars bonds Treasury cial pper' lances
NSA' deposits' and brokr/ only deposits" NSA' NSA' securities
dealer*
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
NPeiot purchases 3 agencies outrightPeriod Net RdemptRedemptions Net redemptions holdings 5
purchases (-)change 1 1-5 5-10 over 10 (.) Change total4 Net RPs
May
June
July
August
September
Weekly
June 24
July 1
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
September 30
h~si I
September 30
October 2, 1992
