Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
1 In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic format.  All 
scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced tilting) and lightly 
cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other blemishes caused after initial 
printing). 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optimal character recognition computer program (OCR) first 
created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, staff checked 
and corrected the text as necessary.   Please note that the numbers and text in charts and tables were not 
reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC January 31, 1992
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Just after the December 17 FOMC meeting, the Desk's
posture in the reserves market remained unchanged, and federal funds
continued to trade around 4-1/2 percent. On December 20, the discount
rate was cut by one percentage point to 3-1/2 percent in response to
cumulating evidence that economic and financial conditions were pointing
to receding inflation pressures. The funds rate immediately fell to its
new expected level of 4 percent. Since then, the funds rate has aver-
aged 4.07 percent, incorporating rather mild year-end pressures. Along
with the discount rate cut, the allowance for adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing was increased by $50 million to account for the emergence of a
50 basis point spread between the funds rate and the discount rate. At
the same time a partly offsetting downward technical adjustment of $25
million recognized the ongoing downtrend in seasonal borrowing in early
winter; another such adjustment was made later in the intermeeting
period, to bring the borrowing allowance to its current level of $75
million. In the last two complete maintenance periods, actual adjust-
ment plus seasonal borrowing ran above its allowance, as reserve short-
falls pushed up adjustment borrowing on settlement days. So far in the
current maintenance period, overall discount borrowing has retreated to
an average of $100 million, which has included about $25 million of
special situation borrowing at one small western bank.
(2) Immediately after the 50 basis point easing of the funds
rate, other short-term market rates fell about 30 basis points and long
rates somewhat less. The prime rate followed the discount rate down by
a full percentage point to 6-1/2 percent, but its spread to funding
costs still remains high relative to historical experience. Subse-
quently, market rates, especially in the intermediate- and longer-term
sectors, decreased further through the first week of January on percep-
tions of continuing economic weakness. The decline in the yield on 30-
year Treasury bonds, to a low of around 7-3/8 percent, also was spurred
by discussions of a possible curtailment of issuance of long-term Trea-
suries. Since the first week of the new year, however, interest rates
have firmed in response to what are seen as more upbeat prospects for
the economy and the fading of market expectations of near-term monetary
policy easing, as well as to heightened market concerns about outsized
fiscal stimulus. In addition, a flood of issuance of corporate, mort-
gage-backed, and agency debt has put upward pressure on intermediate-
and long-term rates. On balance, 3-month rates are down about 1/4 to
1/2 of a percentage point since the last FOMC meeting, and long rates
are about unchanged. At intermediate-term maturities, where the effects
of a cyclical rebound and fiscal stimulus might be expected to be most
pronounced, Treasury rates are up as much as 25 basis points. A con-
siderable stock market rally was touched off by the policy easing and
expectations of a more buoyant economy, with broad indexes up 7 to 11
percent. Aided by lower funding costs and better-than-expected fourth-
quarter earnings reports, bank stock prices rose around 15 percent.
(3) The dollar declined further on exchange markets in late
December, particularly against the German mark, following the Bundes-
bank's 1/2 percentage point increase in its official lending rates on
December 19 and the System's easing action the next day. In January,
however, the dollar rebounded sharply, except against the Japanese yen.
Incoming evidence suggesting to market participants that wage and price
pressures in Germany may be less than feared, combined with renewed
optimism on the U.S. economy, held out the prospect of some reversal in
the relative directions of monetary policies. These expectations were
reflected in movements in long-term interest rates: German bond rates
declined 15 basis points in January, even as U.S. bond rates reversed
their earlier decreases. Over the intermeeting period the dollar rose,
on balance, by 2 percent against the mark and by similar amounts against
the other currencies in the European Monetary System. Against the yen,
however, the dollar declined 2-1/2 percent; most of the movement fol-
lowed Desk sales on January 17
.against a back-
drop of growing friction over bilateral trade issues. On a weighted-
average basis, the dollar's exchange value rose by 1-1/4 percent over
the intermeeting period.
(4) Growth of the broader monetary aggregates receded in
December, and M3 expansion slipped further in January. Over the two
months, M2 grew at a 2-3/4 percent rate and M3 at a 1-1/4 percent rate,
close to FOMC specifications of 3 percent and 1-1/2 percent, respec-
tively, for the November to March period. 1 These two-month growth
rates, especially for M3, were held down in part by unusually large, but
transitory, declines around year-end, whose reversal by the latter part
of January was not fully reflected in the monthly average.2 Even
after allowing for these temporary distortions, however, growth of the
broad aggregates remained sluggish, particularly in light of the sharp
declines in short-term rates in the fourth quarter. The additional
steepening of the yield curve and the continued stock market rally have
made the returns on longer-term bond and stock funds still more attrac-
tive relative to average returns on M2 balances. Moreover, steep reduc-
tions since mid-December in average offering rates on NOW accounts and
savings deposits (including MMDAs) likely have held down deposit growth
by limiting the impact that the policy easing has had in lowering the
average M2 opportunity cost with respect to short-term market rates.
(5) The liquid components of the aggregates nevertheless con-
tinued to expand briskly on balance over December and January, perhaps
in part because depositors shied away from locking in low returns on
small time deposits. M1 grew at a 12 percent average rate. An
accelerating outflow of small time deposits was the primary culprit
behind a decline in the nontransactions component of M2 over the two
months. Growth of M3 was depressed not only by the year-end outflows of
money funds but also by a more sizable decrease in large time deposits
at commercial banks. Bank credit expansion softened in December, owing
to renewed weakness in loans. A further slowing of bank credit growth
is suggested by data for the first three weeks of January, as acquisi-
tions of securities have nearly halted. At thrifts, the decline in
large time deposits has abated some since November, as total thrift
assets likely fell less steeply since RTC resolution activity remained
(6) Growth in the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors ap-
pears to have slowed to a 3-3/4 percent rate in December, and very
partial evidence suggests weak growth again in January. The decelera-
tion has mainly reflected a reduced pace of federal borrowing. In
addition, sluggish spending and deleveraging by businesses and house-
holds seem to have depressed the growth of debt of nonfederal sectors
since November even below the anemic 2-3/4 percent pace of earlier in
the year. Heavy gross issuance in corporate bond and equity markets
largely has represented balance sheet restructurings and refinancings:
Businesses have shifted further away from short-term borrowing at banks
and from commercial paper, while refundings of callable bonds and re-
verse LBOs have become more common. For households, the stirring of
activity in the housing market and soaring refinancings do not yet seem
to have encouraged much faster net mortgage growth, and consumer credit
still seems to be trending lower, even with an apparent respite in
December. Indicators suggest a stabilization of credit availability,
but no significant easing. In the January survey of senior loan
officers, banks reported little change of lending terms and standards
since last October and quality spreads in open markets have remained
stable or narrowed some since the December FOMC meeting.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'91
p to p
Nov. Dec. Jan. Jan.
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt 5.3 3.7 .-
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 107 191 217
Excess reserves 892 979 1069
p - Preliminary estimate.
1. Data on the monetary aggregates incorporate the
seasonal review.
1992 benchmark and
Alternative Long-Run Strategies
(7) As background for consideration of the annual ranges for
money and credit in 1992, the table on the following page presents three
alternative long-run strategies for monetary policy through 1996, to-
gether with the associated consequences for output, prices, and resource
utilization. The baseline path, strategy I, judgmentally extends the
greenbook forecast for 1992 and 1993 out through 1996; as in the basic
greenbook forecast, it assumes no fiscal stimulus package this year
except for the change in tax withholding schedules. Strategies II and
III posit somewhat tighter and easier monetary policies as indexed by M2
growth one percentage point below or above the baseline M2 path. The
alternative scenarios for output, prices, and unemployment were obtained
using simulations of the staff's econometric model of the U.S. economy
to establish deviations around the baseline.4
(8) In each of the strategies, M2 growth over 1992 remains
restrained relative to historical relationships with interest rates and
income embodied in the staff's standard money demand equation by the
same forces that have depressed M2 growth in recent years--constraints
on the availability of depository credit, disruption of depositor rela-
tionships caused by RTC resolution activity, shifts out of M2 instru-
ments to higher-yielding capital market instruments, and deleveraging.
By 1993, minimal further downward shifting in M2 demand is foreseen.
With earnings and capital positions substantially improved by then,
banks are assumed to compete more aggressively for both loans and
deposits. In addition, longer-term rates are projected to decline, at
some point cutting into incentives for shifting into capital market
instruments, and stronger balance sheets of households and businesses
are restored. In the final four years, growth of M2 moves into conform-
ity with what would be expected given the growth in nominal spending and
movements in interest rates. It is assumed that the downward shift in
M2 demand in the 1990 to 1992 period is not retraced through the fore-
cast horizon, but rather that the level of M2 velocity has shifted up.
I (baseline)
II (tighter)
III (easier)
CPI
I
II
III
Real GDP
I
II
III
Unemployment rate
I
II
III
3-1/2 4-1/2 4-1/4 4-1/4 4-1/4
2-1/2 3-1/2 3-1/4 3-1/4 3-1/4
4-1/2 5-1/2 5-1/4 5-1/4 5-1/4
2.9 3-1/2
3-3/8
3-5/8
2-3/4
2-1/4
3
.2 2 3-1/2
1-1/4 2-3/4
2-1/2 4-1/2
6.9 7-1/4 6-3/4
7-1/2 7-1/4
7 6-1/4
2-1/4
1-1/2
3
3
2-1/2
3-1/2
6-1/4
7
5-1/2
2
1
3-1/8
2-3/4
3
2-1/2
6
6-3/4
5-1/4
(9) After strengthening through 1993 real output growth in
the baseline strategy I slows to a 2-3/4 percent rate by 1995, or about
1-7/8
3/4
2-3/4
3-1/2
2
5-3/4
6-1/4
5-1/4
one-half percentage point above potential real GDP growth. Although
short-term nominal rates are flat over the entire forecast interval,
real short-term interest rates rise from their current unsustainably low
level, helping to slow output. By the end of the simulation, real
short-term rates reach about 2 percent, their average level during the
1950s and 1960s. Output growth also is held down by a mildly contrac-
tionary overall fiscal position of federal, state and local governments.
With the unemployment rate declining but remaining above the estimated
5-3/4 percent natural rate for most of the period, inflation gradually
slows to around 2 percent in 1995 and 1996.
(10) The tighter policy of strategy II produces virtual price
stability during the forecast period. The reduced rate of M2 expansion
of this strategy raises nominal interest rates more quickly, thus push-
ing up real rates and putting upward pressure on the dollar's exchange
value. This strategy damps the recovery over the 1992-1994 period in
comparison with the baseline. As a slower rate of job creation keeps a
larger and more sustained gap between actual unemployment and the natu-
ral rate, inflation declines more steeply. Since the staff model does
not allow for credibility effects that may accompany the resolute pur-
suit of price stability, it is possible that this policy could put even
greater and prompter downward pressure on both inflation expectations
and actual inflation.
(11) Strategy III provides for a more vigorous recovery in
output and jobs. Although the output path associated with this strategy
remains somewhat subdued compared with the typical post-war recovery,
given the current degree of slack in the economy the strategy makes no
further progress in reducing inflation beyond the gains projected
through 1993. Indeed, inflation accelerates slightly in the last two
years shown, since the unemployment rate drops to below the natural rate
by late 1994. Later in the period, nominal income growth in excess of
M2 growth is associated with somewhat higher nominal interest rates than
are embodied in strategies I and II. Real short-term interest rates,
however, remain at a lower level than in strategy I, placing downward
pressure on the exchange value of the dollar.
(12) The next table presents inflation rates derived from two
different sets of simulations of the P* model, which has been augmented
with a variable capturing the relative price of oil.5  The simula-
tions use the same M2 growth rates as in the exercise above. The upper
panel shows simulation results based on the basic P* model, which uses
an historical average of velocity as an estimate of long-run equilibrium
velocity, V* 6 In these simulations, inflation slows substantially
under all three strategies to about a 2 percent rate in 1992. All of
the strategies virtually eliminate inflation by 1993, and the first two
produce price deflation thereafter. The predictions in the lower panel,
which allow for shifts in V*, are roughly similar to those presented in
the previous table.7  As in the earlier set of forecasts, strategies
I and II allow for a continuing disinflation over the whole period,
while strategy III permits the inflation process to reignite.
P* Model Simulation of Inflation
CPI
(QIV to QIV percent change)
I (baseline)
II (tighter)
III (easier)
With adjustments for
velocity shifts
I (baseline)
II (tighter)
III (easier)
2.9 3 2-3/4
3 2-1/2
3-1/4 3-1/4
2-3/4
2-1/4
3-1/2
1/4
-1-1/4
1-3/4
2-1/2
1
4
-1/4
-1-1/2
2-3/4
1-1/2
3-3/4
Long-Run Ranges
(13) The table below presents three alternative sets of
ranges for growth of money and credit over 1992. (Appendix B gives
the ranges and outcomes for money and debt growth since 1979.) Alter-
native I represents the provisional ranges selected by the Committee
last July, which are identical to those used in 1991. The staff projec-
tions for M2, M3, and debt all are in the lower halves of these ranges.
Alternative II allows for a tighter policy stance, lowering each of the
ranges 1/2 percentage point. This alternative could be interpreted as
according with the more restrictive longer-run strategy II of the pre-
vious section, which involves money growth 1 percentage point slower
than in the extended staff projection. Any of the alternatives would
accommodate strategy III, but the thrust of that easier strategy would
be particularly consistent with the 1/2-percentage-point increase in the
ranges that define alternative III. An optional targeting approach,
which involves linking this year's target ranges to last year's ranges
rather than to the actual outcomes, also is discussed in this section.
(14) The staff is projecting that 3-1/2 percent M2 growth in
1992 will be consistent with the 5 percent increase of nominal GDP in
the greenbook. The implied rise in velocity this year after no change
in 1991, shown in chart 1, reflects the different behavior of interest
rates expected for 1992. With nominal short-term interest rates assumed
essentially flat in the greenbook projection, opportunity costs would
Alt. I 1
(Provisional
Ranges) Alt. II Alt. III
Memo:
Staff Actual
Forecast 1991
Growth from
QIV '91 to
QIV '92
Nominal GDP
2-1/2 to
6-1/2
1 to 5
4-1/2 to
8-1/2
2 to 6
1/2 to
4-1/2
4 to 8
3 to 7
1-1/2 to
5-1/2
5 to 9
widen substantially in 1992 given the aggressiveness with which institu-
tions are reducing deposit offering rates. The widening opportunity
costs and decreasing impetus provided by previous policy easings would
work to raise M2 velocity. By contrast, the sharp decline in oppor-
tunity costs in 1991 tended to hold down M2 velocity. The rise in
velocity in 1992 also embodies another downward shift of money demand,
8
similar in magnitude to that experienced last year. Bank credit
should remain subdued--reflecting continuing restraints on supply as
well as borrower preferences for longer-term debt and equity--and with
needs for funds limited, banks will continue to be relatively
unaggressive in seeking to retain deposits. 9  Given the wide spreads
between rates on deposits and rates on other investments and on consumer
credit, households are facing conditions favoring the shifting of depos-
it funds into capital market instruments, the financing of expenditures
out of deposits, and the paydown of outstanding debt. The public's
demand for retail deposits probably also will be depressed again in 1992
by the activities of RTC and BIF, with the abrogation of deposit con-
tracts and other disruptions to business relationships involved in the
process of resolving thrifts and banks. Although depository credit is
anticipated to fall this year, the decline is projected to be less than
in 1991, reflecting some abatement in the shrinkage of the thrift
industry. As a consequence, M3 is projected to rise 2 percent during
1992, somewhat faster than the 1-1/4 percent increase registered last
(15) The growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is ex-
pected to strengthen a little to 5-1/2 percent in 1992 from 4-3/4 per-
cent in 1991. All of the acceleration is due to faster growth of fed-
eral debt. Nonfederal debt growth, at 2-3/4 percent, is projected to
remain quite slow. Despite the anticipated pickup in spending, the wide
spreads between borrowing and deposit rates at intermediaries that are
restraining M2 relative to income also will be holding down debt. In
addition, both households and businesses are likely to remain cautious
in their use of debt in view of still-strained balance sheets, with
businesses offering sizable volumes of equity to reduce reliance on
borrowed funds. With state and local governmental units under fiscal
pressure, some may borrow to finance budget imbalances, but the sector
as a whole should continue to limit its borrowing. We do not anticipate
added restraint on credit supplies. The financial condition of many
banks has strengthened, but given the more stringent treatment of weak
depository institutions embodied in the new banking legislation and the
overhang of questionable assets at banks, any loosening of terms and
standards for credit in 1992 is likely to be modest. Continued weakness
in commercial real estate should keep life insurers and some other
intermediaries under pressure as well, affecting especially lower-rated
business borrowers with limited access to open markets for long-term
finance. The restrained growth of debt relative to spending, along with
a lengthening of debt maturities and refinancing at lower interest
rates, is expected to alleviate strains on the financial positions of
many households and businesses.
(16) As noted above, the staff projections for M2, M3, and
domestic nonfinancial debt all are in the lower portions of their pro-
visional 1992 or alternative I ranges, as shown in the table on page 13
and by the dots in charts 3 and 4. This configuration gives consider-
ably greater scope for reducing than for raising interest rates should
output or inflation deviate from the staff forecast, or should the
Committee desire a different outcome. Indeed, given the staff's
appraisal of spending propensities and money demand relationships,
attaining the midpoint of the M2 range later this year implies a need
for a prompt 3/4 percentage point easing in the federal funds rate,
which would be expected to boost nominal GDP growth in 1992 from 5 to
5-1/2 percent. Moreover, the provisional ranges provide considerable
room for additional money growth should velocity not increase as much as
projected by the staff. However, an even larger than projected short-
fall in money demand, prompted say by especially aggressive reductions
in deposit rates, might tend to breach the lower bound of the range
without necessarily signalling weakness in the economy.
(17) If the Committee were concerned about this outcome, it
might consider alternative II, which would reduce each of the ranges by
1/2 percentage point. In comparison with alternative I, this alter-
native would more nearly center expected growth of money and credit
within the ranges. This alternative would allow more leeway for policy
to be tightened, if necessary, during the year, and would emphasize the
Committee's commitment to price stability. A disadvantage of this
approach is that it may be seen as signalling a lack of concern with
weak money and sluggish economic growth last year and appear inconsis-
tent with the Federal Reserve's recent efforts to stimulate a resumption
of economic growth.
(18) Alternative III would raise each of the ranges by 1/2
percentage point. It would convey a Committee intention to make up for
some of the monetary shortfall last year in order to ensure a reasonably
vigorous economic recovery. This alternative would be most appropriate
if the Committee viewed the odds as still being tilted toward weaker
economic performance than desired, or wanted appreciably more growth of
nominal GDP growth in 1992 and 1993 than in the greenbook. Moreover,
the higher range would allow for an abatement or even reversal of recent
money demand shifts, which would lower M2 velocity relative to the staff
forecast. With M2 expected to be only a little above the 3 percent
lower bound of its alternative III range by March, adopting this alter-
native would suggest a strong predilection towards a near-term easing of
monetary policy.
Tunnel Option
(19) Another option that the Committee might consider would be
to link target ranges for 1992 not to the actual outcome for 1991, but
to last year's target ranges. Such an approach would be most appropri-
ate if the Committee wanted to make up this year for last year's short-
fall in money growth from the midpoints of the ranges. One possibility,
depicted in chart 5, would set growth "tunnels," starting from the upper
and lower ends of the 1991 ranges. The boundaries of the tunnels in
this chart were constructed to represent growth at the midpoint of the
provisional ranges--4-1/2 percent for M2 and 3 percent for M3. Both of
the monetary aggregates currently are near the lower bounds of their
respective tunnels. For M2 to finish 1992 at the midpoint of the range
depicted in chart 5, the aggregate would need to expand about 6 percent
over the year--about 1-1/2 percentage points to make up last year's
shortfall from the midpoint plus the 4-1/2 percent growth consistent
with expansion in the middle of the new tunnel. If the staff's assess-
ment of money demand and underlying economic conditions is about right,
such an outcome would require a substantial easing of reserve conditions
early this year. The tunnel could be tilted downwards by selecting a
lower growth rate; such an adjustment might better convey the Federal
Reserve's continued commitment to the eventual achievement of price
stability, but it probably would still require a marked easing of
(20) Choice of tunnels carries a presumption of a multiyear
strategy for monetary growth. In the past, this approach has been
suggested as an element in a strategy that precommits money growth to
relatively narrow ranges over many years. Such a strategy implies
confidence that the targeted monetary aggregates and ultimate variables
of interest to the Committee--such as prices or nominal GDP--move fairly
closely together over the intermediate as well as long term. Under
these conditions, making up shortfalls or overshoots in money from
targets within a year or so would avoid inadvertent drift in the base
for annual target ranges, better providing a nominal anchor to ensure
the achievement and maintenance of the Committee's price objectives over
time. Choice of this approach in 1992 would be appropriate if last
year's shortfall in M2 were seen as associated with an undesirable
shortfall of income or transitory shifts in the demand for money. This
approach would be less attractive if there were concerns that money and
the ultimate targets of the Committee did not always reliably move
together, either because of appreciable interest elasticities of money
demand or shifts in such demands. Reflecting these features of money
demand, in the mid and late 1980s money growth well above the midpoints
for a series of years and then well below was consistent with relatively
damped variations in growth of nominal GDP. In the current situation,
as financial flows are being redirected away from depository institu-
tions, the relationship between spending and the liabilities of those
institutions, which make up the bulk of M2 and M3, might be seen as
remaining especially uncertain.
Short-run Policy Alternatives
(21) Two short-run policy alternatives are presented below for
Committee consideration. Under alternative B, federal funds would con-
tinue to trade around 4 percent, with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
averaging around $100 million.10 Under alternative A, the federal
funds rate would decline to the 3-1/2 percent area in association with a
reduction of the borrowing allowance to $50 million.
(22) Projected monetary growth under the two alternatives is
presented below. Under both alternatives, growth in M2 would strengthen
a little over February and March from its December-January pace. Still,
growth in M2 would be fairly sluggish, despite the sharp decline in
money market rates near the end of last year; indeed, M2 velocity likely
would move higher in the first quarter under both alternatives, as hold-
ers of M2, responding in part to large declines in offering rates on M2,
continue to shift into capital market instruments and to restrain expan-
sion of balance sheets overall. M2 would remain in the lower half of
its provisional 1992 range through March under both alternatives, but
under alternative A would be on a trajectory to move up in its range
over the second quarter. An expected resumption of RTC resolution
activity would reappear as a drag on M2 late in the current quarter and
would have an even greater effect on M3. Partly as a consequence, M3
would remain in the lower half of its provisional range. In contrast,
M1 is expected to continue to expand at a double-digit pace, propelled
by further large gains in transaction deposits.
Alt. A Alt. B
Growth from December
to March
M2 3-1/2 3
M3 1-3/4 1-1/2
Ml 15-1/2 14-1/2
Growth from 1991Q4
to March
M2 3-1/2 3-1/4
M3 2 1-3/4
M1 14-1/2 13-3/4
(23) The markets appear to have built in no policy moves in
the period just ahead and thus unchanged reserve market conditions
under alternative B should have no effect on interest rates. The
course of interest rates thus will depend on developments in fiscal
policy and the economy. In the former area, investors will be assess-
ing the implications of emerging agreements for the longer-term fiscal
outlook. Interest rates could move lower should incoming economic
indicators, as in the staff economic forecast, continue to point to a
flat economy in the near-term and further gains on inflation. If
rates were to edge down, the dollar might come under some downward
pressure, but it is not expected to change significantly under this
(24) Short-term interest rates would fall by nearly the
50 basis point decline in the federal funds rate under alternative A.
With the funds rate around or perhaps a little below most assessments
of the underlying inflation rate, market participants might see such a
policy move as unsustainable, thereby limiting the decline in bond
rates. The greater prospects for calls on corporate bonds and prepay-
ments on mortgages would tend to widen spreads on such instruments
relative to Treasury yields. The exchange value of the dollar would
fall under this alternative as U.S. money market interest rates drop-
ped still further below those of our major trading partners.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
Levels in billions
1991 October 3420.8 3420.8 4162.8 4162.8 880.9 880.9
November 3435.0 3435.0 4171.9 4171.9 891.4 891.4
December 3442.9 3442.9 4178.3 4178.3 898.2 898.2
1992 January 3450.5 3450.5 4180.0 4180.0 909.4 909.4
February 3465.7 3464.3 4191.8 4190.8 923.6 922.8
March 3474.3 3469.9 4197.1 4194.3 933.3 931.0
1991 Target Ranges: 2.5 to 6.5 1.0 to 5.0
1992 Target Ranges: 2.5 to 6.5 1.0 to 5.0
(25) Even with a pickup over February and March, M2 would
expand at only a 3 percent annual rate over the December-to-March
period under alternative B, below the pace over the last three months
of 1991. All of the growth in M2 over coming months would come from
the 14-1/4 percent rate of expansion projected in its M1 compo-
nent. 1 1 Small denomination time deposits are seen as continuing to
run off rapidly over the remainder of the quarter. Recent aggressive
cuts in rates on liquid deposits, however, will tend to limit the
bulge in such accounts, deflecting some funds outside M2 as well as to
other M2 components. 12 Under the easier conditions of alternative
A, M2 would be expected to be expanding at a percentage point faster
pace in March and into the next quarter; all of the added growth in M2
would occur in M1, other liquid deposits, and M2 money funds.
(26) M3, under alternative B, would expand at only a 2 per-
cent annual rate over February and March, after even slower growth in
December and January. Acting to buoy M3, in addition to the February-
March pickup in M2, should be further inflows to institution-only
money funds, which have managed to damp the decline in their returns
relative to short-term market rates by extending maturities. However,
sluggish expansion in bank credit and an increase in RTC activity over
the quarter will continue to restrain this aggregate. Under alterna-
tive A, growth in M3 would strengthen slightly more, to a 2-1/2 per-
cent pace. Under either alternative, activity in bond and mortgage
markets would remain brisk. However, such activity will continue to
be directed mostly toward reducing borrowing costs by calling or
refinancing existing debt. Indeed, businesses are expected to pay
down debt again in the first quarter as capital spending remains weak
and equity issuance strong. Although home mortgage borrowing is
expected to firm in response to the reduced loan rates and some pickup
in housing activity, household debt growth is expected to stay anemic
as consumer loans contract. Overall debt growth, at a 3-3/4 percent
rate from the fourth quarter of 1991 to March, will be boosted by
faster growth in federal debt than in December and January. However,
such growth would leave this aggregate below the lower end of its
monitoring range.
Directive Language
(27) Presented below for Committee consideration is draft
language relating to the Humphrey-Hawkins ranges for 1992 and to the
operating paragraph for the intermeeting period.
1992 RANGES
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and
promote sustainable growth in output. In furtherance of
these objectives, the Committee at THIS [DEL: its] meeting
ESTABLISHED [DEL: in July reaffirmed the ranges it had established
in February] for growth of M2 and M3 of ___ TO ____ [DEL: 2-1/2 to
6-1/2] percent and ____ TO ____ [DEL: 1 to 5] percent, respectively,
measured from the fourth quarter of 1991 [DEL: 1990] to the fourth
quarter of 1992 [DEL: 1991]. The monitoring range for growth of
total domestic nonfinancial debt [DEL: also] was SET [DEL: maintained] at
____ TO ____ [DEL: 4-1/2 to 8-1/2] percent for the year. [DEL: For 1992, on a
tentative basis, the Committee agreed in July to use the same
ranges as in 1994 for growth in each of the monetary
agregates and debt-, measured from the fourth quarter of 1991
to the fourth quarter of 1992.] With regard to M3, the
Committee anticipated that the ongoing restructuring of
thrift depository institutions would continue to depress the
growth of this aggregate relative to spending and total
credit. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress toward
price level stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SLIGHTLY/main-
tain/INCREASE SLIGHTLY the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. In the context of the Committee's long-
run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, (SOMEWHAT) slightly
greater reserve restraint might (WOULD) or somewhat
(SLIGHTLY) lesser reserve restraint (MIGHT) would be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with growth
of M2 and M3 over the period from DECEMBER November through
March at annual rates of about _ AND _ [DEL: 3 and 1-1/2] percent,
