Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Class I FOMC
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC March 19, 1993
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments 1
(1) The degree of reserve pressure was left unchanged over
the intermeeting period. The intended level of the federal funds rate
remained at 3 percent and the allowance for adjustment and seasonal
borrowing at $50 million. The federal funds rate has averaged 3.03
percent since the early February FOMC meeting, and borrowing has aver-
aged slightly above its allowance. Short-term market interest rates
were little changed over the intermeeting period.
(2) Bond markets, however, rallied strongly over much of the
period. Prospects for significant reductions in the federal budget
deficit in coming years and the consequences for aggregate demand
appeared to be the most important influence sparking the rally. De-
mands for Treasury notes and bonds also were boosted by municipal
defeasance activity and assessments of heightened prepayment risk on
mortgage-backed securities. Toward the end of the period, however,
upturns in inflation readings prompted some backup in yields, but
renewed rate declines most recently have erased much of this backup.
On balance, most intermediate- and long-term yields have fallen 40 to
securities and fixed-rate mortgages over comparable Treasuries have
widened some; nevertheless, mortgage rates reached their lowest levels
in two decades. The drop in interest rates buoyed stock prices: Most
major indexes rose 1 to 3 percent, although the NASDAQ index declined
somewhat on net, reflecting concerns about future changes in government
policy toward certain industries, including health-care firms.
(3) The dollar's foreign exchange value on a weighted-average
basis declined about 1-1/4 percent on balance over the intermeeting
period. During much of the period, the dollar generally rose against
European currencies, amid signs of weakening activity and easier cur-
rent and prospective monetary policy stances in those countries. But
the dollar declined against the mark and other European currencies
following the Bundesbank's cut in its discount rate on March 18 that
embodied less easing than was apparently expected by market partici-
pants. On balance, the dollar fell 1/2 percent against the mark over
the period. German short-term rates dropped 70 basis points, while the
long-term rate moved down 40 basis points. Interest rates elsewhere in
Europe also decreased. The dollar depreciated 7-1/2 percent against
the yen, as market attention focused on Japan's growing trade surplus.
In Japan, short-term rates and the bellwether bond yield declined about
(4) The broad monetary aggregates continued to contract in
February. M2 dropped at a 4 percent rate. Its Ml component fell
slightly last month, continuing its deceleration from the double-digit
pace that prevailed over much of 1992.2 The nontransaction com-
ponent of M2 again contracted rapidly. Owing mainly to strong flows
into institution-only money funds, the decline in M3 slowed last month,
and, at a 2-1/2 percent rate, was more moderate than that in M2. The
available data for the first half of March show a less rapid outflow
from M2 but a stepped-up runoff of M3 compared with February. From
January to mid-March, the broader aggregates, especially M2, were
appreciably weaker than anticipated at the time of the last bluebook.
As of mid-March, the broad aggregates were well below their target
cones and only a little above the lower edges of their parallel bands.
(5) Much of the recent weakness in the monetary aggregates
appears to be due to temporary factors. Some weakness in M2 associated
with seasonal adjustment distortions and a decline in deposit balances
associated with a fall in prepayments of mortgage-backed securities was
foreseen in the last bluebook.3  In the event, prepayments plunged
more rapidly than earlier projected. But not all of the shortfall of
M2 from expectations is accounted for by larger-than-anticipated
temporary factors. Thus, even abstracting from temporary depressants,
M2 appears to be fundamentally weaker than foreseen earlier, with
underlying growth from January to mid-March, while positive, quite
modest. Of the 8-1/2 percent growth rate in M2 velocity that seems to
be in train this quarter, no more than 1-1/2 percentage points can
plausibly be attributed to these temporary factors. Evidently, some of
the other persisting influences that have been boosting velocity in
recent years have intensified. Relatively attractive returns on capi-
tal market instruments likely have prompted households to divert more
funds from deposits into bond and stock mutual fund shares, which have
posted record inflows in recent months. Bank credit expansion has
slowed noticeably this year, and banks also have continued to tap
markets for subordinated debt and equity, further depressing their
needs for deposit funding. Both M2 and M3 have borne the imprint of
these developments, as interest rates on retail deposits have dropped
further in recent weeks and as large time deposits have continued to
run off. Moreover, the leveling out of short-term interest rates since
last September, as the stance of monetary policy has held steady, has
meant that earlier policy-induced stimulus to growth of the broader
aggregates has ended.
(6) Overall private debt growth appears to be expanding
around or a bit faster than its pace over the last few months of 1992.
Businesses have drawn heavily on credit markets, as the rally in bond
prices set off another surge of corporate issuance, although the pro-
ceeds were largely used to repay business loans at banks and commercial
paper, both of which have declined a little on balance so far this
year. State and local governments have taken advantage of favorable
market conditions by selling a hefty volume of bonds, with an enlarged
proportion of the offerings earmarked to refund debt. Households seem
to have increased their willingness to take on debt in recent months:
Consumer installment credit rose in January for the fifth straight
month and, in February, bank consumer loans adjusted for securitization
rose at nearly a 9 percent annual rate. Total domestic nonfinancial
debt is estimated to have grown at about a 4-1/2 percent rate from the
fourth quarter through February, leaving this aggregate around the
lower bound of its 1993 monitoring range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV
to
Jan. Feb. Feb.
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
p--preliminary estimates.
1. Debt figures for February are preliminary.
2. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
Policy alternatives
(7) Three policy alternatives are presented below for con-
sideration by the Committee. Under alternative B, federal funds would
continue to trade around 3 percent in association with the allowance for
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing initially remaining at $50 million.
The allowance probably will need to be revised upward over the inter-
meeting period when demands for seasonal credit strengthen during the
spring. Under alternative A, the federal funds rate would decline to
the 2-1/2 percent area. This alternative could be implemented through a
borrowing allowance at the same level as in alternative B, or by
lowering the initial borrowing allowance to $25 million and leaving the
discount rate unchanged. Alternative C, involving a rise in the federal
funds rate to 3-1/2 percent, could be implemented through a boost in the
initial borrowing allowance to $75 million.
(8) Market participants are expecting neither tightening nor
easing in the stance of monetary policy for some time. They appear to
anticipate that the recent runup in inflation will subside in large
part. The gains in stock prices and sustained narrow quality spreads
suggest that investors now also believe that the bond market rally,
together with the economy's existing forward momentum, will keep the
contractionary effects of the deficit-reduction package from derailing
the economic expansion. Thus, under alternative B, short-term interest
rates would stay around current levels. Intermediate- and long-term
rates will remain sensitive to news on the fiscal front and correspond-
ing implications for the economy, as well as reports bearing on the
inflation outlook. Bond rates could edge lower should incoming news on
prices confirm the extent of moderation in inflation embodied in the
staff economic forecast. The dollar would be expected to fluctuate
around current levels under alternative B, but could firm somewhat if
rate declines in Europe prove to be faster and larger than now expected.
(9) The easing of policy under alternative A would surprise
market participants and would lead to a decline in short-term rates,
including the prime rate, commensurate with the 1/2 percentage point
drop in the federal funds rate. In such circumstances, bankers might be
more encouraged to ease lending standards and nonprice terms on business
loans. Rate declines at longer maturities would be muted should market
participants see the easing in the absence of weak economic data as
risking a sustained resurgence of inflation. Conversely, the tightening
of policy under alternative C, which also would come as a surprise to
market participants, would induce a rise in short-term rates comparable
to the hike in the federal funds rate. The increase in intermediate-
and long-term rates would be lessened to the degree it were seen as a
timely measure to hold inflation in check. To the extent that market
participants saw dimmer prospects for economic activity, risk premiums
incorporated in yields on private obligations would increase. The ex-
change value of the dollar would move in the same direction as domestic
interest rates under either alternative.
(11) Monetary growth rates for the February-to-June period
thought to be consistent with the three alternatives are shown in the
table below. Despite both stronger nominal income expansion and lower
longer-term interest rates than expected previously, in all three
alternatives growth rates of M2 and M3 over this period are roughly
sions primarily reflect the weaker-than-expected underlying monetary
growth to date and the prospect that the various influences causing a
rechanneling of credit flows away from depositories will remain intense,
even if abating some from their extraordinary strength so far this year.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from February
to June
Implied growth from 1992:Q4
to June
(12) Under alternative B, M2 is expected to resume growth over
the February-to-June period. The projected 2-1/2 percent average rate
implies growth of 1-3/4 percent for the second quarter. With nominal
GDP in the staff forecast decelerating to a 5-1/2 percent pace, growth
in M2 velocity would slow to a 3-1/2 percent annual rate in the second
quarter. Slower velocity growth partly results from the positive ef-
fects on M2 of the turnaround of the temporary factors related to sea-
sonal adjustment and prepayments of mortgage-backed securities. Their
impact, which represents a diminishing drag on M2 growth in March as a
whole, acts as a stimulant to growth in the subsequent months, reflect-
ing a reversal of the effects of seasonal distortions and a resurgence
in prepayments.4 On balance, these factors raise money growth per-
ceptibly over the February-to-June period. Much of the pickup in M2
comes from its M1 component, which would expand at a 10 percent annual
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
I
Quarterly Ave. Growth Rates
rate from February to June.5 Outflows to bond funds from money
market mutual funds and nontransactions retail deposits are seen as
moderating over time if bond yields stabilize around current reduced
levels and as portfolio adjustments become more complete. The pickup in
M2 would still be limited by further downward adjustments of deposit
rates. By June, growth in M2 from its fourth-quarter base would be only
(13) Even though M3 is seen as expanding at a 1 percent rate
over the February-to-June period, it still would be well below its
fourth-quarter base in June. The resumption in M3 expansion would
partly reflect some anticipated pickup in bank credit. In the months
ahead, banks may become a little more willing to extend business
credit--including loans to smaller firms--and, given their more comfort-
able capital positions, to retain, rather than securitize and sell,
assets. Improved balance sheet structures also imply less need for
banks to rely on capital markets to raise funds, an important substitute
for M3 funding recently. Even though some businesses are expected to
acquire additional financing from banks, others are likely to continue
to rely on bond markets, in some cases paying down bank loans and short-
term paper. Overall business borrowing is expected to strengthen with
increases in capital spending and moderation in equity financing.
Household borrowing will be bolstered by improving housing activity--as
suggested by the stronger level of mortgage applications recently--and
further advances in outlays for consumer durables. Nonfederal debt is
expected to grow at about a 4 percent pace from February to June, up a
little from growth in recent months. Federal debt expansion, while
gyrating from month to month, will remain brisk over the second quarter
to finance large deficits.6 Total debt of domestic nonfinancial
sectors is projected to grow at a 5-1/2 percent annual rate from
February to June. Such growth would place this aggregate in June 5-1/4
percent at an annual rate above its fourth-quarter base and about 3/4
percentage point above the lower bound of its monitoring range.
(14) Under alternative A, M2 would strengthen to a 3 percent
rate over the February-to-June period. This speed-up in M2 growth,
coming mainly from its M1 component, would owe to smaller opportunity
costs, as deposit rate adjustments lag behind the decline in market
rates. Although M2 in June would still be below the lower bound of its
annual growth cone, it would be on a trajectory to reach the vicinity of
the lower bound by year-end, partly because spending would begin to
strengthen later in the year in response to the policy easing. M3 would
grow at a 1-1/4 percent pace over February to June under alternative A,
but would remain below its fourth-quarter base even by June. Under
alternative C, M2 would expand at a 2 percent rate over the February-to-
June period, as wider opportunity costs would discourage inflows to more
liquid deposits, especially M1 balances. M2 likely would not move above
the level of its fourth-quarter base until June, and with slower
spending growth later in the year, this aggregate probably would
increase only marginally over the year as a whole. M3 would expand at
only a 3/4 percent rate from February to June.
Directive language
(15) Presented below is draft wording for the operational
paragraph that includes the usual options and updating. Two versions
are shown for the sentence on the growth of M2 and M3. The first would
return to the specification of numerical growth rate expectations, as
was the Committee's practice prior to the February meeting; the other
would retain the approach at the February meeting of not stating ex-
plicit monetary growth expectations but rather relying on a qualitative
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. In the context of the Committee's long-run
objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, slightly (SOMEWHAT)
greater reserve restraint (WOULD/MIGHT), or slightly
(SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT) be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with GROWTH
OF [DEL: little change in] M2 and M3 AT ANNUAL RATES OF ABOUT
____ AND ____ PERCENT RESPECTIVELY over the period from
[DEL: January to March] FEBRUARY TO JUNE.
Alternative Monetary Growth Sentence
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to
be consistent with a resumption of moderate growth in the
broader monetary aggregates over the second quarter.
March 19,1993
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
Mar 92
Apr 92
May 92
Jun 92
Jul 92
Aug 92
Sep 92
Oct 92
Nov 92
Dec 92
Jan 93
Feb 93
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Clas II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted MAR. 22, 1993
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period Mt M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
ANN. GROWTH RATES (%) :
ANNUALLY 1Q4 TO Q4)
QUARTERLY AVERAGE
1992-1st QTR.
1992-2nd QTR.
1992-3rd QTR.
1992-4th QTR.
MONTHLY
1992-FEB.
MAR.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
LEVELS ($BILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
WEEKLY
1993-FEB.
MAR. 1 p
8 p
discontiruities.
p-preliminary
pe-preliminary estimate
by averaging end-of-month levels of adjacent months, and have been adjusted to remove
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Class II FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted MAR. 22, 1993
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds denomi- Short- Bankers
Demand checkable RPs and Savings nation general Institu- nation Term Term Savings term Commer- accep-
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars deposits' time purpose lions time RPs Eurodollars bonds Treasury cial paper' tances
NSA' deposits' and broker/ only deposits' NSA' NSA' securities
dealer'
LEVELS (SBILLIONS) :
ANNUALLY 14TH QTR.)
March 19, 1993
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
Net purchases 3 agendes outrightPeriod Net Redemptions Nt urchasesRedemptions Net redemptions holdings
Weekly
December 16
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
March 17
asury and agency securities.
rchase transactions (-), and matched purchase sale transactions (+).
March 17
