Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC September 17, 1993
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The federal funds rate averaged close to the Committee's
expectation of 3 percent during the intermeeting period. Short-term
interest rates have edged down since the August meeting, while interme-
diate- and long-term rates have decreased 20 to 30 basis points, on
rates since their recent highs, posted just after the July Humphrey-
Hawkins testimony, to nearly 3/4 percentage point. A sizable portion of
these reductions in rates appears to incorporate a moderation in infla-
tion expectations, a notion supported by survey data. Revisions to the
inflation outlook were probably prompted by generally favorable data on
broad price indexes and evidence of continuing sluggishness in economic
activity. The market response to the cast of data on aggregate demand
and to greater assurance of fiscal restraint suggests that real long-
term interest rates may also have fallen since late July; this inter-
pretation of rate movements is consistent with the reduced foreign
exchange value for the U.S. dollar and continued strength in stock
markets. Market perceptions, in light of incoming data, that the
Federal Reserve would raise nominal short-term rates later and by less
than was previously foreseen probably contributed to declines in real
yields on bonds and equity. Apparently, investors turned increasingly
to longer-term assets to preserve returns, which has helped to lift most
major stock market indexes 1 to 2 percent since the August meeting.
(2) On balance, the weighted average foreign exchange value of
the dollar fell about 3 percent since the last meeting, depreciating
even more against the mark and other European currencies, while appreci-
ating about 3 percent against the yen. The dollar was buoyed against --
the yen early in the period by U.S. intervention sales of yen ($165
million equivalent) and the accompanying public statement by the Trea-
sury Department, which the market apparently read as signalling a new
attitude--that further strengthening of the yen was not desirable.
The mark's strength was partly related to the
unexpectedly slow pace of interest rate reductions by the Bundesbank;
while the discount and Lombard rates were cut 50 basis points on
September 10, the key RP rate was lowered only 10 basis points. German
three-month market rates were essentially unchanged and long-term rates
declined 25 basis points over the intermeeting period. Other ERM
monetary authorities continued to be cautious in reducing interest
rates, despite the additional leeway offered by the wider, 15 percent,
exchange rate margins. Japanese three-month interest rates fell 30
basis points and long-term rates 10 basis points.
(3) Appetites for longer-term securities continue to weaken M2
demand. Bond and stock mutual funds posted a record gain in July, and
weekly data indicate an even stronger advance in August. M2 grew at the
subdued rate of 1-3/4 percent in August, close to the forecast in the
last bluebook, leaving the aggregate slightly above the lower end of its
annual growth cone. A temporary dip in mortgage refinancing likely
restrained M2 growth last month. Components generally followed recent
trends: M1 again grew rapidly--at a 10-1/2 percent rate for the
month;4 savings and MMDAs posted a moderate gain, while there were
runoffs in small time deposits and money market mutual funds, the
closest substitutes for capital market investments. 5
(4) M3 growth was slow in August, although it rose for the
first time in three months and was somewhat above the staff projection
at the last meeting. This aggregate is now at the lower end of its
growth cone. Sluggish depository credit continued to depress M3 growth.
With credit demands continuing to be concentrated in capital markets,
bank credit decelerated to a 3-1/4 percent rate of growth in August.
Most of the increase was in bank securities portfolios; business loans
were little changed, while real estate and consumer loan growth slowed,
and security loans ran off.
(5) The growth of nonfederal debt, though still subdued,
appears to have picked up a little in recent months, with both business
and household borrowing strengthening somewhat. In the business sector,
commercial paper issuance has been strong of late, but the bulk of net
borrowing remained focused on bond markets. Receptive financial markets
readily absorbed heavy bond issuance and a pickup in initial public
offerings of equity, the proceeds of which financed considerable
retirement of higher-cost bonds and probably the paydown of bank loans.
The improvement in household financial positions has supported higher
debt growth. Consumer credit picked up to a 7 percent pace in July (on
a month-average basis), and bank data for August suggest further
appreciable growth. Mortgage debt is estimated to be expanding
moderately, as households do not appear to be taking out significant
additional cash in refinancing their mortgages. From the fourth quarter
of 1992 through July, nonfederal debt grew at only a 3 percent rate.
Federal debt growth eased over the summer from its rapid second-quarter
rate on a seasonally adjusted basis. Total domestic nonfinancial debt
is estimated to have grown at a 5-1/2 percent rate in July, and at a
aggregate somewhat above the lower bound of its monitoring range for
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV
to
June July Aug Aug
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Policy Alternatives
(6) Three policy alternatives are presented for consideration
by the Committee. Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to
trade around 3 percent in combination with an initial allowance for
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $250 million. Under alterna-
tive A, the federal funds rate would decline to 2-1/2 percent, either
through a reduction in the initial borrowing allowance or a cut in the
discount rate by 50 basis points and an unchanged initial borrowing
allowance. Under alternative C, the federal funds rate would rise to
(7) Alternative B is consistent with the staff's economic
forecast. In that forecast, short-term rates are assumed to remain at
current levels through the end of 1994. Growth in output settles into a
pace broadly in line with that of potential output, preserving the
current modest slack in resource markets. Accordingly, core inflation
edges lower. Market participants apparently believe that the federal
funds rate will remain at 3 percent, at least for the next several
months, and under alternative B, money market interest rates would
remain around current levels. However, participants seem to expect
stronger economic growth over coming months than implicit in the staff
forecast and little further progress in reducing inflation. In the
absence of stronger growth, intermediate- and longer-term rates might
well drift lower as incoming data tilt market sentiment and investors
continue to reach for yield. Bond yields could remain unusually
volatile for a time as market participants continue to assess the
sustainability of the much reduced levels of long-term rates that have
recently been reached. This skittishness may focus particularly on
indicators bearing on the outlook for prices, partly in light of their
possible implications for monetary policy going forward. Consistent
with the staff forecast of policy easings in Germany and Japan, the
dollar should trade on the high side of recent levels under alterna-
tive B.
(8) While lower long-term rates and tight quality spreads
should continue to spur considerable activity in capital markets, net
growth in debt is expected to remain moderate. Debt of nonfederal
sectors is projected to grow more rapidly over the balance of the year
than in the first half but more slowly than nominal output. In the
business sector, net equity issuance should stay around the elevated
levels of late, restraining borrowing. Households likely will respond
vigorously to recent declines in mortgage rates, but mainly to refinance
existing mortgages. Mortgage and consumer debt is expected to continue
to increase at a moderate rate. Including the federal government, the
debt of nonfinancial sectors is projected to expand at a bit more than a
growth for the year at 4-1/2 percent, a little above the lower bound of
its annual range.
(9) As shown in the table below, M2 under alternative B is
projected to grow at a 2 percent average rate over the final four months
of this year. Special factors, especially mortgage refinancings.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from August to December
Growth from Q4:1992 to December 1993
should boost M2 growth a little over this period. Underlying
growth in this aggregate, however, will remain quite sluggish.
Although the flatter yield curve should eventually damp the shift from
M2 to capital market assets, we do not expect any slowing in the near
term: indeed, with recent capital gains enhancing the advertised
returns on mutual funds, inflows could remain quite brisk. On a
quarterly average basis, growth in M2 would slow to a 1-1/2 percent
rate in the fourth quarter, implying growth for the year on a Q4-to-Q4
basis of 1-1/4 percent.9 Growth in M2 velocity would pick up to a
year to 3 percent. Under alternative B, M3 would grow at a 3/4
percent rate over the remainder of this year, leaving this aggregate
just above both its fourth-quarter 1992 level and the bottom of its
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Billions of Dollars
- Actual Level
* Projected Level
8%
-- 12600
-- 12400
.. 4% - 12200
-( 12000
-- 11600
I I 
l l
I l 
l l
I l 
l I I
O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J
11400
annual range. Sluggish demand for bank loans is expected to hold down
banks' needs for funds. Moreover, the RTC, with new funding author-
ity, is expected to begin working down its backlog of resolutions in
coming months, leading to more rapid shrinkage of thrift institutions
and the substitution of Treasury financing for deposit financing to
carry acquired assets.
(10) Under alternative A, money market interest rates would
drop by the full 50 basis point decline in the federal funds rate.
The prime rate would also decrease by this amount. Intermediate-term
rates would fall appreciably, as expectations of the path of short-
term rates in the months ahead were revised down, and the dollar would
weaken on foreign exchange markets. Real long-term rates would move
lower as well, and the drop in interest and exchange rates would
provide additional stimulus to spending over time. The extent of the
decline in nominal bond rates, however, would depend importantly on
how the market interpreted the Committee's rationale for this action.
(11) This alternative might seem attractive if the Committee
saw the lack of progress toward full employment in the staff outlook
as unsatisfactory and was willing to settle for essentially no further
disinflation in this expansion; market perceptions that the Committee
had down-weighted its price stability objective could limit declines
in nominal long-term rates. Alternative A might also be chosen if the
Committee saw economic activity and inflation as possibly coming in
below the staff forecast; market perceptions that the Committee was
signalling an expectation that the outlook for real activity had
deteriorated and for disinflation had improved could result in sub-
stantial declines in bond yields. Although the longer-term effects of
lower interest rates on money demand may be uncertain, over the next
several months deposit rates would lag declines in market rates,
boosting money growth under this alternative and providing a little
more assurance that the broad monetary aggregates would finish the
year within their ranges. Given the staff spending forecast, M2 would
expand at a 2-1/2 percent rate over the remainder of the year, ending
the year 1-1/2 percent above its fourth-quarter 1992 base. The boost
to growth in income beginning late in the year would tend to lift this
aggregate further into its tentative 1994 range early next year. Some
of the more rapid growth in M2 would show through to M3 under alterna-
tive A, but expansion of this aggregate would remain quite weak as
borrowers continued to direct their credit demands toward long-term
(12) Under alternative C, interest rates would rise and the
dollar would strengthen on foreign exchange markets. Money market
rates would increase by the full 50 basis point rise in the federal
funds rate. Although markets seem still to expect a tightening in
policy at some point, action under this alternative would come much
sooner than now built into the yield curve. Intermediate-term rates
would increase significantly, especially if the tightening were seen
as signalling a more aggressive posture of the Federal Reserve against
inflation and a higher trajectory of short-term rates for a considera-
ble period. However, lower prospective inflation might decrease far-
ahead forward rates, limiting advances in nominal bond yields.
(13) Alternative C might be favored if the modest degree
of price deceleration in the staff forecast were viewed to be unsatis-
factory. Tighter money market conditions might also be sought if the
Committee were concerned that low nominal and real short-term rates
were fostering runups in capital market prices that were unsustain-
able, risking either excessive stimulus to spending and inflation down
the road or a sharp correction in financial markets with potential
systemic implications. M2 under this alternative is projected to grow
at a 1-1/2 percent rate over the final four months of the year,
restrained primarily by higher opportunity costs and less robust
mortgage refinancings. M2 growth could be faster than this if
declines in bond and stock prices prompted a reassessment of the
relative risks of deposits and capital market instruments. M3 would
expand at only a 1/2 percent rate over this period, held down in part
by sizable outflows from institution-only money market funds. These
growth rates would place both aggregates near the bottom of their
annual ranges for this year, and on a lower trajectory going into 1994
than under alternative B, partly reflecting damped income growth.
Directive Language
(14) Presented below is draft wording for the operational
paragraph that includes the usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on re-
serve positions. In the context of the Committee's long-
run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, slightly (SOMEWHAT)
greater reserve restraint (WOULD/MIGHT) or slightly (SOME-
WHAT) lesser reserve restraint (WOULD) might be acceptable
in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve con-
ditions are expected to be consistent with modest growth in
M2 and [DEL: little net change in] M3 over the balance of the YEAR
[DEL: third quarter].
September 20, 1993
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
Sep 92
Oct 92
Nov 92
Dec 92
Jan 93
Feb 93
Mar 93
Apr 93
May 93
Jun 93
Jul 93
Aug 93
-- p -- - - 3.12
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR).
Class II FOMC
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures lasOM
Seonlly adjusted SEPTEMER 20, 193
Sesonally adjusted
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactions components tot loans
total loans
Period M1 M2 M3 L and U. S. other total
In M2 In M3 only investments' government
Levels ($Billions):
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Seasonay adjusted unle otherwise noted
Strictly Confidentila (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Levels ($Bll1ons):
Annually (4th gtr.)
Monthly
1992-AU0.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULT
AUG. p
Currency Damand
deposits
Other
checkable
deposits
Overnight
RPs and
Euro-
dollar
NSA'
Savings
deposits'
Small
denomi-
nation
time
deposits
Money market
mutual funds
genera
purpose Institutions
and
broker/ o
dealer
* I T I
Large
denon.-
nalion
time
deposilsI
-a--
Term
RP's
NSA'
Term
Euro-
dollars
NSA'
Savings
bonds
Short-term
Treasury
securities
Commercial
,WT'
Bankers
acceplan-
I_ I I _ 4 _ - I - -
p preliminary
September 17,1993
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
Net purchases 3 agencies outrightPeriod Net 2 Redemptions Net withn Redemptions Net redemptions holdings
Weekly
June 2
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)6
September 15
--- 7,749
-- 375
--- 11,282
- 19,365
--- 2,452
--- 3,730
--- 5,927
--- 7,256
--- 3,141
--- 4,990
--- 5,332
--- 200
September 15
