Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC May 13, 1994
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments 1
(1) In keeping with a strategy of moving away from an
accommodative stance in reserve provision at this stage in the eco-
nomic expansion without severely unsettling financial markets, the
intended federal funds rate was raised 25 basis points, to 3-1/2 per-
cent, immediately following the March 22 FOMC meeting. On April 18.
with incoming data having confirmed considerable momentum and dimin-
ishing slack in the economy, and financial markets seemingly more able
to absorb further tightening, the intended funds rate was raised
another 25 basis points, to 3-3/4 percent. Throughout the intermeet-
ing period, the funds rate generally has traded near its intended
level. 2
(2) As indicated in the upper left panel of Chart 1, just
prior to the March FOMC meeting federal funds futures had embodied a
rising path for the funds rate, including expectations of a 25 basis
point tightening at that meeting and some probability of another move
in April. As shown in the lower panel of the exhibit, the markets
rallied after the March meeting, but only briefly. On March 24, banks
increased the prime rate 25 basis points, to 6-1/4 percent, and over
the next week and a half, market rates backed up, particularly after
the release on April 1 of the strong March employment report:
Chart 1
Federal Funds Futures*
May 13
April 19
April 15 .
March 21
Months ahead
*Observations are for the current, 1-, 2-, and
5-month contracts
Percent Darly close
Yield Curve Movements
Percent
'- -- I-
p-*~ ~4 -~
- S
- ~~*4 - - -I-----
- - - -*--.'--'
iZ __^-
March
Employment
- -. -
Policy
Move
~J5- % S
Daily close
' ' 2-yr T-note
"-- 6-mo T-bill
Intended
Fed Funds
April
Employment
Implied Bond Volatility
(3) Shorter-term market rates rose further when the System
tightened in mid-April--although less than the quarter-point increase
in the funds rate. 3 The mid-April action caught market partizi-
pants somewhat unawares and was interpreted as putting policy tighten-
ing on a steeper trajectory with a higher endpoint, as can be seen in
the upward revision to federal funds futures. Short-term rates
continued to edge up in the latter part of the month. Nonetheless,
there was little net movement in intermediate- and long-term rates
over most of April. as data indicated subdued trends in costs and
prices. However, in late April, rates across the maturity spectrum
began rising again with the release of data suggesting to the market
considerable additional vigor in economic activity. Weakness in the
dollar over this period appeared to contribute to the upward movement
in interest rates, because it implied additional price pressures in an
economy operating at high levels of output and provided a rationale
for more aggressive policy action.
(4) On balance, since the day before the March meeting.
while the funds rate has been raised 50 basis points, other short-term
interest rates have risen 60 to 85 basis points, intermediate rates
The weakness in the dollar suggests that a portion of the increase in
interest rates likely represents a market view that some of the
developing price pressures will ultimately show through into higher
actual inflation than previously anticipated. However, real rates
probably also have risen, judging in part by declines in major stock
price indexes of 5-1/2 to 10 percent over the intermeeting period.
Some of the increase in real rates likely resulted from the effect of
heightened uncertainty on term premiums. The upper right panel of the
exhibit shows that expected volatility inferred from near-term options
on bond prices rose sharply toward the end of March. The rise in
expected volatility probably owed to the persistence of higher actual
price volatility and to uncertainties about the course of monetary
policy and inflation in the face of strong aggregate demand.
(5) Increased uncertainty premiums in U.S. interest rates.
not fully matched by similar increases abroad, would reduce the demand
for dollar assets, and thus could explain part of the downward
pressure on the foreign exchange value of the dollar, despite
increases in nominal interest differentials in favor of dollar assets.
The dollar's weighted average exchange value declined a little more
than 1 percent, on balance, over the intermeeting period. Monetary
authorities in several key foreign countries eased their policies.
Three-month interest rates declined 75 basis points in Germany, and
the Bundesbank reduced its discount and Lombard rates 1/4 percentage
point on April 14 and 1/2 percentage point on May 11. Nonetheless.
bond rates rose 25 basis points in Germany. Three-month and ten-year
rates declined 15 and 40 basis points, respectively, in Japan. The
political disarray in Japan seemingly had the perverse effect of
strengthening the yen against the dollar, on the grounds that the new
minority government would have greater difficulties in implementing
trade reforms; the yen would therefore have to appreciate to help
reduce Japan's huge current account surplus. For most of the inter-
meeting period, the market believed that the U.S. government would
welcome a further decline in the dollar against the yen and perhaps a
weaker dollar generally. In part to dispel such impressions, the Desk
intervened on two occasions to purchase dollars against yen and marks.
Both operations were accompanied by statements from the Secretary of
the Treasury: The first emphasized countering disorderly markets; the
second highlighted concerns of U.S. authorities with the dollar's
weakness, which was viewed as inconsistent with economic fundamentals.
and rejected an undervalued dollar as a U.S. policy objective. The
second intervention was coordinated with a substantial number of
foreign central banks. In total, U.S. authorities purchased $1,950
million against yen and marks, equally divided between System and
Treasury accounts.
(6) The broad monetary aggregates accelerated somewhat more
than expected at the time of the March FOMC meeting. M2 rose at a
compared with projected growth rates of 3-1/4 and 1-3/4 percent, re-
spectively. These increases left M2 somewhat below the midpoint of
its 1-to-5 percent range for 1994 and M3 somewhat above the lower end
of its 0-to-4 percent range. Data through early May suggest a slowing
in the growth of both aggregates.
(7) The strengthening of the broad aggregates, which runs
counter to what might normally be anticipated with rising interest
rates, appears mainly attributable to a reassessment on the part of
households of the attractiveness of investing in capital market in-
struments. Bond mutual funds suffered substantial net redemptions
over March and April, and there was a corresponding surge in retail
money funds: in addition, a slowing in runoffs of small time deposits
may represent reduced shifting to stock and bond funds. The broad
money aggregates were also boosted in March and April by hefty in-
creases in overnight and term repurchase agreements, which helped
banks fund sizable net acquisitions of government securities. The
rise in short-term opportunity costs does seem to have had its usual
effect of restraining demand for a number of components of M2, espe-
cially liquid retail deposits. M1 expanded at only a 1-1/2 percent
rate over March and April. held down by a drop in mortgage refinanes
ings as well as the wider opportunity costs.4  In addition, savings
deposits (including MMDAs) registered a small decline in April.
(8) Bank credit expanded rapidly in March and April, re-
flecting strong growth in consumer and business loans, as well as the
increase in securities holdings. An early May survey revealed con-
tinued increases in the willingness of banks to lend to households and
a further easing of credit standards for businesses. The strength in
bank credit in part represents a rise in the share of banks in house-
hold and business debt creation. As capital market prices have
dropped, firms have cut back on bond and stock issuance: mounting
external financing needs have been concentrated more on commercial
(9) While the backup in rates has altered the pattern of
financing and discouraged refinancing of outstanding obligations, it
appears to have little affected nonfinancial debt growth. Debt of the
nonfederal sectors has increased at a 4-1/2 percent rate in recent
months, about in line with the more rapid pace of the second half of
credit is growing briskly, but household mortgage indebtedness appears
to be expanding only moderately. State and local governments have
slowed their net debt issuance of late, owing to improved fiscal
positions and considerable previous advance refunding. While federal
debt growth surged in March, it now appears to be slowing, even after
allowing for the usual tax-season swings, as fiscal restraint and
strong economic performance reduce deficits. Total domestic nonfinan-
cial debt is estimated to have grown at a 5 percent pace from the
fourth quarter through March. leaving this aggregate somewhat above
the lower bound of its 4-to-8 percent monitoring range for 1994.
MONEY. CREDIT. AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth
Feb. Mar. Apr. A
Money and credit aggrenates
Reserve measures2
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Policy Alternatives
(10) Three monetary policy alternatives are presented below
for Committee consideration. Under alternative B. federal funds would
continue to trade around 3-3/4 percent, in association with the al-
lowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing remaining initially at
$175 million.5  Under alternative C, the federal funds rate would
move up 1/4 percentage point (one-half the usual adjustment shown in
previous bluebooks for "alternative C") to 4 percent, effectuated by
increasing the initial borrowing allowance to $200 million. Under
alternative D, the federal funds rate would be raised to 4-1/4 per-
cent, either by increasing the initial borrowing allowance to $225
million or by raising the discount rate to 3-1/2 percent, while keep-
ing the initial allowance for discount window borrowing at $175 mil-
(11) In the staff's economic forecast, the federal funds
rate is assumed to be raised gradually to 4-1/2 percent by the fall of
this year and maintained at that level through the end of next year.
Long-term interest rates are seen as holding close to their most re-
cent levels in the face of the assumed policy tightenings, but sub-
sequently to drift lower, as market participants come to realize that
economic trends imply lower inflation and a lesser degree of needed
policy restraint than now built into market rates. In effect, this
funds rate path is broadly consistent with the attainment of "policy
neutrality," in that real GDP, after moving into the vicinity of its
estimated potential in the current quarter, grows about in line with
its potential over the next six quarters. The unemployment rate
remains near its estimated natural rate of about 6-1/2 percent, and
core CPI inflation runs just below a 3 percent rate through the end
next year. Variations in the timing and size of the steps taken to
raise the funds rate to 4-1/2 percent by this autumn probably would
not have a persistent influence on economic activity but could affect
inflation expectations for a time and the near-term paths of financial
market prices.
(12) Compared with the staff's assessment, financial market
participants now appear to be anticipating appreciably more Federal
Reserve tightening by the fall, judging by the rate of 5-1/4 percent
on federal funds futures for October. Many in the market expect the
Committee to increase the funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting,
though others anticipate only a 25 basis point increase, and the
federal funds futures quote is in between. Very short-term rates
might thus increase slightly under alternative D. The behavior of
rates on instruments of a few months' maturity or longer would depend
importantly on whether the market interpreted the larger increase of
alternative D as indicating a steeper trajectory of future policy
actions, and perhaps the need for greater cumulative tightening. If
expectations were to ratchet up in this manner, as appeared to have
been the case in some of the tightenings earlier this year, there
could be sizable hikes along the maturity spectrum. However, several
factors suggest that the market may react more favorably this time.
For one, such a move--larger than recent ones--might assuage concerns
that the Federal Reserve was "falling behind the curve." A rise in
the foreign exchange value of the dollar, which would be expected
under this alternative, would also help to reduce inflation concerns.
Moreover, an action of this magnitude coupled with a discount rate
increase, depending perhaps on the wording of the associated announce-
ment, might be seen as suggesting that the Federal Reserve thought it
had reached the neighborhood of "neutrality." If the action is seen
this way, policy would be expected to be kept on hold for a while, or
at least to tighten more slowly and be more dependent on incoming
data. With one source of uncertainty diminished, at least for a time,
investors who had been avoiding longer-term instruments pending the
Federal Reserve's action might be tempted to extend maturities. Bond
yields could still back up somewhat in the aftermath of an announce-
ment of the Federal Reserve's choice of alternative D, but these other
influences should limit any increase and work to reduce yields over
time. provided incoming data on the economy indicate a moderate path
for activity, in line with the staff forecast.
(13) The case for increasing the intended federal funds rate
only 25 basis points as under alternative C would seem to hinge on the
judgment that financial market participants have exaggerated the like-
ly strength of future spending relative to the economy's potential and
hence of prospective inflation pressures. In this view, taking the
fundamentals reasonably into account, the markets have gotten "ahead
of the curve" and the risk of disappointing them should not be allowed
to divert the Federal Reserve from a gradual course of 25-basis-point
adjustments in the stance of policy toward neutrality. With the loca-
tion of a neutral funds rate itself a moving target--and lower to the
extent that real long-term interest rates are higher--such an approach
would allow more time to assess the needed federal funds rate in-
creases as new information on the economy and prices becomes avail-
able. Short-term rates likely would edge off immediately after a
modest policy tightening. The initial reaction in capital and foreign
exchange markets could be adverse if the small size of the move were
seen as signalling a reluctance to move aggressively to head off an
inflationary buildup. However, the odds on such a reaction may have
been reduced by the recent favorable price data. In this context,
market participants might be more inclined to interpret the smaller
move as sufficient to counter coming inflation pressures and to
project a lower trajectory of short-term rates, which would pass
through to lower longer-term rates.
(14) The case for standing pat, alternative B, is a more
extreme version of the rationale for alternative C: In this case, the
market assessment, and even that of the staff, of the strength of
aggregate demand would be judged to be seriously off the mark, perhaps
because the rise in long-term rates, along with the decline in house-
hold wealth, will have a more significant restraining influence on
aggregate demand. Choice of alternative B would come as a consider-
able surprise--and disappointment--to financial markets; very short-
term interest rates would be likely to fall appreciably, but this
alternative risks a significant sell-off in the bond market before
weakness in aggregate demand becomes apparent.
(15) Material differences in nominal spending and overall
borrowing under the three policy alternatives outlined above are un-
likely to emerge in the next several months. Under all three alterna-
tives, the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors should expand at
around a 5 percent rate from March through September, matching its
pace this year through March. A pickup in growth of nonfederal debt
is expected to fill in the gap left by a softening of federal govern-
ment borrowing. Higher long-term rates and lower price-earnings
ratios present a less favorable environment for balance sheet restruc-
turing, but borrowers will continue to find banks and other inter-
mediaries to be willing lenders. Business borrowing should remain
well above last year's meager pace, as corporate capital spending
rises appreciably further relative to internally generated funds.
Households too are likely to continue taking on consumer debt more
quickly than they did on average last year, although with recent in-
creases in mortgage rates restraining housing activity, mortgage debt
expansion is not anticipated to outpace last year's performance.
(16) Projected growth rates of the monetary aggregates from
April to September under alternatives B and D are shown on the table
below. (More detailed data are presented in the table and charts on
the following pages.) While we foresee M1 growth picking up some, at
Alt. B Alt. D
Growth from April
to September
around 3 to 4 percent, it remains damped relative to spending. The
recent increases in opportunity costs on liquid retail deposits aris-
ing from the previous tightenings in the stance of monetary policy,
and under alternative D from an additional firming move as well, will
serve to hold back growth of M1 and some of the other components of M2
and M3. With any further backup in long-term interest rates not ex-
pected to be sustained under either policy alternative, another surge
in outflows from bond mutual funds does not appear to be in the cards.
As a consequence, the effects of higher opportunity costs show through
Alernative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. B Alt. D Alt. B Alt. ) Alt. B Alt. D
Billions of Dollars
I
Actual Level
* Short-Run Alternatives
- 1300
- 1200
SB
S D
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 110oo
O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J
to the growth of the broader aggregates, contributing to an appreci-
able slowing from the stepped-up pace of March and April. Under both
alternatives, growth from the fourth quarter of last year to September
will be at almost a 2 percent rate for M2 and at less than a 3/4 per-
cent rate for M3.
Directive Language
(17) Draft language for the operational paragraph, including
the usual options and updating, is shown below. In light of the re-
commendations for a discount rate increase from all twelve Federal
Reserve Banks, wording is given in brackets in the first sentence
should the Committee wish to make reference in the directive to a
possible change in the discount rate. This suggested wording is
similar to that used by the Committee in comparable situations in the
past. Of course, the minutes would explain the Committee's approach
to implementation and its rationale.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to increase slightly (SOMEWHAT)/maintain/DECREASE
SLIGHTLY (SOMEWHAT) the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. [TAKING ACCOUNT OF A POSSIBLE INCREASE IN THE DISCOUNT
RATE]. In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving care-
ful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary develop-
ments, slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint MIGHT/WOULD
or slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint might/WOULD be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with moderate MODEST
growth in M2 and M3 over COMING MONTHS [DEL: the first half of 1994].
May 16, 1994
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short Term Long Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm market bank US government constant A utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market markel paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond marke market
Monthly
May 93
Jun 93
Jul 93
Aug 93
Sep 93
Oct 93
Nov 93
Dec 93
Jan 94
Feb 94
Mar 94
Apr 94
p preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class II FOMC
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted MAY 16, 1994
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial deb
nontransactrons components loans
total loans
Period M1 M2 M3 L and U
s
other' totaP
In M2 In M3 only investments' government'
Levels ($Billions):
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
Levele ($Billion-) s
Annually (4th Qtr.)
Monthly
1993-APR.
MAYt
JUNM
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR. p
Currency Demand
deposits
Other
checkable
deposits
Overnight
RPs and
Euro-
dollar
NSA'
Savings
deposits'
Small
denomi-
nation
time
deposits
3
Money market
mutual funds
general
purpose Insttutions
and
broker/ only
dealr
Large
denomi-
nation
time
Term
RP's
NSA'
Term
Euro-
dollars
NSA'
Savings
bonds
Short-term
Treasury
securities
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class II FOMC
MAY 16, 1994
Commercial Bankers
paper' aoceptan-
Ces
I ~ ~~ ~~ ~~~~ 4 I - I4II -
p preliminary
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
Weekly
January 19
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
May 11
--- 11,282
-- 19,365
-- 3,141
- 4,990
- 6.326
- 4,742
--- 3281
A <
asury and agency securities.
irchase transactions (-), and matched purchase sale transactions ().
May 11
May 13, 1994
