Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC January 29, 1994
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Federal funds generally traded quite close to the in-
tended level of 3 percent during the intermeeting period.1 In the
maintenance period spanning year-end, reserve needs were considerable,
reflecting seasonal movements in currency and required reserves as
well as an enlarged demand for excess reserves. To meet these needs,
the Desk arranged a number of rounds of term System repurchase agree-
ments and, as a result, federal funds continued to trade at around
(2) Most other market interest rates declined 10 to 20 basis
points, and stock price indexes posted new records over the intermeet-
ing period. Market participants were encouraged by generally good
news on inflation; this information, along with a sense that the
severe weather and earthquake would make it more difficult in early
to postpone when an expected tightening of monetary policy would
occur. Still, the economy is seen as reasonably robust, and policy
firming is expected to commence within a few months to counteract a
potential buildup of inflation pressures.
(3) The dollar's weighted-average foreign exchange value was
about unchanged on balance over the intermeeting period. The dollar
appreciated a little more than 1 percent relative to the mark and less
relative to other European currencies, against the background of
strong U.S. economic data and sluggish economic activity in continen-
tal Europe. Although the Bundesbank's stance in money markets was
unchanged, three-month rates in Germany declined 20 basis points,
while long-term rates were little changed. The dollar depreciated
about 1-1/2 percent against the yen in the context of renewed expres-
sions of U.S. concerns over bilateral trade issues with Japan.
Japanese short- and long-term interest rates rose 10 and 35 basis
points, respectively.
The Desk did not intervene.
(4) The monetary data in this bluebook reflect annual bench-
mark adjustments and seasonal factor revisions. These data con-
firm that M2 rose 1.4 percent from 1992:Q4 to 1993:Q4, within its
downward-revised 1 to 5 percent annual range.3,4 M3 expanded
creases in both aggregates were not much different than in 1992, and
their velocities climbed considerably further, reflecting the evolving
pattern of financial intermediation: Investors diverted considerable
balances from deposits to long-term mutual funds, prompted by a still-
steep yield curve and capital gains in bond and stock markets; bor-
rowers concentrated their funds-raising in long-term markets to take
advantage of the low cost of capital, and thus relied relatively
little on bank credit. Moreover, thrift institution assets continued
to contract. Total domestic nonfinancial debt rose 4.9 percent on a
fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis, inside its 4 to 8 percent
monitoring range. Nonfederal debt growth firmed further, especially
in the second half of the year, apparently reflecting increased com-
fort with balance sheets and better prospects for employment and in-
come, but the increase in such debt still fell considerably short of
the rise in nominal spending by these sectors.
(5) Growth of the broad monetary aggregates remained rela-
tively slow over December and January, though stronger than over 1993,
with expansion of both M2 and M3 around 2 percent at an annual
rate.5 M1 slowed to a 6 percent average rate over the two months.
In addition to a drop-off in demand deposit growth, the expansion of
M1 was depressed in January--by an estimated 5-1/2 percentage points--
as a large regional bank initiated a program to sweep balances from
some customers' NOW accounts; because such funds are swept into MMDAs,
M2 and M3 are not affected by the program. Recent data on mutual
funds are especially difficult to interpret because reported flows in
December are distorted by the effects of large year-end distributions.
Nonetheless, while flows into stock funds are estimated to have re-
mained quite strong, flows into bond funds over December and early
January seem to have been below the pace of most of last year in
apparent reaction to the backup in rates last fall. At the M3
level, growth was buoyed by large time deposits, which expanded at the
most rapid rate since last spring, perhaps in association with a
modest acceleration of bank credit, but larger runoffs in its other
components served to slow M3 on balance.7  In January, both
aggregates are within their provisional ranges for 1994.
(6) Nonfederal credit growth seems to be maintaining the
somewhat brisker pace set this past autumn. The pickup remains most
evident among households. Consumer installment credit appears to have
expanded at a robust rate in December, and bank data for January
suggest continued strong growth. Net home mortgage borrowing likely
also continued apace: Although refinancing activity dropped sharply
as mortgage rates stabilized above their October lows, the strength in
sales of new and existing homes no doubt contributed to demand for
mortgage credit. In the business sector, credit demands may have
picked up a little. Business loans at banks are estimated to have
expanded appreciably on average over December and January,
accompanying indications of further easing of loan terms and standards
in the latest Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey. Gross issuance of
bonds by nonfinancial corporations over the past two months remained
considerably below the 1993 average, but much of the fall-off was
probably in refinancing activity. In the tax-exempt sector,
securities issuance rebounded strongly in December, but has dropped
off that pace this month. Reflecting swings in federal debt growth,
total domestic nonfinancial sector debt rose at a 7-1/2 percent rate
in December, but probably slowed this month and remained within its
provisional 4 to 8 percent range for 1994.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Dec. Jan. 93:Q4 Jan.
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt 7.4 -- 4.9
Federal 13.3 -- 8.4 -
Nonfederal 5.2 -- 3.7
Reserve measures2
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
benchmarks and sea-
Long-Run Scenarios
(7) The scenarios shown in this section are designed to
illustrate several issues related to the conduct of monetary policy
over the rest of this decade. The first set examines three alterna-
tive strategies for policy, each striking a different balance over the
intermediate run between progress toward price stability and progress
toward full employment. The baseline begins with the Greenbook pro-
jection for 1994 and 1995 and continues with a judgmental extension
out through 1999. The baseline strategy maintains a modest degree of
slack in resource utilization and thus makes a little further progress
against inflation. The tighter strategy makes more progress toward
the objective of price stability, while the easier policy moves the
economy to full employment fairly promptly and keeps it there. The
alternatives to the baseline were derived using staff econometric
models of the U.S. and foreign economies. Summary information about
these simulations is presented in the table on the next page and in
Chart 1.
(8) A number of assumptions play key roles in the scenarios.
In the framework underlying these scenarios, the change in the rate of
inflation is influenced mainly by the gap between the natural rate of
unemployment and the actual rate; roughly speaking, a 1 percentage
point gap, maintained for one year, reduces the rate of inflation
about 1/2 percentage point. The natural rate itself is expected to
edge down slightly from its current level of around 6-1/2 percent (as
measured on the new 1994 survey basis), as the dislocations stemming
from defense downsizing and corporate restructuring abate. The growth
rate of potential GDP is assumed to average close to 2-1/2 percent
over the period of the scenarios. Federal fiscal policy is assumed to
luding
3.1
CPI inflation--exc
baseline
tighter
easier
Nominal GDP growth
baseline
tighter
easier
Real GDP growth
baseline
tighter
easier
Unemployment Rate
baseline
tighter
easier
baseline
tighter
easier
Federal funds rate
baseline
tighter
easier
(QIV to QIV percent change)
(fourth-quarter level, percent)
remain on a moderately restrictive trajectory over the next few years,
with the structural deficit declining from 2-3/4 percent of potential
GDP in 1993 to 2 percent in 1994 and then holding at roughly 1-1/2
percent for the remainder of the projection period. Money growth is
assumed to return gradually to a more typical alignment with nominal
income growth: the forces disrupting this relationship ebb as the
yield curve returns to a more normal slope and portfolios become more
fully adjusted to the increased availability of mutual funds. 8
(9) Under the baseline policy, the Committee holds the funds
rate at 3 percent into the summer before raising it over the next two
years. To maintain some slack in resource utilization, and thus to
keep inflation edging lower, short-term real interest rates need to
rise from their currently low levels only gradually in light of fiscal
consolidation at home and sluggish growth abroad. As foreign econo-
mies recover and fiscal consolidation comes to an end, the funds rate
rises to about 4-1/2 percent in nominal terms in 1996. Given the
inflation rate prevailing at that time, this level of the funds rate
translates to about 2 percent in real terms. In turn, this level of
the real funds rate and associated levels of long rates in real terms
are sufficient to keep inflation tilting down. By the end of the
period, inflation in the CPI excluding food and energy falls to about
shifts diminish.
(10) The more rapid progress toward price stability under
the tighter policy involves an unemployment rate over the forecast
period that averages about 1/4 percentage point above that in the
baseline strategy. This additional slack is obtained by moving the
funds rate up more promptly than in the baseline--indeed, starting in
the current quarter. With real interest rates higher, the interest-
sensitive portion of domestic spending is damped; dollar appreciation
also checks aggregate demand and puts additional downward pressure on
prices. Inflation comes down to 1-1/2 percent by 1999 and is headed
still lower from there. If the anti-inflation resolve embodied in the
tighter policy were to reinforce the credibility of the Committee's
commitment to price stability, an even more rapid decline in inflation
might result.
(11) The greater employment gains delivered by the easier
policy come at the expense of any further progress in reducing infla-
tion. To implement this strategy, the Committee is assumed to keep
the funds rate at 3 percent into early 1995. The dollar is lower than
under the baseline strategy, and part of the economic stimulus and of
the upward pressure on prices comes from the foreign sector. Given
the low level of short-term real interest rates, a 3 percent funds
rate probably is not sustainable, and the Committee eventually must
shift toward a more restrictive stance in order to prevent a pickup in
inflation--indeed, temporarily pushing the nominal funds rate above
that in the baseline.
(12) The outcomes under these three strategies depend impor-
tantly on underlying judgments about the labor-market threshold for
the emergence of faster inflation and about the near-term strength of
aggregate demand. Charts 2 and 3 present scenarios based on alter-
native assumptions about these key elements of the macroeconomy. A
critical aspect in the design of each of these scenarios is the speci-
fication of the responses of monetary policy to these different macro-
economic circumstances. The responses shown are intended to be il-
lustrative of actions that might be taken by a policymaker who places
some weight on both inflation and unemployment in the intermediate
(13) Chart 2 focuses on the implications of different levels
of the natural rate. As before, the solid lines present the baseline
scenario, which embodies a natural rate of around 6-1/2 percent. The
dashed lines present a scenario based on an assumed natural rate of
about 7 percent (just under 6-1/2 percent on the old basis). The lack
of much deceleration in wage inflation this past year may suggest that
the implications of this possibility are worth contemplating. In this
circumstance, the inflation rate currently would be under some upward
pressure, and the Committee is assumed to adopt a more restrictive
stance of policy as that pressure becomes more evident; relative to
the baseline, the funds rate is about 50 basis points higher by the
end of this year and 100 basis points higher by the end of 1995. Even
this tighter stance of policy is not sufficient to prevent a slight
pickup in inflation, given both an assumed lag in identification of
the higher natural rate and the lag in the response of the economy to
the change in policy. Nonetheless, the specified policy eventually
restores a downward tilt to inflation, albeit on a higher trajectory
than in the baseline. In contrast, if the natural rate is about
rent basis that some economists have asserted) then there is consider-
ably more slack in resource utilization than is assumed in the base-
line. In these circumstances, the Committee could maintain the funds
rate at 3 percent for longer and tighten by less. Even with lower
unemployment rates, it would still make more rapid progress toward
price stability, as illustrated by the dotted lines in Chart 2.
(14) Finally, Chart 3 examines the implications of alterna-
tive assumptions about the strength of aggregate demand this year.
The dotted lines in Chart 3 depict a scenario in which growth of ag-
gregate demand is about 1 percentage point greater in 1994 than in the
baseline, while the dashed lines plot the symmetric case of weaker
aggregate demand. In the case of stronger aggregate demand, the Com-
mittee is assumed to begin moving the funds rate up sooner and by
considerably more this year than in the baseline, as incoming data
reveal the demand shift. Still, the unemployment rate falls fairly
rapidly--to below the natural rate until the tighter policy takes
hold--and inflation edges higher for a time. By contrast, in the case
of a shortfall in demand, the Committee is assumed to ease the stance
of policy for about a year. Nonetheless, the unemployment rate moves
up to about 7-1/4 percent and inflation slows rapidly. Eventually,
however, the lower level of interest rates supports sufficient growth
to bring the unemployment rate back down.
Long-Run Ranges
(15) To aid the Committee in selecting its money and debt
growth ranges for 1994, presented below are the staff's projections
and the provisional ranges for 1994 that were selected by the Commit-
tee last July.9
(16) The projections of money and credit are consistent with
the Greenbook forecast of the economy. In that forecast, growth of
nominal GDP in 1994 strengthens a touch from the pace of 1993 before
slowing some in 1995 to keep inflation pointed down, albeit modestly,
as the economy approaches its potential. As noted in the previous
section, real and nominal short-term interest rates rise beginning in
the second half of 1994. Long-term rates edge lower over the next few
quarters as economic activity decelerates and underlying inflation
remains relatively low. Long rates firm a bit subsequently along with
the upward movement of short-term rates.
(17) With spending in the staff forecast expected to grow a
shade faster than in 1993 and impediments to borrowing and lending
considerably diminished, private credit growth over 1994 is projected
to remain around the somewhat elevated pace of the second half of
with capital outlays, as internal funds expand only sluggishly. While
financial conditions will continue to favor raising funds in capital
markets, the more willing lending posture of banks and the expanding
financing needs of those without access to open markets will boost
business loans at banks. Household borrowing should slow a little
from the brisk pace of late, in keeping with a cresting of housing
activity and less rapid growth in spending on durable goods. Mean-
while, borrowing by governments, both federal and municipal, will
moderate with the projected improvement in fiscal positions and sharp-
ly curtailed advance refundings of state and local debt. Overall debt
of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to grow 5-1/2 percent
this year, in line with nominal output. (See chart 4.)
(18) M3 in 1994 should be boosted by stronger funding needs
of depository institutions. Although bank credit is expected to
continue to grow at the moderate 5 percent pace posted in 1993, the
contraction in thrift credit should cease. Moreover, banks are ex-
pected to rely less on non-M3 sources; with capital at high levels,
they are presumed to issue a smaller volume of bonds and equity, more
than offsetting further increases in FHLB advances. On balance, M3 is
projected to expand 1-1/2 percent in 1994, a percentage point faster
than in 1993.
(19) The staff projects that M2 will grow 2 percent in 1994,
a bit faster than in 1993. M2 velocity is projected to rise by about
mutual funds, whose yields would remain well above those on deposits
and whose availability will be further enhanced by increased offerings
through banks. However, this rise in velocity would be the smallest
since 1991. Acting to boost M2 growth and slow velocity increases is
the expectation that households will show a little less appetite for
longer-term investments, especially bond and stock mutual funds. The
flattening of the yield curve and smaller capital gains may reduce
incentives to shift portfolios; greater emphasis by bank and securi-
ties regulators on disclosure of risks inherent in such instruments
might also be a factor.10  On the other hand, the drop-off in mort-
gage refinancing from the torrid pace of late 1993 will depress the
demand deposit component of M2 and limit the pickup in M2 growth this
year. In addition, the rise in short-term interest rates later this
year will restrain M2 growth, mainly through its effects on M1. M1 is
projected to slow appreciably, to 6-1/2 percent in 1994. The new
program to sweep balances from NOW accounts to MMDAs at a regional
bank will shave M1 growth by about 3/4 of a percentage point, but will
have no effect on M2. The velocity of M1 is projected to fall
only marginally in 1994, after three years of very large declines.
(20) In 1995, debt growth is projected to grow at a pace
near that of 1994, exceeding somewhat the growth of income. The broad
money aggregates, however, strengthen a little further as intermedia-
tion patterns move closer to historic norms. Thus, despite the moder-
ation in nominal GDP in the staff forecast, M2 growth is projected to
pick up to 2-1/2 percent next year. Contributing to this pickup is
the expectation of a further reduction in the pace of household in-
vestment in competing instruments--especially bond and stock funds--as
the yield curve continues to flatten and portfolio allocations move
closer to desired alignments. Moreover, the drag on M2 in 1994 from
the slowdown in mortgage refinancing activity should not persist into
small degree of restraint on M2 but much more on its M1 component,
which is projected to grow only 2-1/2 percent in 1995. Faster growth
in M2 in 1995 is expected to show through to M3, which is projected to
pick up to 2 percent next year.
(21) Two alternatives are shown below for ranges for the
broad monetary aggregates and debt for 1994. Even though the Commit-
tee has reduced the importance of these financial aggregates in its
conduct of policy and market participants accordingly attach less
significance to them, the selection of ranges still can convey useful
information to the public about the Committee's expectations for
growth in money and credit consistent with its outlook and intentions
for the economy and inflation. Alternative I consists of the pro-
visional ranges set by the Committee in July for 1994, which were
identical to those put in effect last summer for 1993. Alternative II
lowers the ranges for M2 and debt, centering them on the staff's pro-
Alternative Money and Debt Ranges for 1994
(Percent)
Alt. I
1993 (Provisional Memo: Staff
ranges ranges) Alt. II projection
(22) In addition to being about centered on the staff's
projections for money and credit, alternative II might be selected as
a means of underscoring the Committee's commitment to containing and
reducing inflation. If, for example, a pickup in money growth were to
accompany a continued strong and potentially overheating economy, the
Committee might be better positioned to take and explain prompt ac-
tions under this alternative than under the higher provisional ranges.
Moreover, if the Committee tightened reserve conditions to forestall a
potential strengthening of inflation pressures or to bring inflation
down more rapidly--as in the tighter scenario above--the alternative
II ranges would allow more scope for the lower money growth that might
accompany moderate nominal GDP expansion with higher interest rates
than in the staff forecast. This alternative might also be favored if
it were thought that further large downward shifts in M2 demand are
still in prospect, posing a significant risk that M2 in 1994 could
come in below the lower end of its provisional range, even under the
staff economic forecast.
(23) The staff's M2 forecast is in the lower half of the
alternative I range. This range allows for a greater move toward more
normal velocity behavior than the staff has assumed, should, for
example, public appetites for mutual funds fall off more rapidly than
expected. Even absent such a shift, the alternative I ranges would
not necessarily present problems should the Committee substantially
firm reserve conditions. The responsiveness of M2 to movements in
short-term rates has been muted in recent years, and growth of this
aggregate could still exceed 1 percent if short-term rates rose sig-
nificantly. In part this is because rising short-term rates are like-
ly to be accompanied by some declines in bond and possibly stock
prices, damping shifts to mutual funds from M2 and supporting the
aggregate's growth. Moreover, the M2 ranges in alternative I would be
consistent with the attainment of price stability in the context of a
return over time to a flat trend in M2 velocity, as the staff assumed
in constructing the money growth rates for the long-run strategies.
With flat velocity, M2 growth of about 3 percent--the midpoint of
alternative I--would accompany nominal income growth of the same
magnitude consistent with the staff's estimate of growth in potential
output, given the upward bias in measured inflation rates.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(24) Three policy alternatives are presented below for Com-
mittee consideration. Alternative B involves a continuation of feder-
al funds trading around 3 percent and of adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing averaging initially about $50 million.12  Under alterna-
tive C, the federal funds rate would increase to around 3-1/2 percent
in association with a rise in the borrowing allowance to $75 million.
Alternative A embodies a downward adjustment of the federal funds rate
to 2-1/2 percent and of the borrowing allowance to $25 million.
(25) Market participants now anticipate continuation of the
money market conditions implied by alternative B over the near term,
and FOMC choice of this alternative would not engender any immediate
reaction in security markets. Investors generally expect the Federal
Reserve to put off any policy tightening for a time, given
uncertainties about the extent of moderation in economic activity and
about developing price trends in early 1994--uncertainties that have
been heightened by the earthquake and severe weather. Nevertheless,
most anticipate a tightening within a few months as incoming data
suggest only a limited slowing in economic growth and a cessation of
disinflation. As the intermeeting period progresses, economic data
along the lines of the staff forecast might put modest upward pressure
on short-term interest rates as the time of expected tightening
approaches, but would induce little systematic movement in longer-term
rates. The exchange value of the dollar also is likely to trade in a
relatively narrow range around current levels.
(26) The firming in the stance of policy under alternative C
would come sooner than now built into market quotes and would be re-
flected in increases in short-term rates nearly equal to the 50 basis
point hike in the federal funds rate. The action might help to
resolve any questions about whether the Federal Reserve would take
steps to contain price pressures in advance of actual increases in
inflation. If so, forward interest rates further out the yield curve
might eventually even adjust down slightly, tempering the ultimate
rise in longer-term rates. The exchange value of the dollar would
tend to move higher with the more attractive real returns on U.S.
versus foreign financial assets.
(27) The easing of policy under alternative A would come as
more of a surprise to market participants. Some could interpret the
action as a response by Federal Reserve policymakers to weaker inter-
nal economic forecasts than the market consensus, perhaps owing to
concerns about upcoming fiscal drag. But others would be led to
question the Federal Reserve's anti-inflationary resolve. In those
circumstances, an adverse impact on inflation expectations could well
result, preventing much of a decline in bond yields. Even the fall in
short-term rates could be muted by the view that the policy ease would
soon have to be reversed to forestall excessive price pressures. The
dollar's exchange value could be lowered by both the reduced U.S.
short-term rates and heightened concerns about U.S. inflation.
(28) Growth of the monetary aggregates projected under all
three policy alternatives from January to June is shown in the table
below. (More detailed data are presented in the table and charts on
the following pages.) Under all the alternatives, M2 growth is ex-
pected to be in the neighborhood of 2 percent and M3 growth a little
over 1 percent. Consequently, these aggregates would be positioned at
midyear well within their provisional ranges, with M2 in its lower
portion and M3 somewhat below its midpoint. As usual, only modest
growth differentials are envisioned across the three alternatives,
mirroring the low sensitivity to short-term rates of M2 and M3 so far
in the 1990s.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from January
to June
Growth from 1993:Q4
to June
(29) M2 growth likely will be held down under alternative B
by a reversal of the previous bulge attributable to mortgage refinanc-
ing activity, which had boosted average M2 growth by an estimated 1
percentage point during the October through December months, before
becoming a minor drag in January. Over the February-to-June period,
falling prepayments of mortgage-backed securities are projected to
deduct 1 to 2 percentage points from M2 growth.13 Nevertheless, the
underlying trend of M2 is anticipated to strengthen enough to leave
actual M2 growth at a 2 percent rate from January to June. Inflows to
bond and stock mutual funds through June should be somewhat weaker
than the pace of last year, as a result of the flatter yield curve and
likely smaller capital gains. 14  In addition, previous declines in
offering rates on liquid deposits evidently have brought them into
full alignment with money market rates, so this drag on M2 expansion
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
------------ I-------------
Levels in Billions
Nov-93
Dec-93
Jan-94
Feb-94
Mar-94
Apr-94
May-94
Jun-94
Monthly Growth Rates
Nov-93
Dec-93
Jan-94
Feb-94
Mar-94
Apr-94
May-94
Jun-94
Growth Rate
From
Jun-93
Nov-93
Dec-93
Mar-94
Jan-94
To
Dec-93
Mar-94
Mar-94
Jun-94
Jun-94
Dec-93
Jan-94
Mar-94
Jun-94
- Actual Level
* Short-Run Alternatives
The range for 1994 is the provisional
range adopted at the July meeting.
-Actual Level
* Short-Run Alternatives
may well have finally played itself out. Even so, the underlying
trend of M2 growth is likely to remain below that of nominal spending,
as some of the anomalous weakness relative to historical patterns that
surfaced in the 1990s is assumed to persist.
(30) M3 is projected to expand at a 1-1/4 percent rate from
January to June under alternative B. The growth of debt of domestic
nonfederal sectors from December to June is projected at a 5-1/4 per-
cent rate, sustaining the faster growth rate recorded during the
fourth quarter of last year. The overall debt aggregate is foreseen
as expanding at a 5-1/2 percent rate through midyear, leaving this
measure somewhat below the midpoint of its provisional monitoring
Directive Language
(31) Presented below for Committee consideration is draft
language relating to the Humphrey-Hawkins ranges for 1994 and the
operating paragraph for the intermeeting period.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stabil-
ity and promote sustainable growth in output. In fur-
therance of these objectives, the Committee at THIS {DEL: its
meeting in July lowered the] ESTABLISHED ranges {DEL: it had
established in February] for growth of M2 and M3 OF ____
TO ____ [DEL: ranges of 1 to 5] percent and ____ TO ___ [DEL:0 to 4]
percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter
Committee anticipated that developments contributing to
unusual velocity increases COULD [DEL: would] persist [DEL: over the
balance of] DURING the year and that money growth within
these [DEL:lower] ranges would be consistent with its broad
policy objectives. The monitoring range for growth of
total domestic nonfinancial debt also was SET AT ___ TO
____ lowered to 4 to 8 percent for the year. [DEL: For 1994,
the Committee agreed on tentative ranges for monetary
growth-, measured from the fourth quarter of 1993 to the
fourth quarter of 1994, of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and
the monitoring range for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt at 4 to 8 percent for 1994.] The
behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be
evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and develop-
ments in the economy and financial markets.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/main-
tain/INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions. In the context of the Commit-
tee's long-run objectives for price stability and sus-
tainable economic growth, and giving careful considera-
tion to economic, financial, and monetary developments,
slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint (WOULD/
MIGHT) or slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint
(WOULD) might be acceptable in the intermeeting period.
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate (MODEST) growth in M2 and M3
over THE FIRST HALF OF 1994 coming months.
