Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC March 24, 1995
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments1
(1) The System tightened the stance of monetary policy fur-
ther on February 1 to contain inflation pressures amid indications
that the economy was continuing to advance at a substantial pace,
boosting rates of resource utilization from already high levels. The
Board approved a 1/2 percentage point hike in the discount rate, to
fully to reserve markets, raising the intended federal funds rate to
level during the intermeeting period.2 Unusually low demands for
excess reserves appear to have contributed to softness in the federal
funds rate at times during the intermeeting period.
(2) The firming of reserve market conditions was anticipated
by market participants and prompted little response in market rates;
the prime rate, however, was hiked another 50 basis points, to 9 per-
cent. As the period progressed, most market yields moved down con-
siderably in reaction to data indicating that the pace of economic
expansion was slowing appreciably, as well as to testimony and other
comments by Federal Reserve officials that were interpreted as sug-
gesting that, as a consequence, the period of policy tightening might
be drawing to a close. The revision to expectations was reflected in
a substantial downward movement in futures rates on federal funds and
Eurodollar deposits (chart); making some allowance for liquidity pre-
miums, the structure of these rates suggests that market participants
now expect little if any further tightening in monetary policy. Most
short-term rates fell 15 to 30 basis points over the period, while
intermediate- and longer-term yields declined 30 to 60 basis points.
Broad stock price indexes climbed 5 to 7 percent to record levels in
response to heightened prospects for sustained moderate economic ex-
pansion with low inflation and the associated fall in interest rates
and to earnings reports that were generally stronger than expected.
U.S. capital markets were relatively undisturbed by several poten-
tially disruptive events. The failure of Baring Brothers appeared to
have few spillover effects domestically. News of large trading losses
at Bankers Trust reduced the price of its shares and increased the
spread on its uninsured debt, but left the prices of the securities of
other institutions unaffected. Spreads on private paper more general-
ly stayed narrow over the intermeeting period. A plunge in the for-
eign exchange value of the dollar did not appear to push up bond
yields on balance, because it seemed attributable largely to the sof-
tening economic outlook. However, on days when the dollar's decline
was sharpest, bond rates and their implied volatility moved up tem-
(3) The dollar's foreign exchange value fell 4-3/4 percent
on a weighted-average basis against other G-10 currencies over the
intermeeting period. It fell especially steeply around the time of
the defeat of the Balanced Budget Amendment, perhaps suggesting erod-
ing confidence in the ability of the U.S. government to address some
of its serious economic concerns. Declines against the mark and the
yen were particularly large--7 and 10-1/2 percent, respectively.
Long-term interest rates declined about 25 basis points in Germany,
about half of the fall in the United States. The mark may have bene-
fitted as well from stronger demands arising from political uncer-
tainties in several European countries, notably Italy and Spain. The
extent of the yen's strength against the dollar was somewhat puzzling;
Japanese bond rates declined somewhat more than U.S. rates. The de-
terioration of the Mexican political and economic situation led to a
sharp depreciation of the peso against the dollar and appeared to
weigh on the dollar vis-a-vis major currencies. Intervention activity
was substantial: U.S. monetary authorities purchased $1,420 million
against marks and yen, split evenly between the System and the Trea-
The Bank of Mexico drew $1 billion on its swap line with the
Federal Reserve early in the intermeeting period and later repaid $500
million out of the proceeds of a medium-term drawing of $3 billion on
its swap line with the ESF. At this time, Mexico has outstanding
drawings of $4 billion on the ESF and $1 billion on the Federal
(4) Following a burst of growth in January, M2 has been
nearly flat on net over the past two months, falling short of the
and leaving this aggregate a little above the lower bound of its 1-to-
market funds, was mirrored by strengthening demands for investments
purchases of shares in bond funds after a year of redemptions, and
purchases of stock funds have been brisk.5 Also, noncompetitive
tenders for Treasury securities have been heavy in recent months.
Nonetheless, as in 1994, the growth of M2 has tracked that projected
by the standard staff demand model. Based on the Greenbook projection
for nominal GDP, the velocity of M2 has continued to increase in the
first quarter, but less rapidly than last year.
(5) M3 has remained more robust than M2 in recent months,
expanding at a 4 percent average pace over February and March, a
little stronger than the staff expected. This aggregate in March is
estimated to be slightly above its 0-to-4 percent range for 1995. The
elevated growth of M3 appears to be associated with bank needs to fund
loan growth. Large time deposits have been issued at a particularly
rapid clip, and term Eurodollars and RPs have also been strong.
(6) Debt growth was relatively brisk on balance over the
first few months of the year. Overall business borrowing has picked
up in recent months, perhaps reflecting a widening financing gap.
Business loans at banks surged at a 22 percent annual rate in February
on the heels of similar growth in January; some deceleration, though
to a still-hefty pace, seems to be in train in March. Commercial
paper issuance also has been strong, while issuance of corporate bonds
in public markets has picked up a little. By contrast, household
borrowing is estimated to have moderated. Growth of consumer credit
in January was held down by weakness in auto loans. Consumer borrow-
ing from banks slowed substantially in February, owing importantly to
the virtual absence of tax-refund loans this year, but appears to have
rebounded this month. In the tax-exempt sector, the volume of bonds
outstanding likely has contracted, as bond issuance has been quite
weak while retirements remain large. Total domestic nonfinancial
sector debt is estimated to have expanded at a 6 percent pace through
February, leaving this aggregate in the upper half of its 3-to-7 per-
cent monitoring range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Dec. 94:Q4
to to
Feb. Mar. Mar. 1 Mar.
Money and credit aggregates
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
are calculated by prorating averages for two-week reserve main-
tenance periods that overlap months. Reserve data incorporate
adjustments for discontinuities associated with changes in reserve
requirements. Reserve figures for March assume excess reserves
average $1 billion and adjustment and seasonal borrowings average
$75 million in the maintenance periods ending March 29 and April 12.
Policy alternatives
(7) Three policy alternatives are considered below. Under
alternative B, federal funds trading would continue around 6 percent,
in association with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $75 mil-
lion.6 Under alternative C, the federal funds rate would be in-
creased to 6-1/2 percent by raising either the borrowing allowance to
$125 million or the discount rate by 50 basis points. Alternative A,
involving a reduction of the intended funds rate to 5-1/2 percent,
could be effected by lowering either the borrowing allowance to $50
million or the discount rate by 50 basis points.
(8) A key element in assessing the appropriate stance of
policy going forward is the interpretation of the causes and conse-
quences of the sizeable movements in prices on securities and foreign
exchange markets over recent months. As discussed in paragraph 2, the
drop in dollar interest and exchange rates seemed primarily a response
to the perceived softening in aggregate demand. The question is
whether the market reaction has been appropriate to the new informa-
tion in the sense of leaving rates at levels consistent with the Com-
mittee's objectives for the economy and prices. With an unchanged
federal funds rate in the staff forecast, interest and exchange rates
close to recent levels are associated with activity growing slowly
enough to move the economy back to the neighborhood of its potential
and core CPI inflation flattening out at a somewhat higher rate than
in 1994. If the Committee believes such an outcome were both likely
and acceptable, then it may be inclined to leave the current level of
the federal funds rate in place, as under alternative B, unless and
until incoming economic data or a clarification of prospective fiscal
policy begin to point to a different outlook.
(9) The softer cast to recent economic data along with
statements by Federal Reserve officials have led market participants
to the virtually unanimous opinion that the FOMC will keep its policy
stance on hold at this Committee meeting. Consequently, there would
likely be little change in interest rates in response to the choice of
alternative B. While sentiment in foreign exchange markets has proven
difficult to predict, no clear rationale presents itself for signifi-
cant further dollar depreciation over the intermeeting period.
(10) A case for the 1/2 percentage point increase in the
federal funds rate of alternative C could be made on the grounds that,
with economic activity having already overshot its potential and the
persistence of the slowdown in economic growth not yet firmly estab-
lished, more insurance should be taken out against a serious deterior-
ation in inflation trends. The risk of such an outcome would seem
even greater if it were judged that markets have overreacted, implying
undesirable additional stimulus from the declines in interest and
exchange rates and the rise in stock prices. The need for prompt
further policy firming would be especially pressing to the extent that
the Committee were dissatisfied with the prospects in the staff fore-
cast for a sustained higher level of core inflation. Judging from the
alternative simulations in the Greenbook, even a 50 basis point in-
crease in the federal funds rate would leave the core CPI inflation
rate in 1996 above that in 1994 and might not be sufficient to restore
a downward tilt in subsequent years.
(11) With financial markets having built in no near-term
monetary policy tightening, choice of alternative C would come as a
surprise. Market participants might alter their perceptions of the
Federal Reserve's longer-term intentions and likely reactions to
future economic data. The resulting higher expected path of short-
term interest rates over the intermediate term would act to raise bond
rates, especially in real terms. But for nominal yields, the more
favorable inflation prospects for the out years, and the associated
reduction in expected short-term interest rates for those years, would
serve as a partial offset. The unexpected rise in U.S. real interest
rates across the term structure, other things equal, would provide
support for the dollar on foreign exchange markets.
(12) The easing in reserve market conditions under alterna-
tive A could be justified if the unexpected weakness in the recent
economic data were read as indicating that previous policy tightenings
risked an unacceptably sharp slowdown in spending later this year--
especially since a real federal funds rate remaining above its longer-
term average might add to the restraint on demand already in the pipe-
line. Concerns in this regard might be accentuated by the further
deterioration in the Mexican situation and repercussions on U.S. net
exports. In this view, with pressures on resources possibly abating
appreciably, the risks of worsening inflation would seem minimal. In
effect, choice of alternative A would imply a view that not only have
longer-term interest and exchange rates not overshot on the downside,
but that policy may still be too tight to allow markets to compensate
fully for oncoming economic weakness.
(13) The 50 basis point easing of the federal funds rate
under alternative A also would surprise market participants. Both
long- and short-term rates are likely to fall substantially as a
result, as would the foreign exchange value of the dollar. Although
the Federal Reserve's anti-inflationary credibility has apparently
increased over the last few months, it could begin to erode if incom-
ing data were to indicate that inflation pressures were not abating,
prompting the market to judge that the easing had been unwarranted.
Under those circumstances, long-term rates would begin to retrace
their initial declines, particularly if the dollar came under persist-
ent, intense downward pressure.
(14) The table below shows staff projections of money and
debt aggregates through September under the unchanged reserve market
conditions of alternative B. (More detailed data, including money
growth rates under alternatives A and C, are shown in the table and
charts on the following pages.) From a March base, average M2 growth
would pick up to a 2-1/2 percent rate, while average M3 growth would
slow to a 3 percent pace. The projected strengthening in M2
growth, despite the staff's forecast of weaker nominal GDP expansion,
reflects both a continued rise in the offering rates on deposits and
the reduced attractiveness of financial assets of longer maturities
(Footnote continues on next page)
anticipated moderation in bank funding needs following the outsized
burst in lending activity over the first quarter of the year. The
bulk of this slowdown in M3 is expected to be concentrated in large
time deposits. By September, M2 would be in the lower half, and M3
near the top, of their respective 1-to-5 percent and 0-to-4 percent
annual growth ranges. Somewhat slower growth in the monetary aggre-
gates would result from the higher opportunity costs of alternative C,
while somewhat faster growth would occur under alternative A. The
Alternative B
Growth from March
to September
Growth from 1994:Q4
to September
effect of a 50-basis-point change in the federal funds rate on M2
growth over the six-month period would be expected to be about one-
half percentage point. In neither a tightening nor an easing would
(Footnote continued from previous page)
balance, the staff has built in somewhat stronger liquid deposits in
April and somewhat weaker in May arising from the heavier final pay-
ments this year. Later refunds contribute slightly to stronger
deposit growth in April as well.
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
the growth of the broader aggregates be expected to breach the upper
or lower bands of their annual ranges, although M3 is virtually at the
upper end of its range under alternative A.
(15) Consistent with the forecasted moderation in nominal
spending, the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to
slow to around a 4-3/4 percent pace from February to September, bring-
ing its rate of growth from the fourth quarter of last year to 5 per-
cent--the mid-point of its monitoring range. Its nonfederal component
is projected to follow a virtually identical pattern. Borrowing by
nonfinancial businesses is likely to edge off; enlarged bond issuance
brought about by declines in long-term interest rates should be more
than offset by an ebbing of bank lending and commercial paper issu-
ance. Household borrowing should moderate with spending, led by a
reduction in flows of consumer credit, which might also be affected by
increased interest charges. The tendency toward increasingly generous
provision of credit by banks and other institutional lenders might
well draw to a close as rising debt service burdens and the economic
slowdown begin to raise some cautionary flags about prospective credit
Directive Language
(16) Presented below is draft wording for the operational
paragraph that includes the usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the im-
mediate future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOME-
WHAT/MAINTAIN/increase somewhat the existing degree of
pressure on reserve positions, [DEL: taking account of a
possible increase in the discount rate.] In the con-
text of the Committee's long-run objectives for price
stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving
careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater
reserve restraint (WOULD) (MIGHT) or somewhat
(SLIGHTLY) lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT) be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contem-
plated reserve conditions are expected to be consis-
tent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming
March 24, 1995
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
Mar 94
Apr 94
May 94
Jun 94
Jul 94
Aug 94
Sep 94
Oct 94
Nov 94
Dec 94
Jan 95
Feb 95
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
SeasonallyMARCH 27, 1995
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt1
nontransactions components total loans
total loans
Period M1 M2 M3 L and U. S. other' total2
In M2 In M3 only investments' government'
Levels (Sbillions):
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
MARCH 27, 1995
Money market
Overnight Small mutual funds Large
Other RPs and denomi- general denomi- Term Term Short-term Ban
Period Currency Demand checkable Euro- Savings nation purpose nstitutions nation Ps Euro- avings Commercial Banker
deposits deposits dollars deposits' time and time NSA' dollars bonds Treasury r ces
NSA' deposits
Monthly
1994-FEB.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
Net of money market mutual fund holdings of these items.
Includes money market deposit accounts.
Includes retail repurchase agreements. All IRA and Keogh accounts at commercial banks and thrift institutions are subtracted from small time deposits.
Excludes IRA and Keogh accounts.
Net of large denomination time deposits held by money market mutual funds, depository institutions, U.S. government, and foreign banks and official institutions.
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Weekly
December 21
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
March 22
Treasury couons
-- -- - ---
-- 302
--- --- --- --- ---
--- 200 ...
March 24, 1995
March 22
