Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC June 30, 1995
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The Committee's decision at the May 23 meeting to keep
reserve conditions steady came as no surprise to market participants,
and most interest rates showed little immediate change. In subsequent
weeks, federal funds generally traded close to the intended rate of
Treasury's balance, mostly related to tax flows; by fluctuations in
required reserves, which partly reflected the implementation or exten-
sion of retail sweep programs by two large regional banks; and by an
unexpected slowdown in currency. Also, the desk continued to monitor
closely the demand for excess reserves, which has run on the lean
(2) Despite the stability of the federal funds rate, other
short-term rates fell 1/4 percentage point over the intermeeting
period, mostly owing to revisions to the prospects for the economy and
monetary policy. When the Committee met last month, market partici-
pants apparently viewed the weakish cast to real activity as raising
the odds of some policy easing later in the year. Futures quotes on
federal funds and Eurodollar rates, for example, tilted down slightly
(chart). Many of the economic data releases that followed, parti-
cularly the decline in payroll employment posted for May, made easing
appear even more probable. In recent days, however, upticks in
several indicators have tempered the market's expectation regarding
policy ease. Nonetheless, money-market futures rates still point down
over the balance of 1995 and by more than they did in mid-May.
(3) In capital markets, the yield curve for Treasury coupon
securities shifted down 20 to 30 basis points on balance. The bond-
market rally, which lasted through most of the intermeeting period,
was helped along at times by evidence that major economies abroad were
weaker than had been anticipated and by a political dialogue at home
indicating that meaningful progress in narrowing future federal budget
deficits might be in the cards. A significant portion of the decline
in nominal yields would seem to embody a revision to real interest
rates; some trimming of inflation expectations cannot be ruled out,
but readings from surveys are ambiguous. Corporate and municipal
yields have not matched the decline in Treasury rates, and risk
spreads, particularly for junk bonds, have edged higher. Discussions
of a possible flat income tax, which would erode the benefits of tax-
exempt debt, may have contributed to the run-up in the ratio of tax-
exempt-to-taxable yields. The drop in interest rates helped to lift
the stock market, with most major equity indexes gaining at least
uncertain and the sense prevalent in the marketplace that the stance
of monetary policy might shift over coming months, measures of price
volatility moved higher; however, volatility--both realized as mea-
sured from actual rate changes or expected as implied from options
prices--remains below the level posted in the spring of last year.
(4) The dollar's weighted average exchange value has declined
about 3-1/4 percent since the May meeting. Long-term interest rates
abroad were little changed, on balance, while short-term rates, on
average, edged lower. Essentially all of the dollar's net decline
over the intermeeting period was posted in the week following the FOMC
meeting, mainly in response to weak U.S. economic data. On May 31,
U.S. monetary authorities initiated concerted intervention purchases
of dollars against marks and yen, which caught market participants by
surprise and seemed to have a significant short-run effect of boosting
the dollar. The System purchased $250 million against marks and a
like amount against yen; the Treasury bought equal amounts. During
June, the dollar has traded in a fairly narrow range, despite substan-
tial further variations in U.S. interest rates and changing prospects
for an agreement (eventually reached) regarding U.S.-Japan auto trade.
(5) The decline in U.S. interest rates over most maturities
in recent months seems to have contributed to a surge in the expansion
of M2. This aggregate increased at rates of 5 percent and 11-3/4
percent in May and June, respectively.2 The performance of M2 over
the past two months has pushed the growth of this aggregate from the
fourth quarter of 1994 to June up to a 4 percent rate and placed it in
the upper portion of its annual range. Growth of M2 for the first
half of the year has been considerably stronger than anticipated in
the January bluebook, especially under the tighter alternative se-
lected by the Committee in February, despite slower spending than was
forecast at the beginning of the year. Market rates, particularly at
intermediate- and long-term maturities, have been lower, on balance,
in the first half of 1995 than was expected by the staff. With rates
on M2 assets, as usual, lagging market rates, savers have reallocated
funds into deposits and money fund shares and out of market instru-
ments. The pronounced flattening of the yield curve also may have
encouraged demands for the shorter-term assets in M2. Growth in money
market funds has been particularly strong. Indicative of the sub-
stitutions out of capital market instruments, the staff's standard M2
demand model, which looks at competing rates only on short-term in-
struments, has underpredicted M2 growth in the second quarter. The
recent rapid growth in M2 should be sufficient to turn its velocity
downward in the second quarter, producing the first quarterly decline
in M2 velocity since early 1991.
(6) M3 has also expanded rapidly in May and June, at rates
of 7-3/4 percent and 13 percent, respectively. From the fourth
quarter of 1994 through June, M3 has increased at a 6-1/2 percent
rate, leaving it well above the upper bound of its 0-to-4 percent
annual range. The first-half outcome was about double the pace
anticipated by the staff in the January bluebook; in retrospect,
depositories have had larger funding needs--both bank and thrift
credit have been stronger over the first half of the year than the
staff had expected. Bank credit has expanded at a rate of 8-3/4
percent from the fourth quarter of 1994 to June, pulled along by
strength in business and consumer loans. Lower short- and inter-
mediate-term rates than in the January outlook have played some role
too: Institution-only money funds, like their retail brethren, pay
yields that lag movements in money-market rates. In the past two
months, the strong growth of M3-type money funds has provided a
powerful boost to M3.
(7) The growth of nonfederal sector debt in April and May
appears to have picked up from its first-quarter performance of 5-1/2
percent. While timely data on household-sector borrowing is scant,
rapid growth of consumer loans at banks, especially after adjusting
for securitizations, suggests that consumer credit has continued to
expand at a double-digit clip in recent months, even as spending on
durable goods has slowed. Judging by indexes of applications, mort-
gage activity has picked up a bit, although it is still too early to
say if there has been any effect on net mortgage debt. Many cor-
porations have rushed to borrow to take advantage of lower inter-
mediate- and long-term market rates; net corporate bond issuance is
estimated to have picked up substantially in May and appears to have
been stronger in June. Reflecting the shift to capital market financ-
ing, perhaps along with some decrease in inventory investment, bank
business lending has flagged of late. Net tax-exempt debt has ex-
tended its runoff in recent months, as advance-refunded issues con-
tinue to be retired. From the fourth quarter of 1994 through May,
total nonfinancial debt grew at about a 5-1/2 percent rate, a pace
about maintained by its private and federal components and up a bit
from its growth in the second half of last year. All told, this
performance, which was a shade faster than the staff had forecast in
January, placed the aggregate in the upper portion of its 3-to-7 per-
cent annual growth range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV
to 1
Apr. May June June
Money and credit aggregates
Ml adjusted for
retail sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial
debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Reserve measures
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
Long-Run Scenarios
(8) This section addresses the long-run implications of vari-
ous monetary policy strategies and highlights several issues that pose
risks to the staff's assessment of output and inflation prospects.
The first set of scenarios examines three alternative strategies for
monetary policy. All three embody the same underlying assumptions
concerning macroeconomic forces and relationships; notably, they all
assume additional fiscal policy actions through the 6-year simulation
period to put the budget deficit along a path to balance early in the
next decade. The three strategies, however, embed different assump-
tions concerning the economic outcomes that the Committee pursues.
The baseline strategy begins with the Greenbook's projection for 1995
and 1996 and thereafter keeps inflation tilted down by maintaining a
small margin of economic slack. The easier and tighter strategies
extend the lower and higher funds rate scenarios in the Greenbook.
The easier strategy may be viewed as consistent with a desire to have
the unemployment rate average around its assumed natural rate over the
forecast interval, while the tighter strategy may be seen as giving
priority to approaching price stability over the next several years.
These simulations are summarized in the table and Chart 2 on the
following pages.
(9) The staff econometric model of the U.S. and foreign
economies was used to extend the baseline forecast beyond the Green-
book horizon and to derive the effects relative to the baseline of the
alternative policy strategies and of the different economic assump-
tions made below. The model includes neither forward-looking expecta-
tions nor any long-term gains in potential output from reducing infla-
tion. The projections are based on an assumed natural rate of
Alternative Strategies for Monetary Policy
(QIV to QIV percent change)
CPI inflation--excluding food
baseline 3.2
tighter 3.2
easier 3.2
Nominal GDP growth
baseline
tighter
easier
Real GDP growth
baseline
tighter
easier
and energy
2.9
2.8
3.0
(fourth-quarter level, percent)
Unemployment Rate (1994-survey
baseline 6.0
tighter 6.0
easier 6.0
basis)
6.1
6.3
6.0
(QIV to QIV percent change)
(fourth-quarter level, percent)
Federal funds rate
baseline
tighter
easier
baseline
tighter
easier
unemployment of 5.9 percent. Each year that the unemployment rate
exceeds its natural rate by 1 percentage point, the model predicts
that inflation will be reduced by around 1/2 percentage point. In
light of uncertainties about the relationships among economic vari-
ables and associated hazards of any forecasting exercise, the results
reported below should be read only as suggestive of the general
patterns likely to be engendered under each of the experiments.
(10) Under the baseline strategy, to effect a modest deceler-
ation of inflation, the nominal federal funds rate is held at its
current level through the first quarter of 1996 before falling to
nominal rates reflect in part an ebbing of inflation, but also incor-
porate lower real interest rates. The real funds rate ends the decade
almost 1 percentage point below its current level, as monetary policy
responds to the influence of fiscal restraint on the equilibrium
federal funds rate. But under this strategy real rates are held
slightly above their declining equilibrium levels to maintain a margin
of slack in resource utilization and foster an ongoing deceleration in
prices. Long rates fall by half as much as the funds rate because the
anticipation of some budget deficit reduction has already been built
into long rates. Fiscal restraint and associated real rate reductions
raise gross investment (as a percent of GDP) relative to current
levels by almost 1 percentage point by the end of the decade.
(11) The 1-1/4 percent decline in the funds rate under the
easier strategy removes remaining monetary restraint and fully offsets
fiscal drag. Thus, the unemployment rate stays in the neighborhood of
its natural rate through the 1990s. Inflation flattens out at around
funds rate is concentrated at the beginning of the simulation period,
even though fiscal restraint is spread out over the entire period,
because spending reacts with longer lags to interest rates than to
fiscal policy. Moreover, in the model long-term rates do not antici-
pate the full measure of fiscal restraint and respond only sluggishly
to changes in short-term rates. (These elements are present in all
the simulations, but are illustrated most clearly under this
strategy.) If bond markets were more forward looking, policy easing
would have to be spread out over a longer period to get the same
(12) To open an output gap sufficient to attain approximate
price stability early in the next decade, the tighter strategy in-
volves an appreciable increase in the federal funds rate by early next
year. The funds rate must fall thereafter, not only in line with
fiscal restraint and lower inflation, but also to limit overshooting
of price stability after the end of the simulation horizon. Of
course, the model does not incorporate any credibility effects from
following the tighter policy; inflation expectations move down in
lagged response to inflation itself, and the sacrifice ratio is
unaffected by the policy strategy.
(13) The recent behavior of labor compensation may be seen as
raising questions about the level of the NAIRU. Chart 3 shows the
effects on inflation of a NAIRU 1/2 percentage point lower or higher
than in the baseline, if the nominal federal funds rate were held to
its baseline path. With the predetermined path for nominal rates, the
difference in inflation begins small, but becomes larger and larger
over time as real rates deviate increasingly from their equilibrium
levels. To bring aggregate demand in line with the new level of
potential output, the real federal funds rate must adjust by about
half a percentage point in the same direction as the change in the
NAIRU. If, owing to recognition lags, the needed policy change is
delayed, or if the longer-term rate adjusts sluggishly to the funds
rate, the initial change in the nominal federal funds rate must be
appreciably larger than one-half percentage point to keep inflation
along the baseline path.
(14) Chart 4 shows the effects of shocks to the staff projec-
tion of aggregate demand. As in the previous exercise, the nominal
federal funds rate is held along its baseline path. The shocks were
designed as surprises of about half a percentage point in the personal
savings rate--well within its range of historic variation, and an
important uncertainty in the economic outlook. They could also proxy
for alternative fiscal policies. The shift in aggregate demand
creates an imbalance between it and potential output, which, in the
absence of a policy response, results in ever rising or falling infla-
tion. Even a shock of these modest proportions gives rise to a dif-
ference from the baseline in the unemployment rate of more than a half
percentage point in 1997. The equilibrium real federal funds rate
moves about one quarter of a percentage point in this example; once
again, given the lags in the effects of policy and, depending on the
dynamics of the financial markets, greater policy adjustments likely
would be needed initially to hold the inflation rate to its baseline
Long-Run Ranges
Projections and Ranges for 1995
(15) As background for the Committee's discussion of its
money and credit ranges for 1995, the table below presents the staff's
projections for the aggregates under the three longer-run policy
strategies discussed in the previous section. The table also gives
two alternatives for the Committee's money and debt ranges for this
the same as in the Greenbook. For the easier and tighter strategies,
the projections for M1 and M2 are based partly on adjustments derived
from the staff's standard econometric money demand models. The fore-
casts for M3 and debt under the alternatives are judgmental. Given
the timing and assumed sizes of the policy moves under the easier and
tighter strategies, monetary growth rates are affected relatively
little for 1995 as a whole.
Growth of Money and Credit and Ranges for 1995
(percent)
Staff Projections
Baseline
Easier (Greenbook) Tighter
Ranges
Alt. I
(current
ranges) Al
M2 4-1/4 4 3-3/4 1 to 5
M3 5-3/4 5-1/2 5-1/4 0 to 4
Debt 4-3/4 4-3/4 4-3/4 3 to 7
M1 0 -1/2 -1 --
Memo:
Nominal
GDP 4.1 4.1 4.0
* - 1994:QIV to May.
** - 1994:QIV to 1995:QII (Greenbook projection).
t. II
to 5
to 6
to 7
Memo:
QIV
to
(16) In assessing the prospects for M2 over the remainder of
the year, the staff has carried through only a part of the unusual
strength witnessed in May and June. The lagged effects of the de-
clines in interest rates in recent weeks should continue to induce
investors to shift funds into deposits in coming months, but the mag-
nitude of such flows in recent weeks has been surprising and seems
unlikely to persist. The modest backup in interest rates and narrow-
ing of the advantage of money fund yields over market rates antici-
pated in the staff forecast will also help to damp money growth.
However, nominal income is projected to expand a little faster over
the second half of the year, augmenting demands for money. Thus, M2
growth from June to December, at a 4-1/2 percent rate under the Green-
book baseline projection, is still expected to be a little higher than
its first-half pace. For 1995 as a whole, M2 is expected to rise 4
percent, placing this aggregate in the upper half of its current 1-to-
outcome that would differ considerably from the substantial increases
over the past three years when M2 demand was restrained by, among
other factors, shifts into mutual funds and, in 1994, by substantial
increases in market interest rates. (The velocities of the aggregates
appear on charts 5 and 6.)
(17) Over the second half of 1995, M3 growth is also expected
to moderate from its recent rapid pace, primarily reflecting a sharp
slowing in bank credit, as inventory financing abates, and in institu-
tion-only money funds. But, at a 4-1/2 percent rate from June to
December under the Greenbook baseline projection, the expansion of M3
should remain brisk compared with its performance of the past few
years. For 1995 as a whole, M3 is expected to rise 5-1/2 percent,
well above its current 0-to-4 percent annual range.
(18) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is anticipated
by the staff to decelerate noticeably over the second half of the
year. Federal borrowing should tail off, partly in response to the
strong cash position of the Treasury resulting from unexpectedly heavy
tax receipts in the second quarter. Borrowing in the business sector
also is likely to flag a bit from its strong pace of the first half,
as the corporate financing gap shrinks in association with the slower
pace of inventory accumulation. On a fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter
basis, overall debt is projected to expand 4-3/4 percent this year
under all of the scenarios, a little above nominal income growth and
in the middle of its range.
(19) As noted, M2 and debt most likely will finish 1995 with-
in their current ranges (given as alternative I) under the Greenbook
baseline assumption of no change in the stance of monetary policy.
This outcome is likely as well under the easier and tighter policy
strategies. However, in view of the recent surge in M2 growth, there
is a distinct possibility that M2 could run above its current range
under the baseline forecast and especially under the easier strategy.
The extent of the recent surge in M2 growth suggests a significant
sensitivity of that aggregate to intermediate- and longer-term inter-
est rates, which is not captured by the standard econometric model.
M3 very likely will exceed its current range under any of the strate-
gies. In these circumstances, the Committee might choose to retain
the existing ranges for all of the aggregates and explain the expected
overshoot of the M3 range as the result of a temporary surge in inter-
mediation by depositories and money funds resulting from cyclical
swings in interest rates and inventories. The explanation could
emphasize that the FOMC does not believe that the predicted outcome
will interfere with achievement of its longer-run objectives.
(20) Alternative II would retain the current ranges for M2
and debt but raise the range for M3 by 2 percentage points, encompass-
ing expected growth of the aggregates under all three scenarios. An
increase in the M3 range likely would be needed eventually in any
case. Historically, the velocity of this aggregate tended to decline,
a result of growth of banks and thrift institutions that until the
late 1980s was usually faster than that of the economy as a whole.
From the late 1980s until recently, that tendency was reversed by
retrenchment of depository institutions, a stricter regime of supervi-
sion and regulation, and a shift toward open-market funding by bor-
rowers. Accordingly, the Committee has selected relatively low ranges
for M3 over the past few years. Looking forward, it is difficult to
predict how much spending will be financed through depository inter-
mediation, but it seems unlikely that the retrenchment of the early
range for M3 could be seen as a technical adjustment to take account
of a return to more normal patterns of intermediation, with no sig-
nificance for the thrust of monetary policy. Although alternative II
would cover the staff projection for M3 in 1995 under the monetary
policy assumption in the Greenbook baseline forecast, considerable
risk would remain that it would run above even that range--a probabil-
ity that would increase if the Committee followed the easier policy
Projections and Ranges for 1996
(21) Projections and alternative ranges for 1996 are pre-
sented in the table on the next page. During 1996, the pickup in
nominal income growth and fall-off of short-term interest rates under
the Greenbook baseline forecast should support M2 growth. The growth
of this aggregate, at 4-1/2 percent, is expected to match that of
nominal income, keeping its velocity unchanged for the second year in
a row. M3 is projected to rise 5 percent next year, a little more
slowly than in 1995. The funding needs of depository institutions
should increase less rapidly than this year, reflecting slower exten-
sions of credit by banks and thrifts; more credit demands are likely
to be met in the markets to take advantage of relatively low inter-
mediate- and long-term interest rates. Overall domestic nonfinancial
sector debt growth, at 4-1/2 percent, should be about in line with
that of nominal GDP.
(22) The effects of the alternative strategies on relative
growth rates of money and credit would be appreciably larger in 1996
than this year. M2 expansion, for example, would be about a percent-
age point stronger or weaker, reflecting both the influence of shift-
ing opportunity costs as well as that of faster or slower nominal
income growth induced by the different stances of monetary policy.
Growth of Money and Credit and Ranges for 1996
(percent)
Staff Projections Ranges
Current
Baseline 1995
Easier (Greenbook) Tighter ranges Alt. I Alt. II
Memo:
Nominal
GDP 5.0 4.5 4.1
(23) Under alternative I, the Committee would keep the cur-
rent 1995 ranges for M2 and debt in 1996 but would raise the limits
for M3 by 2 percentage points (as in the alternative II ranges for
evolving patterns of financial intermediation, noting that M3 growth
within this higher range still would likely be consistent with con-
taining inflation. Under the Greenbook baseline forecast, M2 would
likely finish 1996 close to the upper end of its range, and M3 would
be expected to be in the upper half of its range. Under the easier
policy strategy, M2 would probably run somewhat above this range.
(24) Alternative II involves increasing to 2 to 6 percent the
range for M2 as well as that for M3. The higher M2 range would more
comfortably bracket the staff projection under the Greenbook baseline
policy assumptions. The alternative II ranges also would more likely
accommodate the faster money growth that would accompany the easier
monetary policy strategy than would the first alternative. A poten-
tial disadvantage of alternative II is that it may be perceived as a
signal that the FOMC was placing less emphasis on achieving its price
stability objective; in past monetary policy reports, the Committee
has noted that the 1-to-5 percent range for M2 provided a benchmark
for longer-run growth that could be expected under conditions of
reasonable price stability if that aggregate's velocity resumes its
historical pattern of no long-term trend.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(25) Two policy alternatives are presented below for Commit-
tee consideration. Under alternative B, the intended federal funds
rate would be maintained at 6 percent. Under the easier policy stance
of alternative A, the intended federal funds rate would be reduced by
(26) The decision to leave reserve market conditions un-
changed, as under alternative B, might be favored if the staff
economic forecast, which assumes a constant federal funds rate through
early 1996, were viewed as both a reasonable and desirable outcome.
In that forecast, near-term weakness is limited--about sufficient to
bring the economy down to the level of its potential. An unemployment
rate in the vicinity of its natural rate is restored by the third
quarter, thereby nipping in the bud any tendency for inflationary
momentum to build. The declines in real longer-term rates and the
exchange rate that have already occurred, along with the rise in
equity prices, stimulate final sales sufficiently to return growth
close to the rate of its potential by late in 1995, holding the un-
employment rate about constant. However, monetary policy still is a
little to the restrictive side in the Greenbook forecast, leaving a
small amount of slack in the economy over time. Against this back-
drop, and with very recent indicators suggesting a limit to near-term
weakness, the Committee may wish to see macroeconomic data accumulate
that call the staff forecast into question before deciding to ease
(27) Over the past few days, markets have come to view policy
action at this meeting as much less likely, and interest and exchange
rates probably would change little with the choice of alternative B,
though a further small backup in yields cannot be ruled out with the
disappointment of some residual expectations of prompt easing. Mar-
kets are likely to view data over the intermeeting period consistent
with the staff forecast as mixed; broad measures of production and
employment would continue to the soft side, with the unemployment rate
moving higher and inflation lower than in the first half, but in-
dicators of sales should show some firming tendencies. In these cir-
cumstances, market participants likely would continue to see inflation
risks as more muted and an intermediate-term policy ease as still a
(28) A reduction in the federal funds rate, perhaps of the
as a form of insurance against the downside risks in the economic
outlook. The slowdown in consumer spending of late has been puzzling
and foreign growth has weakened unexpectedly, raising some question of
whether the recent weakness in the economy might persist and deepen.
In that event, waiting for clearcut evidence of a sustained slowdown
would be waiting too long to counter the weakness in spending. More-
over, even if the current slowdown were thought likely to be short-
lived and mild, the risks of rising inflation have been greatly re-
duced, given that the economy is moving back to its level of potential
output and pressures on prices at early stages of production have been
abating. If so, holding the real federal funds rate at its current
somewhat elevated level, especially when the long-run sustainable rate
may be depressed by fiscal restraint, might no longer be appropriate.
That is, the financial market conditions associated with the unchanged
policy of alternative B, including the backup in long-term rates in
the staff forecast, might be seen as unnecessarily risking weak spend-
ing. Even in the staff forecast, unemployment in the latter part of
to see inflation level out at something over 3 percent rate--as in the
easier scenario--rather than aim to tilt it down, it might be more
disposed to consider a policy easing.
(29) Immediate implementation of the 1/2 percentage point
cut in the federal funds rate of alternative A would represent a
considerably more aggressive policy action than currently is priced
into financial markets. Thus, short-term interest rates initially
would decline further, with the rally probably showing through to some
degree in bond markets as well. The exchange value of the dollar is
likely to depreciate. At this point, market participants likely would
be somewhat puzzled by this action, and the response of market prices
would depend largely on their interpretation. A larger response in
fixed-income and foreign exchange markets would be elicited to the
degree that the 1/2 percentage point rate cut led the market to think
that the Federal Reserve was responding to significant underlying
weakness in the economic outlook. In this case, the policy action
might be seen by market participants as only the first in a series of
reductions in short-term rates. Such a perception could be mitigated
if the reserve market action were not accompanied by a cut in the
discount rate. Should the Committee instead decide on only a 1/4
percentage point reduction in the federal funds rate, the financial
market impact could be appreciably less, though further Federal Re-
serve action likely would be anticipated.
(30) The influences affecting money and credit growth with
and without a policy easing were discussed in general terms in the
previous section. In brief, growth of M2 and M3 from June to December
seems likely to remain substantially stronger than in recent years,
but down considerably from May and June. Were the Committee to ease
by 1/2 percentage point at this FOMC meeting, M2 would probably not be
boosted enough in coming months to exceed the 5 percent upper bound of
its current annual range, though, obviously, the risks of running
above the range would be significant. Under either alternative, M3 is
expected to remain above its current 0-to-4 percent range.
Directive Language
(31) Presented below for Committee consideration is draft
directive language relating to the ranges for 1995 and 1996 and the
operational paragraph for the intermeeting period. With regard to the
ranges for 1995, three alternatives are shown: (1) wording that might
be used if the Committee decides to retain the ranges for 1995 that
were adopted earlier this year; (2) wording to reflect a decision to
change the ranges; and (3) wording to indicate a decision to raise the
range for M3 while retaining the ranges for M2 and debt. The third
option includes a brief statement of the reason for raising the M3
range; if this option were to be adopted, a fuller explanation would
be provided in the Humphrey-Hawkins report and testimony and in the
minutes for the meeting.
Paragraphs for 1995 and 1996 Ranges
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and
promote sustainable growth in output.
(1) In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee RE-
AFFIRMED at THIS its meeting THE RANGES IT HAD ESTABLISHED on
January 31-February 1 [DEL: established ranges] for growth of M2 and
M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured
from the fourth quarter of 1994 to the fourth quarter of 1995.
The Committee anticipated that money growth within these
ranges would be consistent with its broad policy objectives.
The monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial
debt was MAINTAINED AT [DEL: lowered to] 3 to 7 percent for the year.
(2) In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at
this meeting LOWERED/RAISED the ranges it had established on
January 31-February 1 for growth of M2 and M3 to ranges of
to ____ and ____ to ____ percent respectively, measured from the
fourth quarter of 1994 to the fourth quarter of 1995. The
Committee anticipated that money growth within these ranges
would be consistent with its broad policy objectives. The
monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial
debt was MAINTAINED AT/lowered to/RAISED TO 3 to 7 percent
[____ TO ____ PERCENT] for the year.
(3) In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee
reaffirmed at this meeting the range it had established on
January 31-February 1 for growth of M2 of 1 to 5 percent,
measured from the fourth quarter of 1994 to the fourth quarter
of 1995. The Committee also retained the monitoring range of
total domestic nonfinancial debt. THE COMMITTEE RAISED THE
MENT TO TAKE ACCOUNT OF CHANGING INTERMEDIATION PATTERNS. The
Committee anticipated that money growth within these ranges
would be consistent with its broad policy objectives.
For 1996 the Committee agreed on tentative ranges for
monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 1995 to
the fourth quarter of 1996, of ____ to ____ percent for M2 and
____ to ____ percent for M3. The Committee provisionally set
the associated monitoring range for growth of domestic non-
financial debt at ____ to ____ percent for 1996. [For 1996, the
Committee established on a tentative basis the same ranges as
in 1995 for growth of the monetary aggregates and debt, mea-
sured from the fourth quarter of 1995 to the fourth quarter of
to be evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and developments in
the economy and financial markets.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future,
the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/INCREASE
SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving
careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary
developments, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint
WOULD/MIGHT or somewhat (SLIGHTLY) lesser reserve restraint
would/MIGHT be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
