Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Class I FOMC
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC November 8, 1996
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) With markets placing better than even odds on a 25 basis
point rise in the federal funds rate at the September 24 FOMC meeting,
the decision to keep the intended federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent
precipitated interest-rate declines on that day across the term
structure, with the reaction most pronounced at shorter maturities
(chart). Over the balance of the intermeeting period, the incoming
data generally have pointed toward more subdued labor-cost and price
pressures than had been expected by most market participants. Against
this backdrop, the rate structure on federal funds futures contracts
has flattened enough to suggest that the market on average no longer
expects a System tightening over the next few months (chart).
Although further declines at the front end of the yield curve were
limited, intermediate- and long-term interest rates moved down
considerably further. Over the entire intermeeting period, yields on
Treasury bills have slipped off 15 basis points, while those on coupon
securities have fallen some 50 to 55 basis points to their lowest
levels since early March.1 Equity markets have reacted positively to
the drop in interest rates and to generally favorable earnings
reports, with broader indexes rising 5 percent over the intermeeting
(2) On average in major foreign industrial countries, long-term
interest rates have declined about 40 basis points since the last FOMC
meeting, while short-term rates have moved down 10 basis points. In
both cases, these rate declines were a little less than those in the
United States, and the dollar's weighted average exchange value edged
down slightly on balance over the intermeeting period. However,
bilateral dollar exchange rates showed unusually divergent movements,
in part reflecting specific factors applying to individual foreign
countries. Official interest rates were lowered 100 basis points in
Canada and 75 basis points in Italy, while rates in the United Kingdom
were raised 25 basis points.
The Desk did
not intervene.
(3) Available data suggest that private debt has continued to
expand at a moderate pace in recent months, with somewhat stronger
borrowing by businesses tending to offset a slowing in debt growth of
households. Although their commercial paper has been running off,
nonfinancial firms have borrowed heavily from banks and have tapped
stock and bond markets in volume since the latter part of September.
The stepup in business financing owes in part to unusually strong
merger activity and perhaps to a pickup in inventory investment.
Credit supply conditions for businesses have continued to be
favorable: Risk spreads in capital markets have remained narrow, and
banks have further eased standards and terms on business loans over
the last three months, according to the most recent survey of lending
officers. In the household sector, the recent moderate pace of growth
of residential mortgages likely has continued into the fourth quarter.
Consumer credit growth has been subdued on balance in recent months,
perhaps in part as a result of rising debt burdens and a more
restrictive posture at banks toward consumer lending. The runoff of
debt of states and municipalities has persisted on average over recent
months, as advance-refunded debt has continued to be paid down, while
federal borrowing has been light. Growth of the total debt of
domestic nonfinancial sectors for the year through September was at a
(4) M2 grew at a 3 percent rate in October, near its September
pace and somewhat slower than foreseen at the time of the last FOMC
meeting. The shortfall was mainly attributable to a surprisingly
large contraction in transaction deposits even after adjusting for new
has expanded at a 4 percent rate this year, placing it in the upper
half of its 1996 range. 3 M3, which grew at a 7 percent rate in
September, picked up to a 10 percent pace last month. The
acceleration, which was unforeseen at the time of the September FOMC
meeting, owed mainly to a surge in managed liabilities in that
aggregate, especially large time deposits, that were issued to fund
strong bank credit expansion. The October advance brought M3 growth
so far this year to the 6 percent upper bound of its annual range.
- 5
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV
to
Aug. Sept. Oct. Oct.1
Money and Credit Aggregates
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank Credit
Adjusted2
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed Reserves3
Total Reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary Base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
Policy Alternatives
(5) Final sales weakened more in the third quarter than
estimated in the September Greenbook, and inventory accumulation was
greater. In the latest forecast, final demand is expected to rebound
promptly so that inventory imbalances are avoided. The expansion of
economic activity is projected to run in line with that of potential
output, assuming that the current federal funds rate is maintained
through the end of 1998. In light of recent statistical evidence on
compensation, the staff has made a more optimistic assessment of the
outlook for price pressures. Factoring in as well favorable prospects
for food and energy supplies, the forecast for the CPI has been
reduced--even against the backdrop of a lower path for the
unemployment rate. The CPI is now projected to increase less than 3
percent in 1997 and 1998. It remains the staff view, however, that
resource pressures are intense enough to foster an upward tilt to the
underlying trend of wage and price inflation. Indeed, the rise in the
core inflation rate from 2-3/4 percent this year to 3 percent in each
of the next two years would be larger still were it not for technical
changes in the index.
(6) If the Committee views the staff forecast as both likely and
acceptable, it presumably would favor standing pat--alternative B.
Even if the Committee found unacceptable the forecasted upcreep in
core inflation (abstracting from technical CPI adjustments), it might
want to wait for more evidence that such an outcome is in train before
taking action. The overutilization of resources may be seen as
staying modest in any event, and thus policy inaction at this meeting
would not seem to risk allowing inflation to rise so much that jarring
adjustments to employment and output would be required eventually.
(7) With market participants widely expecting policy to remain
on hold for some time, the Committee's selection of alternative B
should elicit little response in financial markets. Assuming that
developments over the intermeeting period play out in accord with the
staff projection, which appears aligned with most market forecasts,
there is no reason to anticipate that interest rates will break out of
their recent range. Similarly, the dollar should trade on foreign
exchange markets around its recent levels.
(8) A policy tightening, such as the 50 basis point firming of
the federal funds rate under alternative C, might be favored should
the Committee wish to move promptly to counter the updrift in
underlying inflation embedded in the staff outlook. Furthermore, the
Committee may be concerned about additional upside risks to the
inflation outlook: For example, recent wage data may be misleading
and the widely reported tightness of labor markets could be reflected
soon in much more sizable increases in labor costs. Or spending might
snap back more forcefully than envisioned by the staff--especially in
light of the recent rallies in bond and stock markets--and intensify
pressures on resource utilization.
(9) The choice of alternative C would come as a surprise to
market participants. Most likely, they would infer that the Committee
sees considerably more risk of greater inflation pressures than is
generally perceived. Interest rates could rise markedly across the
term structure--perhaps almost as much at short-term maturities as the
interest rates would be likely to boost the dollar on foreign exchange
markets. Financial prices could be volatile for a time as market
participants reappraised the economic outlook and the likely path for
monetary policy, and appreciable declines in equity values cannot be
ruled out.
(10) A 50 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate, as
under alternative A, might be favored if the Committee viewed the
recent softness of final sales as likely to persist. Under those
circumstances, inventories may turn out higher than firms desire,
imparting an additional drag on production over the next couple of
quarters. But even if the staff forecast of spending is accepted, the
Committee may view the recent favorable performance of wages and
prices as suggesting that the natural rate of unemployment is still
lower than that implicit in the staff's inflation forecast. If so,
the economy may not have overshot its potential, and price pressures
may be weaker than in the staff forecast.
(11) While some talk has surfaced in the market that the next
policy move might be toward ease, participants do not foresee a
reduction in the intended federal funds rate at this meeting. A 50
basis point reduction in the funds rate, as under alternative A, would
most likely be read as evidence that the Committee has serious
reservations about the prospects for spending. In this event, sizable
reductions in nominal and real market yields would likely be induced
across the term structure. However, the easing might also be taken by
the market as revealing a greater willingness on the part of the
Committee to risk an uptick in inflation as it undertook to test the
upside of potential output. If doubts about the Committee's resolve
to contain inflation were to become prevalent in the market, which
might be especially likely should incoming data indicate buoyant
spending or increased inflation pressures, nominal intermediate- and
longer-term yields could begin to reverse their initial declines. In
any case, the dollar would most likely weaken on foreign exchange
(12) Under the staff forecast, the debt of domestic nonfinancial
sectors is anticipated to continue to expand at a moderate pace into
early 1997. Consumer credit picks up in coming months in keeping with
the projected near-term rebound in consumer spending, especially on
durable goods. In contrast, mortgage borrowing should slow a bit with
softening housing activity. In the staff projection, the pace of
business borrowing remains brisk, in keeping with somewhat enlarged
external financing needs. With growth of federal government debt
remaining sluggish, total domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to
expand at a 4-3/4 percent pace through next March. This implies
growth for 1996 at around the 5 percent midpoint of its annual range.
(13) In coming months, offering rates on M2 accounts are not
expected to change much under alternative B, maintaining opportunity
costs at around their recent levels. M2 growth over the October-to-
March period is expected to quicken to a 4-1/4 percent rate from the
unexpectedly weak advance in September and October, reflecting the
projected speedup in nominal spending in the staff forecast.4 This
strengthening in M2 does not show through to M3, as banks lessen their
net issuance of managed liabilities, and the broader aggregate is seen
as expanding at a 6-1/4 percent pace over the next five months. The
implied growth of M2 for 1996 as a whole is 4 percent, in the upper
half of its range, compared with a 4-1/2 percent rate projected in the
September bluebook. The growth of M3 for the year is projected at 6
percent, at the upper bound of its range and slightly higher than the
Growth Rates of Money and Debt
(percent, annual rates)
October 1995-Q4
to to
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rate
From To
Directive Language
(14) Presented below is draft wording for the operational
paragraph that includes the usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE
(SLIGHTLY/SOMEWHAT) the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. In the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary
developments, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater reserve
restraint would (MIGHT) or (SOMEWHAT) slightly lesser
reserve restraint (WOULD) might be acceptable in the
intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with moderate
growth in M2 and RELATIVELY STRONG EXPANSION IN M3
over coming months.
November 11, 1996
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
Nov 95
Dec 95
Jan 96
Feb 96
Mar 96
Apr 96
May 96
Jun 96
Jul 96
Aug 96
Sep 96
Oct 96
-- p
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Clas II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted
Mo ne stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancal debt
nontransactions components tol loans
Period M1 M2 M3 L and U. S. other
2
total
2
in M2 in M3 only investments' government'
Levels (Sbillions)l
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
NOVB1BER 12, 1996
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
easmonaIly adusted
Money market
mutual funds
Other Small Large Short-termPed Currency Demand checkable Savings denomination denomination RP's Eurodollars Savings Treasury Commercial ankers
depos deposits' bends paper acceptancesdeposits deposits deposits' time deposits' Retail' Institution- time deposits' bo nds securities' paper acceptances'
p preliminary
November 8,1996
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
Net purchases 3 agencies ourightPeriodNet Redemptions Net Redemptions Net redemptions holdings 5
Weekly
July 31
November 6
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)6
November 6
-- ,4
- 3,716
--- 3,716
