Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
May 16, 1997
Monetary Policy Alternatives
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) May 16, 1997
Class I -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Over the intermeeting period, federal funds averaged close to the slightly
higher rate of 5-1/2 percent adopted by the FOMC as its intended level at the last meeting.
Federal funds generally traded near their intended level, despite the complications to Desk
operations posed by soaring individual nonwithheld income tax payments in mid-April, which
pushed Treasury balances well above the capacity of the Treasury Tax and Loan system at
depository institutions for an extended period. The diversion of the excess to the Treasury's
account at the Federal Reserve drove that account to a record level, leading to substantial
upward adjustments to estimated reserve needs. The Desk met these needs primarily through
repurchase agreements, entering the market earlier than usual on a number of occasions to
maximize the availability of collateral and, in an even rarer tactic, twice arranging two rounds
of RP transactions on a single day. The Desk also purchased bills and coupons on an outright
basis to help offset the tax-related reserve drain as well as to address longer-term reserve
needs stemming from the uptrend in currency outstanding.
(2) Market interest rates generally showed small mixed changes on balance over
the intermeeting period. At the short end of the maturity structure, rates on most private
instruments were up 5 to 10 basis points, owing to the March policy action, which had been
mostly anticipated. The three-month Treasury bill rate, however, fell 20 basis points, in
reaction to reduced issuance (chart). Intermediate- and long-term yields rose early in the
intermeeting period, responding mainly to indications of sustained strength in aggregate
demand and output. Subsequently, the bond market more than rolled back these increases on
the publication of data suggesting that wage and price pressures remained damped and that
economic growth was moderating. Also contributing to the rally were expectations of
reduced federal borrowing, reflecting strong tax flows and perhaps the announcement of an
agreement to balance the budget, as well as a speech by the Chairman that was perceived, on
balance, to be suggesting that the odds on monetary policy tightening might be lower than
previously expected. Judging from quotes on federal funds futures contracts, investors now
see only a modest chance of a 25 basis point move at the May FOMC meeting. In contrast to
the small declines in nominal bond yields, the rate on the Treasury's inflation-indexed security
rose around 10 basis points over the period. Stock prices fluctuated substantially but finished
the period up 4 percent to 8 percent. With real interest rates perhaps a bit higher, the rally
appeared to be spurred by greater optimism about the outlook for earnings, supported by
stronger-than-expected reports on first-quarter profits.
(3) In foreign exchange markets, the dollar's trade-weighted-average value roughly
followed the pattern of U.S. intermediate- and long-term interest rates, rising early in the
period but subsequently declining to end down about 1 percent, on balance. The depreciation
in May has been especially pronounced against the yen. In Japan, long-term bond yields have
risen about 20 basis points, on balance, and stock prices have rallied sharply on market
perceptions that the economic picture may be brightening. In addition, Japanese authorities
attempted to jawbone the yen higher, following up on the April 27 statement by the G-7 that
emphasized "the importance of avoiding exchange rates that could lead to the emergence of
large external imbalances." The dollar has risen about 1/2 percent on balance against the
deutsche mark as German bond yields declined 20 basis points.
;the Desk, again,
did not intervene.
(4) Growth of the broad monetary aggregates have been strong over the past two
months, exceeding the staffs projection. Much of the strength in M2, particularly in April,
however, seems to have reflected a temporary buildup of liquid balances by households to
make outsized tax payments.1 Supporting this interpretation, data for late April and early
May show a reversal of the M2 bulge as tax payments cleared. These data, together with
rough estimates of the possible effects of the unusual tax payments on money holdings in
April, suggest that underlying growth in M2 has tapered off from its strong pace of earlier
this year. For the first time this year, M2 dropped below the 5 percent upper end of its
annual growth range in the early weeks of May. The rapid growth in M3 in March and April
was impelled by its M2 component as well as by large time deposits. M3 also dropped
sharply in early May--but not by enough to bring it within its growth cone. The strength in
M3 in March and April was associated in part with the need to fund a brisk expansion of
bank credit. Banks acquired large volumes of securities on balance over the two months,
likely as temporary outlets for the buildup of tax-related deposit balances, and business and
real estate lending remained robust.
(5) Growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt so far in 1997 has been somewhat
slower than in 1996, mainly owing to the reduced pace of federal borrowing. In March, this
aggregate was a little below the midpoint of its annual range. Among private borrowers,
consumer credit growth slowed in March from a very rapid rate earlier in the quarter, and
bank data for April suggest modest expansion in such debt last month. Business borrowing,
in contrast, appears to have remained fairly strong. Credit supply conditions are still
generally quite favorable for business borrowers. In open markets, debt spreads have stayed
near record low levels, and banks report a further easing of terms on C&I loans. Banks have
been tightening standards and terms on consumer credit, however, as households have
continued to experience debt servicing problems.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Feb. Mar. Apr. Apr.1
Money and Credit Aggregates
M1
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank Credit
Adjusted2
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed Reserves3
Total Reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary Base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
Policy Alternatives
(6) Given the Committee's recent tightening, the staff now assumes a slightly
higher real federal funds rate for a time than in its last forecast, but has not appreciably
revised its expectations for most other key financial variables. In the current forecast, as in
the last, the economy will continue to operate beyond its estimated potential through the end
of 1998 and at a bit lower unemployment rate than in the forecast for the March meeting.
Taking account of the incoming data, real GDP is now seen as rising about 3 percent over the
four quarters of this year, somewhat more than in the last forecast. This growth rate for 1997
is well above, and the unemployment rate at the end of the year--at 4.8 percent--well below,
the central tendencies of the Committee members' February forecasts. Nonetheless, the staff
projection for total CPI inflation this year of not quite 2-1/2 percent is lower than the members'
Humphrey-Hawkins projections. The slowdown in economic growth that seems to be in train
is not viewed by the staff as sufficient to forestall an upturn in inflation. For next year, with
the unemployment rate remaining below 5 percent, the total and core CPI are projected to
speed up to around 3 percent, despite a slight damping effect from technical changes to the
(7) Although there have been a number of fiscal developments since the last
Committee meeting pointing toward reductions in expected deficits, none would seem to have
a material effect on the appropriate near-term stance of monetary policy. The agreement to
reach budget balance would not exert any additional fiscal restraint for several years. While
the agreement had the potential, in the near term, for providing economic stimulus through
lower interest and exchange rates and higher wealth valuations, in the event the response in
financial markets was muted. Personal tax payments have been much higher than expected
and revenues for future years have been revised up, damping disposable income. However,
this is not expected to have a material effect on the growth of spending. Taxpayers likely
anticipated much of their higher payments and have already adjusted the level of their
consumption, if necessary. In addition, some of the unexpected surge in payments may be a
byproduct of the rise in wealth and a greater willingness to spend it. For these reasons, the
lower path for disposable income going forward would be reflected mostly in a smaller
measured private saving rate.
(8) Despite the staffs perception that underlying inflation pressures will be
building, the Committee may find reasons to leave its policy stance unchanged, at least for
the time being, as incorporated in alternative B, which keeps the intended federal funds rate
at 5-1/2 percent. In the Greenbook forecast, the expansion of real GDP abruptly slows by
enough to keep resource utilization from increasing further. The Committee may feel that
there is a reasonable chance that the rates of resource use in the forecast could be associated
with more subdued inflation than the staff expects. Data becoming available since the last
meeting indicate a continuing damped response of prices and costs to unemployment rates
that were once regarded as well below sustainable levels, underscoring the heightened
uncertainties of recent years about the relationship between resource use and inflation. Even
if labor costs do accelerate as the staff projects, the higher profit share of late could provide
an even greater buffer against the effects on prices than the staff has assumed, damping
inflation rates for some time to come. The argument for standing pat would be stronger still
if one gave appreciable weight to the notion that real short-term interest rates already had
moved to relatively high levels, providing some insulation against the risk that overly rapid
economic growth would resume.
(9) Many analysts continue to predict that the Committee will tighten policy at this
meeting. However, in recent weeks, markets appear to have removed all but modest odds of
any action, and the choice of alternative B should trigger a relatively minor decline in rates.
As the intermeeting period progresses, incoming evidence confirming the staff forecast of
markedly slower second-quarter growth in real GDP and still-quiescent inflation readings
could further erode expectations of policy firming, fueling additional price gains in fixed-
income markets. As an exception, the recent decline in the three-month bill rate should begin
to unwind significantly with the approach of renewed net bill issuance in July. The exchange
value of the dollar probably would fluctuate around its recent lower levels or even drift lower.
(10) Some firming of the intended federal funds rate would seem justified if the
underlying uptrend in inflation in the Greenbook forecast, which assumes no policy tightening
until well into next year, were viewed both as the most likely outcome and as unacceptable.
Tightening also might be favored even if the Committee has a more benign outlook for
inflation, perhaps because it sees potential output as much higher than does the staff, but
perceives an unacceptable risk that the staff outcome might be realized. Despite the recent
good inflation performance, each decline in the unemployment rate has raised the likelihood
that the economy has breached its potential and that inflation pressures will intensify, a
concern that has presumably been accentuated with the unemployment rate falling to under 5
percent. Because of the lags in the effects of monetary policy actions, the Committee may
decide that another move now to head off higher future inflation is warranted, even
recognizing the inevitable uncertainties about prospective aggregate demand and the level of
the NAIRU. In addition, although real short-term rates are above historical averages, the
recent strength in profits and share prices might suggest that unusually productive investment
opportunities and rising wealth will require still higher real rates to restrain demand. Against
this backdrop, the recent runup in bond and stock prices may have reinforced the risk that the
economic expansion will remain robust on average over coming quarters, intensifying the
strain on resources and heightening inflation pressures by even more than is foreseen in the
(11) The 1/2 percentage point rise in the federal funds rate under alternative C
would come as a major surprise to financial market participants and likely would spark a
considerable rise in interest rates and the exchange value of the dollar. Future expected real
short rates could shift up appreciably over a relatively long time horizon as the market saw
the action as reflecting an FOMC view, which the market may find persuasive, that inflation
pressures over the near term were likely to be stronger than the market had previously
anticipated and an intention to contain those pressures through further aggressive policy
tightenings. The higher real interest rates for discounting future business profits, along with
possibly greater downside risks to those profits, could take a considerable toll on equity prices
as well. It is possible, though, that the market would see such a prompt substantial firming as
enough to hold inflation in check, or even reduce price pressures, without the need for any
future tightenings. In these circumstances, upward revisions to expected future interest rates
would be appreciably smaller, and the selloff at the longer end of the maturity spectrum
considerably more limited.
(12) If the FOMC believed that the time were ripe for some further tightening, but
thought that a smaller rise in the funds rate might well be enough to contain any emerging
inflation problem, it could instead opt for a 1/4 percentage point increase. Such an action
might be viewed as a logical follow-through to the Committee's action at the last meeting,
given the subsequent data indicating first-quarter growth in real GDP substantially above
trend and an appreciable decline in the unemployment rate. It also would come as less of a
shock to market participants, lessening the likelihood of a sharp selloff in bond and stock
(13) Under the staff forecast, the growth of debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors
will be damped somewhat over coming months, held down by Treasury paydowns through
midyear and subdued federal borrowing thereafter. Elsewhere, borrowing by businesses is
expected to continue around the faster pace of the first quarter. Strong merger activity and
rising external financing needs, as profits level out, will be supporting healthy growth in
business debt. In that environment, lender caution could become evident, but credit supplies
to businesses still should remain ample. In the household sector, borrowing is likely to be
supported by continued high levels of housing activity and outlays for consumer durables;
some further tightening of supply conditions for consumer credit to marginal borrowers will
exert only modest restraint on overall household borrowing. With some pickup in total
domestic nonfinancial debt growth after midyear, expansion in this aggregate should remain
around a 4-1/2 percent pace from the fourth quarter of 1996 through September, somewhat
below the 5 percent midpoint of its annual range.
(14) The runoff of the tax-related deposit surge of April should be completed in
May, after which the monthly growth of M2 and M3 under alternative B is expected to
stabilize at annual rates of 4-1/2 and 6 percent, respectively, through September--somewhat
below the pace of the first five months of the year. Quarterly average growth of M2 in the
second and third quarters would be a touch below the staffs projected average pace for
nominal GDP of 4-1/4 percent over the two quarters, reflecting the lagged effects of higher
opportunity costs stemming from the policy firming in March. M3 growth is expected to ease
slightly, though still remain strong. Rapid money fund growth and some further shifting
toward large time deposits and away from overseas funding of bank assets will continue to
sustain growth in this aggregate, even in the face of a substantial slowing in bank credit
growth. As shown in the charts, the staff anticipates that M2 will have grown at a 4-3/4
percent rate from the fourth quarter of 1996 through September, just below the 5 percent
upper end of its annual range, while M3 will have expanded at a 6-3/4 percent rate over the
same period, well above the 6 percent upper bound of its annual range.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in Billions
Apr-97
May-97
Jun-97
Jul-97
Aug-97
Sep-97
Monthly Growth Rates
Jan-97
Feb-97
Mar-97
Apr-97
May-97
Jun-97
Jul-97
Aug-97
Sep-97
Growth Rate
From
Apr-97
May-97
Sep-97
Sep-97
Apr-97
May-97
Sep-97
Directive Language
(15) Presented below is draft wording for the operational paragraph that includes
the usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee
seeks to DECREASE (SLIGHTLY/SOMEWHAT)/MAINTAIN/ increase slightly
(SOMEWHAT) the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the con-
text of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint
(MIGHT/WOULD) or slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint might
(WOULD) be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with some moderation in the expansion
of M2 and M3 over coming months.
May 19,1997
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Lonc-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
May 96
Jun 96
Jul 96
Aug 96
Sep 96
Oct 96
Nov 96
Dec 96
Jan 97
Feb 97
Mar 97
Apr 97
p - preliminary data
Strictly confidential (FR)-Money and Credit Aggregate Measures tric ass I FOM
Seasonally adjusted MAY 19, 1997
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactions components total ans
total loans
Period M1 M2 M3 L and U. S. other' total'
In M2 In M3 only investments' government
2
Levels (billions),
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Seasonallyadjusted
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
MAY 19, 1997
Money market
Other Small mutual funds Large Short-term
Period Currency Demand checkable Saing denomination denomination RP's' Eurodollars" Savings T ry ommercial Bankers
deposits deposits time deposits Retail' Institution- time deposits' bonds securities' paper' acceptances'
Monthly
1996-APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR. p
p preliminary
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
Weekly
January 22
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
May 14
May 14
May 16, 1997
