Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
JUNE 25, 1999
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) June 25, 1999
Class I -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The announcement of the adoption of a directive tilted toward tightening at
the Committee's meeting on May 18 reinforced market expectations of firmer monetary
policy. While most interest rates backed up only modestly that day, the announcement set
the stage for the more pronounced increase in interest rates in subsequent weeks that was
fueled by stronger-than-expected incoming data and published reports of the views of
Federal Reserve officials, which boosted market participants' expectations of policy
tightening (Chart 1).1 The better-than-expected May CPI report on June 16 and the
Chairman's testimony the next day only temporarily damped expectations of the extent of
eventual policy firming. After allowing for term premiums, federal funds and Eurodollar
futures rates now suggest that most market participants view a quarter-point rate hike at this
meeting as virtually certain and expect a cumulative increase in the funds rate ofthree-
quarters of a percentage point or more over the next year. Over the intermeeting period,
most short-term rates have risen around 25 basis points; yields on Treasury coupon securities
have increased about 25 to 40 basis points, perhaps pressured as well by a crowded calendar
of upcoming agency and corporate issuance. The advance in nominal Treasury yields
primarily reflected increases in forward rates at two- to five-year horizons, while longer-term
forward rates rose much less. This configuration suggests that Federal Reserve policy is
expected to push real interest rates higher over the next few years than had been expected
prior to the May meeting, but perhaps not by enough to contain pressures on prices entirely.
This view is supported by the fact that yields on indexed Treasury securities have gained
about half as much as their nominal counterparts.
(2) The announcement of a biased directive, coming on the heels of stronger-
than-expected April CPI figures the Friday before the last meeting, seemed to make market
participants more cautious about taking on risk. This increased caution was evidenced by
some deterioration in measures of market liquidity and a widening of risk spreads, although
these effects mostly faded later in the intermeeting period (Chart 2). On balance, yield
spreads on agency and investment-grade securities still are a touch wider than at the time of
the May meeting. The effects of higher interest rates on stock prices were about offset by
brighter second-quarter earnings prospects, and, on net, broad equity indexes are unchanged
to down 3 percent.
(3) The exchange value of the dollar has changed little against an index of other
major currencies over the intermeeting period. Even though U.S. interest rates rose less than
those in euro-area countries, the dollar has risen about 2-1/4 percent against the euro,
reflecting in part uncertainty about the attitude of the authorities owing to sometimes-
conflicting public statements by officials. The Bank of England lowered its repo rate 25
basis points, responding largely to the implications of persistent strength of the pound for
growth and inflation. Following that action, the dollar has appreciated 3/4 percent against
the pound. In contrast, the dollar has depreciated 1-1/2 percent against the yen over the
period, as yields on Japanese government debt rose sharply relative to rates on U.S.
Treasuries. The rise in Japanese rates owed to perceptions of improved prospects for the
Japanese economy, supported in part by the surprising strength of reported Japanese GDP in
the first quarter. Monetary authorities in Japan have leaned against the rise in the foreign
exchange value of the yen, intervening on four recent days in both Japan and Europe and
purchasing more than $20 billion and the equivalent of more than $4-1/4 billion in euro. 2
(4) In Latin America, financial markets have been subject to heightened stress
over the intermeeting period, related only in part to market expectations of higher U.S.
interest rates. Uncertainty about Argentina's longer-term commitment to its currency-board
regime and concerns over the slow progress of fiscal reform in Brazil have contributed to
these pressures. Stripped Brady bond spreads spiked higher in late May and early June; on
balance, Brady bond spreads have increased 60 to 140 basis points from their levels in
mid-May. In Argentina, domestic short-term interest rates are up 2-3/4 percentage points
since early May. The Brazilian realhas depreciated almost 7-1/2 percent against the dollar on
balance, while the Mexican peso has fallen almost 1-1/2 percent. Major Latin American
stock market indexes are up slightly to off 5-1/2 percent over the intermeeting period. In
contrast, financial markets in emerging Asian economies have generally improved, with their
currencies appreciating and share price indexes up considerably in many cases.
The Desk did not
intervene for the accounts of the System or the Treasury.
(5) Growth of the broad monetary aggregates has been volatile in recent months,
reflecting in part the effects of tax-related flows on liquid deposits. Smoothing through the
monthly swings, money growth appears to have moderated slightly, with M2 expanding at an
average rate of about 5-1/4 percent over the four months through June, down from about 6
percent in January and February and double-digit rates late last year. The slowing earlier in
the year owed to an unwinding of the heightened demand for safety and liquidity of last fall,
while more recently M2 growth has been damped by a rise in its opportunity cost as market
rates have increased. Through June of this year, M2 has expanded at about a 6-1/4 percent
pace from the final quarter of last year, above the upper end of its 1 to 5 percent annual
range. Growth in M3 has also declined this year, partly as the consequence of the behavior
of M2. In addition, the sluggish expansion of depository credit since the start of the year has
reduced depository institutions' issuance of managed liabilities in M3, including large time
deposits and RPs. Institution-only money market funds also contributed to the slowdown in
M3: These funds pay rates that are averages of recent short-term market rates, and so their
relative attractiveness has diminished with the backup in market interest rates in recent
months. From the fourth quarter of last year through June, M3 has grown at a rate of about
(6) The expansion of domestic nonfinancial sector debt also has moderated a bit
recently. Business borrowing appears to have fallen back a bit from its very rapid pace earlier
in the year. Moreover, the uptick in rates following the May meeting appeared to redirect
business credit, with bond issuance slowing, as some borrowers deferred coming to market,
and commercial paper issuance and bank lending picking up. Household debt has advanced
less rapidly in recent months than early in the year, owing to a slowing in consumer credit
growth. Municipal debt issuance also has dipped of late, as higher interest rates have reduced
the attractiveness of the advance refunding of earlier issues. Despite the recent slowing, the
debt of nonfederal sectors grew at an 8-3/4 percent annual rate from the final quarter of last
year through May, up slightly relative to 1998. Paydowns of federal debt have accelerated
this year, however, leaving the growth rate of total domestic nonfinancial debt from the
fourth quarter of 1998 through May at 6 percent--about the same pace as last year and in the
upper half of its annual range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Apr. May. Jun. Jun.
Money and Credit Aggregates
Ml
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Adjusted'
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
Excess reserves
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Long-Term Strategies
(7) This section uses the staff quarterly econometric model of the U.S. economy
to extend the Greenbook forecast and to consider alternative monetary policies: The base-
line strategy caps inflation at 2-1/2 percent as measured by the chain-weight core PCE price
index, while the price stability alternative is constructed to bring this gauge of inflation down
to around 3/4 percent by the middle of the next decade.3 4
(8) The Greenbook projection for this year and next shows an economy marked
by several notable imbalances that shape the evolution of the economy over the next decade.
One imbalance is the excess of domestic investment over domestic saving. In response to
the apparent improvement in productivity trends, as well as to the partly related surge in
equity prices, consumers have boosted their spending to levels that are unusually high relative
to current income (although not to perceived permanent income). This low rate of saving,
which implies little direct addition to wealth, together with the projection that equity prices
rise less rapidly than nominal income, implies that the ratio of household net worth to GDP
falls gradually over the next decade. As current income moves higher in line with the
public's anticipations, saving out of that income is likely to rise gradually over time, to a level
more in line with historical norms, moderating the decline in the ratio of wealth to GDP.
Federal budget surpluses are assumed to remain sizable relative to nominal GDP, and the
behavior of households boosts national saving, lowering the equilibrium real rate of interest
over the long term.5
(9) A related imbalance is on the international side. The current account deficit
has ballooned in response to strong domestic spending, weak growth abroad, and a relatively
high value of the dollar. With the rest of the world called upon to finance the continuing
excess of domestic spending over production, international portfolios are likely to be
increasingly dominated by dollar-denominated assets. The extended forecast assumes that
the discomfort implied by burgeoning dollar asset holdings in foreign portfolios, together
with the downward movement of U.S. real interest rates as domestic saving increases, leads
to a secular decline in the real foreign exchange value of the dollar.
(10) Another imbalance occurs in the labor market, which in the Greenbook
remains tight through the end of next year. As a consequence, inflation picks up and is
poised to rise further in 2001 and beyond. In the absence of additional increases in
productivity growth or of declines in relative import and commodity prices, consumer price
inflation would continue to move up until the economy returns to a sustainable level of
resource utilization, which for labor markets in the model is represented by a NAIRU of
(11) Under the baseline strategy, policy is assumed to tighten sufficiently to raise
the unemployment rate gradually to 5-1/4 percent, thereby capping inflation at a moderate
rate (shown by the solid lines in Chart 3). This action requires 100 basis points of tightening
in 2001 (beyond the 50 basis points assumed in the Greenbook) and brings the nominal
funds rate to 6-1/4 percent. Over the longer run, short-term interest rates decline modestly,
along with the downward drift in the equilibrium rate. Under the alternative price-stability
strategy (shown by the dotted lines in the chart), policy must create enough economic slack
to bring inflation down from its current level. This entails a similar-sized increase in the
nominal federal funds rate, but it is put in place much sooner so that the real funds rate rises
higher and remains elevated for a more extended period. As a result, the unemployment rate
peaks at almost 6-1/2 percent at the end of 2003, but thereafter drifts down to its sustainable
level, as inflation settles in at the lower target rate and policy returns to a neutral stance.
Ranges for Money and Debt
(12) The table below shows staff projections for money and debt growth consistent
with the Greenbook forecast for this year and next and the ranges for 1999 chosen by the
Committee in February. Growth of the aggregates so far this year relative to these ranges
and projected outcomes for 1999:Q4 under the staff forecast are depicted in Chart 4.
Money and Debt Growth
Debt 6.1 6.0 5-1/2 4-1/4 3 to 7
Memo: 5.2 5.4 5-1/4 4-1/2
Nom.
GDP
Projected Money and Debt Growth
(13) Over the first half of this year, M2 grew about 1 percentage point faster at an
annual rate than did nominal GDP, extending the decline in velocity that has been evident
since mid-1997. The factors behind that decrease over the past two years are not entirely
clear. As the lower two panels of Chart 5 suggest, velocity, after shifting higher over the
early 1990s, appears to have responded to movements in the standard measure of
opportunity cost (the three-month Treasury bill rate minus the average rate earned on M2
assets) in a fashion similar to its behavior during the 1960s, 1970s, and 19 80s. Nonetheless,
velocity continued to drift higher until mid-1997 and since then has dropped considerably
despite the fact that the standard measure of opportunity cost has changed little on balance
in the last two years. Much of the recent decline in velocity could reflect the substantial rise
in wealth relative to income in recent years: Investors may have been attempting to
rebalance their portfolios by reallocating some of their wealth from equities to assets
included in M2. The staff projects that velocity will continue to fall over the balance of
the previous build-up in wealth begin to fade and as M2's opportunity cost increases in
response to the monetary policy tightening assumed for this year. M2 growth is projected
to slow to 5-1/4 percent over the balance of 1999, bringing growth for the year to 6
percent. Next year, growth is expected to moderate further to 5 percent as expansion of
nominal income slows. 6
(14) M3 is forecast to increase 6-1/4 percent in 1999, its slowest pace since 1995
and well below the nearly 11 percent advance posted in 1998. The non-M2 component of
M3 should decelerate sharply from last year's rate, partly owing to reduced funding needs of
depository institutions. Adjusted for mark-to-market effects, bank credit growth is
projected to plunge to 3-1/4 percent this year from 10-1/4 percent in 1998, largely
reflecting an unwinding of the bulge related to the market turmoil in the latter part of 1998.
The slack demands for bank credit this year translate into very subdued issuance by banks of
managed liabilities included in M3, such as large time deposits. M3 also decelerates because
the expansion of institutional money market mutual funds this year is lagging behind the
blistering pace of 1998, perhaps as more corporations complete their shift toward the
outsourcing of corporate cash management and as the effects of last year's monetary easings
wear off. Next year, the expansion of M3 is seen as declining slightly further to 6 percent.
Although bank funding needs should be boosted a little by a modest rebound in bank credit
growth, the deceleration in M2 should hold down M3 growth. With M3 growth still
outstripping that of nominal GDP over both 1999 and 2000, V3 is projected to extend its
secular decline (Chart 6).
(15) In the staff forecast, domestic nonfinancial sector debt expands 5-1/2
percent in 1999 and 4-1/4 percent in 2000, about in line with nominal income. In both
years, debt growth is accounted for by the nonfederal sectors, whose debt is expected to
increase about 8 percent this year and about 7 percent next year. Increasing federal
surpluses imply that the government is a growing net supplier of funds to credit markets,
facilitating household and business borrowing and spending. Nonetheless, most credit
supply conditions, as measured by interest rate spreads in open markets and lending terms
and standards of banks, are expected to remain around current levels, which are a bit tighter
than one year ago, imparting little, if any, additional restraint on spending.
Ranges for Money and Debt
(16) In February, the Committee chose ranges of 1 to 5 percent for M2, 2 to 6
percent for M3, and 3 to 7 percent for debt for 1999. The Committee established those
ranges for the monetary aggregates--the same ranges that have been in place since 1995--to
provide benchmarks for money growth consistent with long-term price stability and
historically typical velocity trends. Thus, the ranges did not necessarily reflect the
Committee's expectations for actual money growth over 1999. Indeed, the staffs
projections for monetary growth exceeded the upper ends of the selected ranges, and those
projections were based on a forecast of nominal GDP growth that was slower than those of
most FOMC members.7 The predictability of the velocity of the monetary aggregates does
not appear to have improved markedly in the last two years. After two years of relatively
small errors in annual staff projections, V2 fell about 3 percentage points more in 1998 than
the staff had projected at the beginning of that year; relatively little of that error can be
explained by unforeseen movements in opportunity costs prompted by the Committee's
policy actions in the second half of the year. As noted above, the velocity of M2 has
continued to decline in 1999, albeit at a slower pace than in 1998, and, based on the
Greenbook GDP forecast, the rate of decline in velocity over the first half of this year
appears to have been about 1-1/2 percentage points less than forecast by the staff this
(17) The table below displays two sets of ranges for money and debt for 1999 and
rates of money growth and relatively small errors in forecasting debt growth in recent years,
the alternatives are constructed under the presumption that the Committee will continue
with its current approach to the ranges--that is, ranges for money keyed to the Federal
Reserve's price stability objective and the range for debt aligned with its expected growth.
Staff Projections and Alternative Money and Debt Ranges
(Q4 to Q4, percent)
Staff Projections Alternative I Alternative II
Debt 5-1/2 4-1/4 3 to 7 2 to 6 3 to 7 2 to 6
(18) The Committee's selection of ranges for M2 and M3 may be influenced by the
possibility that underlying trends in productivity and potential GDP growth have
strengthened appreciably since the adoption of these ranges and their underlying rationale in
the mid-1990s. If the Committee were confident that the faster trend in potential output
would persist, it might choose to increase the monetary ranges, as discussed below. If not,
it presumably would opt to maintain the current monetary ranges for 1999 and carry them
over to 2000, as in Alternative I. Those ranges would be consistent with an expectation of
potential real GDP growth of 2-1/2 percent, the staff estimate of a 1/2 percentage point
upward bias in inflation calculated using the GDP deflator, no true inflation, and the
assumptions that V2 would be flat and V3 would decline at 1 percent per year, their long-
term historical tendencies. The July Humphrey-Hawkins report would need to note that the
monetary aggregates could well overshoot their ranges again during 1999 and very possibly
in 2000.
(19) If the Committee believed that long-term productivity trends had improved
significantly, price stability and historically typical velocity trends would involve more rapid
rates of monetary growth than implied by the midpoint of the existing ranges. For example,
allowing for the 3-1/4 percent growth in potential real GDP in the Greenbook forecast, the
(1/4 percent) of true inflation would call for M2 and M3 ranges centered on 4 and 5
percent, respectively, 1 percentage point higher than their current ranges. Alternative II
gives such ranges.8
(20) The Committee has not employed a price-stability rationale in choosing
ranges for the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors but instead has based ranges on
forecasts of actual growth. The current 3 to 7 percent range remains consistent with this
approach for 1999. However, centering the range for 2000 approximately on the staff
forecast would imply selecting a range of 2 to 6 percent. As it happens, a range of 2 to 6
The Committee might also adjust the monetary ranges upward, as in Alternative II,
if it wished to shift away from its current, long-run price-stability rationale and toward ranges
based on forecasts in 2000, perhaps because it believed that the period of especially large
disturbances to velocity was coming to an end. Staff forecasts suggest that an upward adjust-
ment probably would be necessary to center the ranges on expected monetary growth.
percent would also be centered on the 4 percent expected rate of growth of debt under
assumptions of increased productivity growth, price stability, and the flat trend of velocity
that has prevailed over most of the postwar period.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(21) The general contours of the staff forecast have not changed much from the
May Greenbook. Smoothing through turn-of-the-year effects, output increases on average
over the next 1-1/2 years at a rate a little below the growth of its potential, down noticeably
from the pace of the last few years. In the near term, financial conditions act as more of a
restraint on demand than was assumed in the last forecast, reflecting both recent market
developments and an assumption that tightening by the Committee will take place sooner
than in the previous forecast. Financial conditions remain roughly unchanged over the
forecast period--bond yields, equity prices, and the dollar fluctuate near current levels--
which contributes to the maintenance of economic growth near trend. The current tautness
of labor markets persists, and core inflation begins to edge higher. Core PCE price inflation
moves from a little below 1-1/2 percent over 1999 to a little above 1-3/4 percent over 2000,
and core CPI inflation from just above 2 percent to 2-1/2 percent--in both cases revised up
slightly from the May Greenbook. Pressures on compensation are expected to be a bit
stronger in this forecast, based on a slightly firmer tone to recent wage and benefits reports.
(22) The Committee might nonetheless favor the unchanged federal funds rate of
alternative B if it did not view the prospects for a rise in inflation as having increased since
the last meeting, when it saw the risks as tilted, but not enough to tighten. The staff sees
the growth of GDP slowing in the second and third quarters to about the pace of its
potential. This slowing presumably does not owe in any appreciable way to the firming of
financial conditions over May and June and could reflect more fundamental tendencies of
aggregate demand. If so, a partial reversal of that financial market firming, which would
occur under this alternative, would not lead to tauter labor markets, especially if continued
rapid growth in productivity were viewed as a reasonable prospect. Furthermore, CPI data
that have become available since the last Committee meeting have extended the downward
trend in the twelve-month change in core prices, underlining uncertainties about the supply
side of the economy. In these circumstances, before tightening policy, the Committee may
want to see more concrete evidence that the economy was growing faster than its potential
or that upward pressures in costs and prices were emerging.
(23) A decision to leave the federal funds rate unchanged would come as a surprise
to market participants and prompt a reassessment of the Federal Reserve's strategy and
tactics. Interest rates would decline some and the dollar would drop on foreign exchange
markets, although the extent of the declines could be limited by expectations that a
tightening may not be far off, especially if market participants were to believe that the
Committee's directive retained the tilt announced in May. Still, the hesitancy of the
Committee to tighten at this meeting would signal lessened concern about inflation
prospects than the market has inferred from announcements and statements and would
suggest a less steep trajectory for short-term rates going forward. Equity prices might be
boosted for a while by declines in interest rates, but they could reverse any gains if,
consistent with the staff forecast, news on earnings proved to be disappointing in coming
(24) The Committee might choose the 25 basis-point increase in the federal funds
rate under alternative C if it agreed with the staffs forecast that the risks were decidedly on
the side of an upward tilt to inflation and wished to take preemptive action now. Although
inflation remains subdued, as yet signs that economic expansion will moderate to a pace that
will avoid added strains in labor markets are tentative. With foreign economies continuing
to recover and the real federal funds rate appreciably below its level of a year ago, the
Committee may desire some added assurance that the economy will slow to trend.
Validating at least the initial step of the sequence of expected policy moves now embedded
in financial prices would help to preserve the recent firming in financial conditions.
Grounds for tightening would be even stronger if the Committee saw, as the staff does, the
unchanged unemployment rate in the Greenbook forecast as too low to forestall an upward
trend in inflation. The Committee, in this case, might even want to consider a 50 basis
point firming; in the extended baseline strategy, a 150 basis point tightening over the next
three years is needed to cap PCE inflation at 2-1/2 percent.
(25) Although a 25 basis-point firming is built into prices, financial markets might
still react to a tightening move of this magnitude. The fluctuations in yields of the past few
weeks have demonstrated that financial markets are especially sensitive to perceptions of
Federal Reserve intentions, and the near-term reaction to alternative C will depend on the
market's interpretation of the announcement together with the choice of the tilt of the
directive. If the wording of the announcement suggested that the Committee was less
concerned about inflationary pressures than market participants have come to believe--and
therefore that the extent of policy firming in coming quarters might be less than now
anticipated--intermediate- and longer-term interest rates could decline some, perhaps
reversing a significant portion of the run-up over the past week. In this case, the dollar
could weaken some and equity markets could turn up. If, instead, the announcement
suggested serious concern about inflation risks, market participants could expect a more
rapid or protracted subsequent series of moves. In this case, interest rates and the foreign
exchange value of the dollar could rise a good bit, and stocks and emerging market debt
could come under selling pressure. While market talk that the Committee might tighten by
come as a considerable surprise. Price movements would likely be outsized, though a clear
indication that the Committee would be on hold for some time could limit the response.
Directive Language
(26) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording relating to
the Committee's ranges for the aggregates in 1999 and 2000 and the operational paragraph
for the intermeeting period.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee REAFFIRMED at THIS its meeting THE
RANGES IT HAD ESTABLISHED in February [DEL: established ranges] for growth of M2 and
M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 2 to 6 percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of
THE COMMITTEE AT THIS MEETING RAISED/LOWERED THE RANGES IT
HAD ESTABLISHED IN FEBRUARY FOR GROWTH OF M2 AND M3 TO RANGES
OF ____ TO ____PERCENT AND ____ TO ____ PERCENT RESPECTIVELY,
MEASURED FROM THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1998 TO THE FOURTH
QUARTER OF 1999.] The range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was
MAINTAINED set at 3 to 7 percent (RAISED/LOWERED TO ____ TO ____
PERCENT) for the year.
FOR 2000, THE COMMITTEE AGREED ON A TENTATIVE BASIS
TO SET THE SAME RANGES FOR GROWTH OF THE MONETARY
AGGREGATES AND DEBT, MEASURED FROM THE FOURTH QUARTER OF
AGREED ON TENTATIVE RANGES FOR MONETARY GROWTH, MEASURED
FROM THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1999 TO THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 2000,
OF ____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR M2 AND ____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR M3. THE
COMMITTEE PROVISIONALLY SET THE ASSOCIATED RANGE FOR GROWTH
OF TOTAL DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEBT AT ____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR
progress toward price level stability, movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
To promote the Committee's long-run objectives of price stability and
sustainable economic growth, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in
reserve markets consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/DECREASING the federal
funds rate at/TO an average of around ____ [DEL: 4-3/4] percent. In view of the evidence
currently available, the Committee believes that prospective developments are [EQUALLY
LIKELY TO WARRANT AN INCREASE OR A DECREASE] more likely to warrant an
increase/A DECREASE than a decrease /AN INCREASE in the federal funds rate
operating objective during the intermeeting period.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. B Alt. C
All Alternatives
Monthly Growth Rates
Jun-99
Jul-99
Aug-99
Sep-99
Oct-99
Nov-99
Dec-99
Quarterly Averages
1998 Q4
1999 Q1
1999 Q2
1999 Q3
1999 Q4
Growth Rate
From
Jun-99
Jun-99 1999 Q4
May-99
Jun-99
Dec-99
