Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) August 20, 1999
Class I -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The announcement that the FOMC increased the target federal funds rate to 5
percent at its June meeting had been widely expected, but the move to a neutral directive
surprised many market participants.1 Treasury coupon yields tumbled 10 to 15 basis points
the day of the announcement, apparently as investors trimmed their odds for further policy
tightenings, and fell further on balance in subsequent weeks, partly in response to favorable
inflation data. Yields retraced these declines, however, in the weeks following the
Chairman's Humphrey-Hawkins testimony on July 22. The testimony was widely read as
emphasizing both the risks of an uptick in inflation pressures and the Federal Reserve's
resolve to act "promptly and forcefully" should such pressures become more apparent. And
it provided a backdrop for market responses to subsequent data showing an acceleration of
labor costs, indications of a firming of activity abroad, and a weaker dollar. Most recently, in
response to continued benign inflation reports, interest rates have fallen back a bit, and for
the intermeeting period, on net, are about unchanged. 2 Judging from federal funds futures
quotes, market participants now see a 1/4 point tightening at the August FOMC meeting as
highly likely and attach some probability to further tightening later in the year. Equity prices
generally tracked movements in bond prices over the period-rising initially, dropping off
sharply late in July, and rebounding more recently. Major indexes show mixed net changes,
from up 2-1/2 percent to down 4-1/4 percent.
(2) Spreads of yields on many financial assets over Treasuries, including swap
spreads, widened appreciably during the intermeeting period, although some of that
movement has been reversed in the past few days.3 The widening in spreads seemed to be
prompted by heavy demands for fixed-rate financing in an environment of increased
uncertainty about the course of interest rates and concerns about the liquidity of markets
around the end of the year.4 5 Many corporations reportedly have shifted forward some
longer-term issuance that they had planned for later this year or early next year. At the same
time, Treasury debt outstanding has been declining, contributing to a trend in relative debt
supplies that has tended to depress Treasury yields relative to comparable private yields.
Fallout from the events of last autumn may have exacerbated the resulting widening of
spreads. Market participants are more conscious of the possibility and consequences of a
widespread reduction in market liquidity, and the amount of funds committed to taking a
view on a narrowing of spreads probably has been reduced considerably. Moreover, the
willingness to take such positions may have been further diminished for a time by
counterparty credit concerns prompted by rumors that a large swap dealer was in trouble.
In the past few days, however, spreads have narrowed noticeably as interest rate volatility
and longer-term rates have declined in response to reduced fears about the possible extent
of monetary policy tightening and as concerns about possible financial difficulties of market
participants have diminished. Still, markets remain somewhat skittish and spreads are wider
than they were at the end of June.
(3) Over the intermeeting period, the dollar depreciated about 1 percent, on
balance, against a broad set of currencies; this performance averages an appreciation against
the index of the currencies of important developing country trading partners and a
depreciation against the index of the currencies of major industrial countries. The dollar fell
bulk of the dollar's decline against the major currencies started in mid-July amid data
releases suggesting a pickup in activity in Europe and Japan. Although central banks in
most industrial countries held their policy rates steady over the intermeeting period, longer-
term interest rates in many countries rose on the market's more upbeat assessment of
economic growth going forward. Spurred in part by data showing a sharp widening of the
trade balance, the dollar dropped further against European currencies in recent days.
Concerns about a stronger yen drove the Japanese authorities to intervene three times in
July. The depreciation of the dollar against the yen resumed in mid-August, as statements
by Japanese officials and an absence of further intervention by the Japanese government
apparently suggested to market participants that the willingness of Japanese authorities to
engage in measures to limit the rise in the yen may be diminishing.6
(4) Credit spreads widened across a broad range of international financial assets
during the intermeeting period. Corporate bond spreads against government obligations
rose 10 to 15 basis points in Germany, Japan, and Canada. In Latin America, financial
markets appeared particularly sensitive to prospects for rising interest rates in the United
States. Spreads were further boosted by the news very late in the period that Ecuador
would seek to reschedule its next Brady debt payment. In total, Brady yield spreads over
Treasuries widened appreciably, with the Emerging Market Bond Index spread increasing
The Desk did not intervene during the period for the accounts of the
System or the Treasury.
Mexican peso was little changed on balance, perhaps supported by rising crude oil prices
and an improving economic outlook. Concerns over the viability of Argentina's currency
board continued, as that country's recession appeared to deepen and political uncertainty
mounted ahead of this fall's presidential election. Equity prices fell about 10 percent in
Brazil, Argentina, and Mexico. In Asia, renewed tensions between China and Taiwan, as
well as increasing speculation about a possible devaluation of the renminbi, were reflected in
falling equity prices in much of the region. The dollar appreciated about 4 percent versus
the Thai baht, the Korean won, and the Philippine peso, and over 11 percent against the
Indonesian rupiah amid continued political uncertainty and increasing doubts about the
reform of Indonesia's financial sector.
(5) Growth of the broad monetary aggregates has moderated in recent months.
In addition to the slower expansion in nominal output, the upward movement in market
interest rates over the spring and summer likely has been restraining M2 growth. A portion
of this effect likely owes to the decline in prepayments on mortgage-backed securities,
which are typically held for a time as liquid deposits. But a pickup in noncompetitive
tenders at Treasury auctions also suggests a growing attractiveness of market instruments
relative to M2 assets. Currency has expanded at around an 8 percent clip over recent
months, down a notch from the double-digit growth rates recorded over the first few
months of the year. The moderate advance in M2 has contributed to the relatively tepid
growth of M3. In addition, expansion in bank credit slowed sharply in July, likely damping
the growth of managed liabilities in M3. The generally sluggish rise in bank credit in July
likely reflected, in part, substitutions by businesses of bond financing for bank loans.
(6) Borrowing by nonfinancial sectors has been slower in recent months than
earlier in the year, similar to the pattern for money. Continued budget surpluses have kept
federal debt on a downward trend, and borrowing by other sectors has slowed noticeably.
Business borrowing, while off from earlier, remains faster than the growth of output, and
has been focused on the bond market Perhaps reflecting greater selectivity and preference
for liquidity on the part of investors, junk bond issuance has slackened and issuance in
general has shifted toward larger offerings by better-known firms. In the household sector,
the rise in mortgage rates appears to be holding down mortgage borrowing, especially cash-
out refinancing, while consumer credit has stayed on a slower trajectory relative to earlier in
the year.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
May Jun. Jul. Jul. 2
Money and Credit Aggregates
M1
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Adjusted1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
Excess reserves
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Policy Alternatives
(7) In the staff forecast, bond yields and equity prices holding in their recent
ranges foster growth of real GDP near that of its potential over the next year and a half,
smoothing through quarterly gyrations arising from year 2000 effects. This slowing in GDP
growth from the pace of the past several years is produced by a substantial moderation in
the expansion of private domestic demand, which is only partly offset by a reduced drag
from the external sector and a pickup in government spending. The staff believes that
maintaining the financial conditions necessary to slow private domestic demand to this
degree will require two more quarter-point increases in the federal funds rate by the early
spring, one more than assumed in the June Greenbook. The unemployment rate remains
around its current low level, which produces increasing pressures on labor costs. The effect
of these pressures on inflation is reinforced by the turnaround in the prices of commodities
and imported goods as the dollar drifts lower. As a result, inflation is expected to trend
higher, with core consumer prices projected to expand around 2 percent over the four
quarters of this year and 2-1/2 percent next year.
(8) Despite the pickup in underlying inflation in the staff forecast, the Committee
may nonetheless prefer to keep the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting, as under
alternative B. The projected pickup in inflation, if realized, would be gradual and not likely
for some time to foster an appreciable increase in inflation expectations that could
destabilize financial markets or materially increase the ultimate cost to economic activity of
containing price pressures. Accordingly, policy makers would be afforded more time to
judge whether the rise in inflation in fact is likely to materialize. Such additional time might
be viewed as especially desirable if the Committee were to put less weight than the staff on
the possibility that underlying inflation trends are adverse. Recent data may suggest that
spending is on a lower trajectory than in the staff forecast--particularly because domestic
demand likely has not yet felt much of the effects of the run-up in interest rates and
flattening out of equity prices since early May. While some of the recent restraint from
financial markets would be rolled back should the Committee fail to validate prevailing
expectations of policy tightening, financial conditions on net could well remain more
restrictive than those that generally have prevailed this year. And the Committee may see
the wage and cost data as sufficiently ambiguous to reserve judgment on whether the
current level of tautness in labor markets will produce accelerating prices, especially since
trends in core consumer inflation and longer-run inflation expectations remain flat.
Moreover, recent developments may indicate that global financial markets are fragile, with
the potential for further deterioration as year-end approaches even absent a firming in
(9) News that the Committee was standing pat, as under alternative B, would
come as a considerable surprise in the market, triggering a rally in capital markets and
putting further downward pressure on the foreign exchange value of the dollar. That
reaction would be tempered if the Committee chose and announced a directive tilted toward
restraint, thus preserving expectations of a higher funds rate in the near term. This
approach might be favored if the Committee believed tightening was probably needed fairly
promptly but wanted to be more assured that an acceleration of costs and prices was in
train. In these circumstances, however, financial markets could remain volatile as market
participants awaited policy action, with possible adverse effects on spreads. If, instead, the
Committee thought that the sense in financial markets that policy tightening is almost
inevitable were inconsistent with its own assessment of the situation, this market
misconception could be countered by announcing that a neutral bias was being retained,
though the announcement would need to convey a more balanced sense of risks than the
market now sees as implied by the "asymmetrical symmetry" of the June directive and
related announcement. The expected path of short-term rates would be revised down, but a
traditional symmetry might elevate market participants' uncertainty about the Federal
Reserve's assessment of inflation risks and policy intentions in light of the inflationary
concerns expressed in the Chairman's testimony.
(10) The staff forecast suggests that there are substantial risks that price pressures
will be intensifying and by enough to require an appreciable tightening of policy ultimately
to stabilize inflation. If the Committee shares these concerns, it might see little to be gained
from delaying policy action and choose the 1/4 percentage point firming of alternative C
as an appropriate down payment. Even a sense that inflation risks were less pronounced
than in the staff forecast might lead the Committee to the view that a modest near-term
policy firming was warranted. As noted, failing to validate current market expectations of
policy action would tend to erode prevailing financial restraint, which may be seen as risking
unsustainable economic growth and greater strains in already-tight labor markets, thus
heightening the odds of accelerating prices. Given apparently mounting worries about the
secular imbalance in the U.S. trade position, the Committee especially might want to avoid
fostering doubts among global investors about the Federal Reserve's commitment to
contain inflation. Elevated market stresses apparently owe importantly both to uncertainty
surrounding the outlook for System action and some aversion on the part of traders and
investors to participate in the market in the fourth quarter. The former could be alleviated
by immediate action combined with an announcement suggesting little likelihood of
subsequent policy moves, while the latter might suggest that--because the Committee may
feel increasingly uncomfortable in tightening as the year wears on--action delayed now may
wind up being delayed for some time to come.
(11) Given the high odds market participants put on action at this meeting, the
announcement that the Committee was raising the intended federal funds rate 1/4
percentage point, as under alternative C, should produce little response in key financial
prices if no surprises are in store from the wording of the press release. The market
consensus has settled on a quarter-point move and the retention of a symmetric directive. If
the announcement of such a directive suggested to market participants that further action
was unlikely for some time, financial markets might rally to some extent, as investors
removed the modest odds on additional tightening that now seem built into the structure of
interest rates for the fourth quarter. If, instead, action on Tuesday were accompanied by a
directive tilted toward tightening, market participants could take it as a signal that additional
firming is in the cards this year--and more so even than is currently built into financial
prices. As a result, the term structure of interest rates would likely shift up and the dollar
would probably strengthen on exchange markets. Because additional tightening would be
taken as fairly imminent, market spreads would likely remain wide as issuers rushed to lock
in longer-term financing in advance of the Committee's next action. Indeed, if the
Committee thought that it likely would need to tighten again before year-end because it
wanted to forestall an upward trend to inflation like that in the staff forecast, century-date-
change considerations might strengthen the argument for a 50 basis point firming with a
symmetric directive at this meeting instead of a 25 basis point move with an asymmetric
directive. Such a move, by restoring the federal funds rate to its level of last August and by
getting ahead of market expectations, would have a very good chance of being seen as the
last action for the year. While interest rates and the dollar's exchange rate would rise
appreciably and equity prices likely would fall, helping to damp demand more than in the
staff forecast, the elements of volatility and uncertainty in the market associated with
possible near-term policy action would be greatly diminished. After the initial adjustment,
market conditions should settle down, providing a better environment for financial market
participants to plan their balance sheet management over the year-end.
(12) Staff projections for debt and money over the balance of the year allow for
some added demands for credit to finance inventories and a buildup of liquid assets and for
a modest displacement of credit demand from late in the year to the current quarter and
from markets to banks. Overall, however, the Y2K effects are modest. The expansion of
the debt of domestic nonfederal sectors is expected to be well maintained over the balance
of the year under the Greenbook forecast; the staff interprets the recent widening in risk
spreads as more indicative of strong demands for credit than of supply restrictions that
would restrain borrowing. Corporate borrowing is projected to slow relative to the rapid
pace on average over the first half of the year, but to remain substantial. More of that
borrowing is expected to occur in the next few months than later in the year, as issuers
show increasing wariness to tap market finance as the century date change approaches. And
borrowing could be boosted by efforts to build up liquidity to cover possible credit needs
into early next year in the event that funding markets are temporarily disrupted. The extent
to which businesses turn to credit markets in the near term will depend partly on whether
they believe they can count on borrowing from banks: Senior loan officers recently
reported that they are making Y2K lines available, at least to their current customers, and
are renewing existing lines with few restrictions on year-end draws. The runup in mortgage
rates is anticipated to restrain housing activity and mortgage borrowing. The growth of
consumer credit should be subdued, in part owing to the projected deceleration in purchases
of consumer durables. In the federal sector, Treasury debt is now expected to run off less
sharply in 1999 than was forecast in the June Greenbook. This is a result of the Treasury's
decision to aim for a higher end-of-year cash balance as a precaution against problems
during the century date change. Still, ongoing paydowns of Treasury debt over the next few
months on net will hold down the expansion of total nonfinancial sector debt to a 5 percent
rate in the second half of this year.
(13) Recent data on the monetary aggregates have provided little in the way of
surprise. Going forward, the effect on M2 growth of the slightly firmer money market rates
for the second half of the year foreseen in the Greenbook is about offset by the slightly
stronger cast to expected spending. Under alternative B, M2 is expected to grow at a 6-1/4
percent pace over the five months from July to December. Over the last two quarters of
the year, projected M2 velocity is about flat. The staff M2 forecast embodies modest
dislocations associated with the century date change, which on net should give a fillip to
money growth owing to a late-year shift toward currency and insured deposits from
investments outside M2. M3 is expected to be buoyed by these effects and by a pickup in
bank credit induced by precautionary borrowing, pushing M3 growth over the July-to-
December period up to 7 percent. The staff anticipates that both aggregates will end the
year above their annual ranges. The firming in policy under alternative C occurs late enough
this year to impart only slight restraint on the aggregates in 1999.
Directive Language
(14) Presented below for the members' consideration is the operational paragraph
for the intermeeting period
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
To promote the Committee's long-run objectives of price stability and
sustainable economic growth, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in
reserve markets consistent with MAINTAINING/increasing/DECREASING the federal
funds rate to an average of around ____ [DEL: 5] percent. In view of the evidence currently
available, the Committee believes that prospective developments are equally likely to warrant
an increase or a decrease [MORE LIKELY TO WARRANT AN INCREASE/A
DECREASE THAN A DECREASE /AN INCREASE] in the federal funds rate operating
objective during the intermeeting period.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. B Alt. C
All Alternatives
Monthly Growth Rates
Aug-99
Sep-99
Oct-99
Nov-99
Dec-99
Quarterly Averages
1999 Q1
1999 Q2
1999 Q3
1999 Q4
Growth Rate
From
Jul-99
Jul-99 1999 Q4
Jun-99
Jul-99
Dec-99
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Monthly
Aug 98
Sep 98
Oct 98
Nov 98
Dec 98
Jan 99
Feb 99
Mar 99
Apr 99
May 99
Jun 99
Jul 99
Weekly
Jun 18 99
Jun 25 99
Jul 2 99
Jul 9 99
Jul 16 99
Jul 23 99
Jul 30 99
Aug 6 99
Aug 13 99
Aug 20 99
Daily
Aug 4 99
Aug 5 99
Aug 6 99
Aug 9 99
Aug 10 99
Aug 11 99
Aug 12 99
Aug 13 99
Aug 16 99
Aug 17 99
Aug 18 99
Aug 19 99
Aua 20 99
August 23, 1999
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Debt Aggregates class FOMC
Seasonally adjusted August23, 1999
oney stock measures Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactions components ..
Period M1 M2 M3onM3 government other' total'
Annual arowth rates(M%)
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
Levels (Sbillionslt
Monthly
Weekly
1999-July 5 1094.9 4511.0 3416.1 1631.2 6142.2
Aug. 2p 1099.5 4552.6 3453.1 1626.1 6178.7
9p 1096.8 4548.2 3451.3 1636.8 6184.9
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES
1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
-- Net purchases 3 agencies outright
Period Net Redemptions Net purchases Redemptions Net redemptions holdings
purchases (-) change 1 ye 1-5 5-10 over 10 (-) Change 0 total 4 Net
Weekly
May 5
August 4
11
18
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
August 18
--- 3,593
- 5,377
August 20, 1999
- 1,674
445 678
