Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
MARCH 26, 1999
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) March 26, 1999
Class I -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The Committee's decision at the February meeting to leave the intended federal
funds rate unchanged was expected by market participants and elicited little response.1 However,
interest rates on Treasury securities moved up significantly in the first half of the intermeeting
period, reflecting incoming data that suggested continued strong momentum in aggregate
spending and a perception, arising from market interpretations of the Chairman's Humphrey
Hawkins testimony, that the FOMC saw its next action as more likely to be a tightening than an
easing (Chart 1). Favorable inflation news later in the period, along with statements by policy-
makers conveying a sense that risks were more balanced, led to a reversal of some of the rise in
market yields. On net since the February meeting, interest rates on Treasury bills have changed
little, but intermediate- and long-term Treasury yields have backed up 30 to 50 basis points. A
substantial portion of the increase in nominal yields has probably reflected higher real interest
rates, at least judging from the upward movement in rates on inflation-indexed debt and the large
increase of intermediate-term forward rates relative to those further out the forward curve. This
backup in real Treasury yields likely owed in part to an unwinding of the earlier flight to safety
and liquidity, but, more fundamentally, market participants may now believe that a higher path of
real short-term rates over the next few years will be needed for the Federal Reserve to keep
inflation damped. Nonetheless, some of the increase in nominal yields apparently was also
accounted for by a rise in inflation expectations, perhaps partly in reaction to the recent increase
in oil prices. More favorable perceptions of and appetites for risk in private securities markets
have narrowed spreads on corporate bonds vis-a-vis Treasuries, but they remain well above the
unusually thin levels prevailing in the first half of 1998 (Chart 2). Indexes of equity prices have
been mixed: The Dow Jones and S&P 500 posted net gains, but lower earnings expectations,
especially for technology companies, led to a drop in the NASDAQ and the Russell 2000 index
of small-cap firms. Bank share prices have moved up sharply, notably for money center banks,
reversing earlier declines when a significant fallout from Brazil's difficulties was feared.
appreciation of the dollar relative to an average of other major currencies since the February
Japan eased monetary policy, announcing that it would guide the overnight call rate "as low as
possible." In recent weeks, the call rate has remained at or below 5 basis points, the ten-year
government yield has fallen 45 basis points, stock prices have risen substantially, and the so-
called "Japan premium" in funding costs for Japanese banks has declined markedly. The dollar
by continued signs of weakness in German economic activity and, late in the period, by the
hostilities in the Balkans. The term structure of euro interest rate futures suggests that market
participants continue to expect a modest monetary policy easing by the ECB Council by the fall.
. The Desk did not intervene during the period for the
accounts of the System or the Treasury.
(3) Financial market conditions have continued to improve in most emerging market
economies, as investor confidence evidently has been bolstered by the limited contagion from
Brazilian developments. In Brazil itself, overall financial conditions have stabilized somewhat
and the real has tended to firm in recent weeks, owing to a number of factors: The Brazilian
Central Bank demonstrated its commitment to containing inflation by raising the overnight policy
interest rate appreciably early in the period; the government struck an agreement with the IMF,
paving the way for the release of the second tranche of multilateral financial assistance;
international banks made public commitments to maintain or increase their exposure to Brazil;
and its Congress completed passage of the major elements of the fiscal austerity program. The
Mexican peso has appreciated 5 percent since the February FOMC meeting, bolstered in part by
the snapback in oil prices. Despite financial collapse in Ecuador, yield spreads over Treasuries
of Latin American Brady bonds have continued to decline, and prices in most major equity
markets in the region are up. Monetary authorities in a number of emerging Asian economies
allowed domestic interest rates to fall somewhat over the intermeeting period. The Korean won,
the Taiwan dollar, the Indonesian rupiah, and the Thai baht have depreciated between 2 and 5
percent against the dollar over the intermeeting period. In local currency terms, share prices have
risen between 5 and 22 percent in the aforementioned countries, with the exception of Indonesia,
where equity prices have registered a 3 percent decline.
(4) The broad monetary aggregates have decelerated markedly in recent months and
by more than expected at the time of the Committee's last meeting. Data through the first half of
this month suggest that M2 growth has slowed to a 3 percent rate in March, while M3 apparently
has posted a slight decline. In part, the deceleration of M2 owed to the ebbing effects of the
policy easings of the fall, which had narrowed the opportunity cost of holding M2 assets, thereby
inducing portfolio shifts into M2. Indeed, net noncompetitive tenders for Treasury securities, an
indicator of retail demand for market securities, have been positive in March for the first time in
several months. In addition, a reduced level of mortgage refinancing activity has depressed
liquid deposits. However, slower M2 and M3 growth also likely reflected further recovery in
financial markets. Until the stock market turbulence of this week, households had resumed
substantial purchases of stock mutual funds and halted net acquisitions of money market mutual
funds. With corporations paying down bank loans out of the proceeds of security issues, banks
have had less need for the managed liabilities in M3. The velocities of M2 and M3 likely have
dropped again this quarter, but perhaps at only one-half the rates of more than 4 and 6 percent,
respectively, of the fourth quarter of last year.
(5) Private debt growth has edged lower, but has remained quite rapid. A widening
gap between capital expenditures and internal cash flows has boosted demands for funding by
corporations. With the improved receptivity of securities markets, most of this financing recently
has occurred through issuance of bonds and commercial paper. Only a moderate amount of the
new issuance has been used to finance merger activity, as most of the recent deals have involved
the exchange of equity or acquisitions by foreign firms that have not required U.S. funding.
Lower average ratings on corporate debt, an uptick in the default rate on junk bonds, and a slight
increase in delinquencies and charge-offs on business loans suggest a little erosion of credit
quality in the business sector. With sustained strength in home purchases and durables spending,
households have continued to pile up new debt, though probably at a bit slower pace than in the
fourth quarter of last year. Measures of the quality of household loans have not evidenced much
change of late: Delinquencies on consumer loans, already elevated, ticked up in the fourth
quarter, while delinquencies on home mortgages have edged down to very low levels by
historical standards. Larger surpluses in the federal budget in recent months have held down the
growth of total nonfinancial debt to a 5-1/2 percent rate in January and February.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Jan. Feb. Mar. Mar.2
Money and Credit Aggregates
M1
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Bank credit
Adjusted1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
Excess reserves
Policy Alternatives
(6) The staff has read incoming data since the February meeting as indicating that
aggregate demand has been more vigorous and inflation better behaved than previously expected.
However, under the maintained assumption of an unchanged federal funds rate over the balance
of this year and the next, the staff still foresees economic growth slowing and inflation picking
up. Among the forces working to slow spending are financial conditions, which are not expected
to provide the impetus that they did last year given that equity prices and long-term interest rates
are anticipated to hold close to current levels. The staff forecasts that real GDP growth will
begin to cool in the second half of 1999, to average 3 percent over the year, up 1/2 percentage
point from the forecast for the February meeting, and decline noticeably further in 2000, to about
lower this year, but retraces that decline next year. With the economy producing beyond its
potential, core inflation (on a methodologically consistent basis) is projected to pick up 1/2
percentage point from 1998 to 2000, to 2-1/2 percent, and is poised to rise faster thereafter. The
overall CPI accelerates by even more over the two years as a consequence of the rebound in
energy prices.2
(7) Despite the likelihood that overall inflation will rise, the Committee might choose
the unchanged policy stance of alternative B at this meeting. A good part of that rise will owe to
the recent increase in oil prices; most measures of wage and price inflation have ticked lower of
late, which should help to contain inflation expectations; and the projected rebound in core
inflation is gradual. These considerations suggest that deferring action in the near term would
not unduly worsen underlying inflation trends. The Committee might see important benefits
from that delay if it thought that only a modest policy adjustment was necessary and wanted to
use the time to build a case for such action with the public, thereby fostering a more measured
reaction in financial markets than would ensue with unanticipated action. Inaction would be
particularly attractive to the Committee if it suspected that the price outlook in the Greenbook
was more likely to be subject to further favorable surprises than to adverse ones, implying that
firmer evidence of an impending acceleration in prices would be desirable before tightening
policy. Indeed, the Committee may be of the opinion that the staff has built in too large an uptick
to inflation, perhaps by placing too little emphasis on the disinflationary force of ample industrial
capacity and the market discipline now exerted on the ability of firms to pass along price
increases, or by giving too much credence to the power of oil producers to enforce their recent
curbs on supply.
(8) Continuing the current stance of policy, as envisioned in alternative B, would
match the expectations currently embodied in financial market prices. As a result, the immediate
market reaction to no adjustment in the federal funds rate should be little movement in other
interest rates or in the exchange value of the dollar. Over time, if output were to decelerate and
underlying inflation to remain contained, as in the staff forecast, long-term interest rates should
fluctuate around their current levels, although, as Congress and the administration address budget
issues, markets might become more sensitive to developments regarding the burgeoning federal
budget surplus. With the economic environment remaining benign and concerns about near-term
monetary policy tightening mostly quiescent, major equity price indexes are likely to be little
changed on net, despite pressure on corporate profit margins.
(9) If the Committee were concerned that inflation was likely to be on an upward
path, as in the staff forecast, it might favor the 1/4 percentage point tightening in the intended
federal funds rate of alternative C. With aggregate demand remaining strong, credit conditions
improving further, and many emerging market economies showing signs of stabilizing, the
Committee might believe that the current meeting is an appropriate time to roll back the policy
easing of last November, initiating the policy action needed to contain inflation over time. Many
on the Committee had viewed the last easing action as an insurance policy taken out as a
precaution against further financial turmoil and a significant broadening of the crises in emerging
markets. While this action may have helped to forestall these eventualities, in current
circumstances they would be unlikely to surface if that action were reversed. The desirability of
immediate tightening would be enhanced to the extent that the Committee read recent data on
spending as indicating that the growth of aggregate demand would not slow as in the staff
projection but rather would remain unsustainably strong absent a tightening of financial
conditions. With the unemployment rate already low and perhaps headed lower, real interest
rates would seem to be falling short of levels required to contain inflationary pressures.
Moreover, while domestic price increases in the past few years have run at a much slower pace
than might have been expected in light of labor market conditions, recently some of the forces
that may have been responsible for this result--declines in oil prices and inflation expectations--
show signs of reversing.
(10) While financial market participants apparently believe that the Committee's next
move will be toward restraint, no measurable weight is placed on action at this meeting. As a
result, the 25 basis point hike in the intended federal funds rate of alternative C could spark a
substantial reaction in financial markets. Short-term interest rates would rise at least as much as
the policy rate, the prices of long-term debt instruments and equities could come under
considerable downward pressure, and the value of the dollar would probably rise sharply on
foreign exchange markets. If the Committee viewed inflation risks to be substantial, such a
market reaction might be desired as it would speed up the necessary adjustment of aggregate
demand. But if a more modest realignment of market prices were sought, the Committee could
attempt to shape market expectations through the wording of the announcement. In particular,
stressing that some of last fall's easing was no longer needed might limit the tendency of market
participants to extrapolate policy tightening into the future.
(11) If the Committee were chiefly concerned about the risk to inflation but saw the
case for tightening as not completely convincing, it may want to consider a directive tilted toward
restraint. In that regard, the disclosure policy reaffirmed in December reserved announcement of
a change in the tilt to those occasions when Committee viewed the new directive as reflecting a
major change in the Committee's thinking that was not recognized by the market. With respect
to market expectations, the yield curve now embodies greater odds on a tightening than an
easing, but does not build in any tightening action until next year. If the Committee perceived
the selection of an asymmetric directive at this meeting only as an incremental step in the policy
process and not so much at variance with market expectations as to seriously mislead the public,
it might want to delay announcement of the directive tilt until the release of the minutes in May.
In contrast, if the Committee saw a significant possibility that it might well need to raise interest
rates before too long, it might wish to alert markets to this fact. There is little precedent to gauge
how markets would react to such an announcement, but it is likely that financial prices would
embody much higher odds that the Committee would tighten policy within a few months. The
resulting increases in market interest rates would impart restraint to the inflation process more
promptly than policy tightening later absent such an announcement.
(12) Under any of these alternatives, the debt of the nonfinancial sectors will likely
continue to expand at a little more than a 5 percent rate in coming months, with rapid growth in
private indebtedness offset by the Treasury's paydown of debt resulting from ongoing federal
budget surpluses. Firms' reliance on borrowing should remain heavy, spurred by further
advances in capital spending and an erosion of internal funds. With purchases of consumer
durable goods expected to be strong, total household debt should continue to expand at a healthy
clip, although mortgage borrowing should cool some from its recent torrid pace. By September,
total nonfinancial debt is projected to have grown at about a 5-1/2 percent annual rate from its
fourth-quarter 1998 base, placing it in the upper half of its 3-to-7 percent annual range.
(13) To an important extent, commercial banks provided a significant offset to the
curtailment of credit from financial markets late last year by expanding their own balance sheets
to fund firms unwilling or unable to tap markets, albeit at wider spreads. The reversal of those
market strains this year has been mirrored in some shrinkage of bank balance sheets. But that
process is anticipated to have about played itself out, implying that bank credit should resume
expanding at a pace a bit above that of total debt. As a consequence, the growth of M3 is
projected to return to around a 7-1/2 percent rate over the next six months. Investors' varying
views of risk-taking have also left their imprint on M2. The slowing of M2 in recent weeks in
part is seen by the staff as evidence that households have become more willing to hold
instruments exposing them to capital risk that are outside of the monetary aggregates. After this
once-off realignment of portfolios is over, M2 is expected to expand a little faster than nominal
income. Growth of this aggregate is likely to be especially erratic around the coming tax date,
but is expected to average around 5-1/2 percent over the next six months. Under the unchanged
stance of monetary policy assumed in the Greenbook, the staff projects that the levels of both M2
and M3 in September will be about 1 percentage point, at an annual rate, above the upper ends of
the Committee's price-stability ranges.
Directive Language
(14) Presented below is draft wording for the operational paragraph that includes the
usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
To promote the Committee's long-run objectives of price stability and sustainable
economic growth, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/DECREASING the federal funds rate at/TO an
average of around ___ [DEL:4-3/4] percent. In view of the evidence currently available, the
Committee believes that prospective developments are equally likely to warrant an increase or a
decrease [MORE LIKELY TO WARRANT AN INCREASE/A DECREASE THAN A
DECREASE/AN INCREASE] in the federal funds rate operating objective during the
intermeeting period.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Money and Credit Aggregates
M2 M3 Debt
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C All Alternatives
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
March 29, 1999
Monthly
Mar 98
Apr 98
May 98
Jun 98
Jul 98
Aug 98
Sep 98
Oct 98
Nov 98
Dec 98
Jan 99
Feb 99
Short-term Long-term
Treasury bills s Comm. U.S. government constant Indexed yields M unicipal 
vntional home
FdTreasury ills secondary paper m sMoody's
Federal secondary market market aturity yields a Bond primary marketfunds sae paper Purity yields Bya
p -preliminary data
Money and Debt Aggregates
Seasonally adjusted
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class II FOMC
March 29, 1999
Money stock measures and liquid assets _ Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactions components
U.S.
Period M1 M2 M2 nM3 government other' total'
Annual growth rates(%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
Monthly
1998-Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Levels (Sbillions):
Monthly
Weekly
1999-Feb.
- - -1 .1- -
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
and have been adjusted to remove discontinuities.
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Weekly
December 23
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
March 24
Net change
outright
holdings 5
total
4 Net RPs
March 24
March 26, 1999
