Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
MAY 12, 2000
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) May 12, 2000
Class II -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The announcement of the Committee's decision at its March 21 meeting to
raise the intended level of the federal funds rate 1/4 percentage point, to 6 percent, and of its
view that the risks remained weighted toward heightened inflation pressures had been widely
anticipated and had little impact on financial markets.1 Later that week, interest rates rose
following the release of the minutes of the February meeting: The support that a few
Committee members had expressed for a 50 basis point policy firming led some market
participants to mark up their expectations of policy tightening going forward. Subsequently,
investors seemed to reassess equity valuations, particularly those of more speculative
technology shares, whose prices had run up substantially over the previous several months.
As share prices tumbled over the first half of April, market participants concluded that less
monetary policy firming might be needed to slow the economy to a sustainable pace, and
interest rates on higher-quality corporate securities and swap contracts fell for a time. These
rate declines were more than reversed later in the period as stock prices appeared to be
leveling out and incoming data suggested both that aggregate demand had continued to grow
more rapidly than potential supply and that wage and price developments were becoming
more worrisome.
(2) Currently, market participants are certain of at least a 25 basis point move at
this meeting, and futures market prices incorporate about a two-thirds chance of a 50 basis
point move. On average, investors appear to expect that the federal funds rate will reach
more than 7 percent next year--around 1/2 percentage point higher than was anticipated just
before the March meeting (chart 1). Reflecting these changed expectations, yields on most
private money market instruments, high-quality corporate bonds, and swap contracts
generally have increased around 1/2 percentage point since the last FOMC meeting, while
rates on junk bonds have risen more than 3/4 percentage point.2 Yields on Treasury
securities have moved up less than those on private instruments across the maturity spectrum
in part because unexpectedly large tax payments raised market participants' estimates of
future paydowns of Treasury debt.3 In addition, some investors have responded to the
Selected Private Long-Term Yields
Percent
High Yield (left scale)
11.5 - ------.. BBB Corporate (right scale
- AA Corporate (right scale)
Chart 1
Financial Market Indicators
Selected Treasury Yields
Percent
Jun Aug Oct Dec Feb Apr
1999
Selected Equity Indexes
Index(6/1/99) = 100
Expected Federal Funds Rates Estimated from
Financial Futures* Percent
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Exchange Rates lndex(6/1/99 = 100)
M J S N J M M J S N
Emerging Market Yield Spread*
Basis points
"J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index Plus, a market-value-weighted
average of spreads on dollar-denominated instruments over comparable
Treasuries for sixteen emerging market countries. MFMA:ECA
Jun Aug Oct Dec Feb
volatility and weakness in stock prices by increasing their demand for the safety and relative
liquidity of Treasuries. The Wilshire 5000 has fallen 6-1/2 percent over the period.
Technology stocks have been particularly hard hit, with the Nasdaq dropping 23-1/2 percent
in volatile trading.
(3) Many foreign central banks tightened monetary policy early in the
intermeeting period in light of mounting concerns about inflation pressures, which, for
some, were made more pressing by the depreciations of their currencies against the dollar.
Policy rates were hiked 1/4 percentage point by the European Central Bank and the Bank of
Canada, among others, and longer-term yields have risen 15 to 30 basis points, on net, in
most of the foreign industrial world. Japan was, once again, the chief exception, with bond
yields having shed about 10 basis points. While spending there has appeared to be on the
rebound, bond yields have dipped as market participants have come to expect that the Bank
of Japan will continue its zero-interest-rate policy for a longer period. The large rise in U.S.
long-term rates relative to most foreign rates, associated with the apparently more vigorous
expansion here than abroad, no doubt has supported the foreign exchange value of the
dollar against a wide range of currencies. But the 3-1/2 percent increase, on net, in the
dollar's value against major currencies has appeared to outstrip what could be explained by
fundamentals. Within that average, the dollar's 6-1/2 percent rise against the euro has been
the most spectacular and surprising. Exchange markets have reacted negatively both to the
welter of comments from European officials about the emphasis to be placed on the value
of the euro and to the growing perception that broader reforms in Europe have been
lagging. The bulk of the 2 percent appreciation of the dollar against the yen has come after
the beginning of April, reflecting in part widening interest rate differentials. 4 Equity prices
in foreign industrial countries have been about flat to down 13 percent. Yield spreads on
emerging market debt have widened on balance, and the dollar has gained 1-1/2 percent
relative to the currencies of other important trading partners.
(4) Growth of M2 in April increased from its already strong March pace, as
households evidently built up liquid balances to meet a higher-than-usual level of
nonwithheld tax payments (chart 2). After tax payments cleared, the surge in M2 reversed,
and consequently M2 growth is expected to slow appreciably in May. Averaging growth in
April and that projected for May, M2 is estimated to be advancing at around a 5-1/2 percent
annual rate, about the same as over the previous two quarters. This virtually unchanged
pace of expansion is occurring in the face of higher market interest rates that have reduced
the attractiveness of M2 assets and most likely reflects continued substantial gains in
income.5 In addition, the weakness and volatility of stock prices may have led some
investors to increase their holdings of the safe, liquid assets in M2. In contrast to the
acceleration in M2, M3 growth slowed considerably in April following a robust advance in
. U.S. monetary authorities have not intervened.
Index scale
09/13/99 = 100
Ratio Scale
Percentage Points
-- 25
M2 Velocity
(left scale)
-- 10
M2 Opportunity Cost*
(right scale)
I I I I I I I
I I
* Two-quarter moving average.
Chart 2
Monetary Aggregates
Index Scale
09/13/99 = 100 Weekly
- 107
- 106
- 105
- 104
- 102
I I 100
Ratio Scale
March. Institutional money funds slumped in the wake of the March tightening as their
yields temporarily lagged the upward move in market rates. The RP and Eurodollar
components of M3 also declined in April, but strong growth in retail and large time deposits
and bulging Treasury tax and loan note balances at banks were sufficient to fund the
considerable expansion of bank credit. With M2 slowing considerably in May, M3 is likely
to decelerate further: Estimated growth for April and May taken together is about 5
percent, well below its average pace over the last two quarters.6
(5) The nonfederal component of domestic nonfinancial debt is estimated to have
continued to expand vigorously in recent months. This measure grew at a 9 percent rate
over the first three months of the year, and partial data suggest a similar rise in April. The
strength of home sales and of spending on consumer durables have continued to boost
residential mortgage debt and consumer debt of households substantially. Business
borrowing also has been heavy, reflecting rapid investment spending. As the bond and
equity markets have become less receptive over the intermeeting period, businesses have
shifted their funding toward commercial paper and bank loans, despite a further tightening
of standards and terms on business loans at many banks. Robust tax receipts have trimmed
the borrowing needs of state and local governments, and municipal bond issuance also has
been restrained by higher interest rates, which have discouraged advance refunding. The
burgeoning federal surplus has allowed the Treasury to pay down a considerable volume of
debt, limiting the growth in total domestic nonfinancial debt to about a 6-1/4 percent pace
from December to March.
Feb. Mar. Apr. Apr.2
Money and Credit Aggregates
Ml
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Bank credit
Adjusted'
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal plus SLF borrowing
Excess reserves
Policy Alternatives
(6) In view of indications that the March Greenbook underestimated trends in
both aggregate demand and core inflation, the current staff forecast assumes a somewhat
steeper path of policy firming, with the intended federal funds rate reaching 7-1/4 percent
by the end of the year and holding at that level through 2001. This trajectory for the funds
rate, which also is a bit higher than currently built into asset prices, is expected to be
associated with slightly larger increases in longer-term private yields than in the last forecast,
contributing to a lackluster performance of broad stock prices indexes and restraining the
effect of wealth on spending. The value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets is
forecast to depreciate at about the same pace as was projected in the last Greenbook, albeit
from the elevated base established in recent weeks. Although financial conditions are
expected to be a bit tighter, on balance, inflationary pressures are more intense than last
projected. The unemployment rate is slightly lower than in the March forecast, remaining a
bit below 4 percent until late next year, as the forecasted gradual slowing in output growth
still leaves the path of real GDP higher than in the previous forecast. This rate of resource
use is expected to induce an acceleration of core prices over the forecast period that is a
little larger than in the last projection, with inflation in core PCE prices gradually moving up
to a 2-1/2 percent rate by the end of 2001. Overall inflation, as measured by the total PCE
index, is projected to finish next year at a 2-1/4 percent pace, up from 2 percent in the last
(7) At its March meeting, the FOMC indicated that the balance of risks was
weighted toward higher inflation. During the intermeeting period, inflation pressures have
intensified, judging by the strength in incoming data on output, employment, and prices.
Accordingly, the issue addressed in this bluebook is not whether to tighten the stance of
monetary policy but by how much. Two basic alternatives are presented for consideration
by the Committee: Alternative C, under which the target federal funds rate would be raised
(8) Even if the Committee's assessment of the outlook is such that a substantial
firming of policy ultimately will be necessary to prevent underlying inflation from rising, it
still may favor a continued gradual approach, as under alternative C. Signs of an actual
acceleration in prices are quite recent, and the Committee may require further evidence that
inflation is on the upswing before firming policy more aggressively. While some measures of
labor compensation gains recently have shown signs of strengthening, this development may
be largely a lagged response to previous increases in productivity growth rather than a signal
of heightened inflation pressures. Moreover, the elevated uncertainty about the economy's
sustainable level of resource utilization and rate of output growth--which contributes to the
sense that forecasts of inflation are less reliable--might justify continuing the incremental
approach to policy firming. Continued gradualism would afford the Federal Reserve more
time to assess the responsiveness of the economy and inflation to the cumulative change in
the stance of monetary policy, thereby limiting the risk of possible over-tightening. And, to
the extent that market participants extrapolate the gradual approach to policy tightening into
the future, expectations of further policy restraint will remain embedded in the structure of
market interest rates, still bringing forward in time the effects on spending of future policy
(9) The 25 basis point move of alternative C would be somewhat smaller than is
incorporated in financial market prices. Even if the Committee also announces that the
balance of risks remains skewed toward higher inflation, short rates still would decline, as
market participants marked down their expected near-term path for the funds rate target.
Longer-term yields also might edge down if market participants concluded that the Federal
Reserve would be pursuing a more gradual approach than they had anticipated, and this
strategy was not viewed as enhancing inflation risks. On the latter score, market participants
might infer from the small size of the policy move that inflationary pressures are a little less
intense than they had thought; such a response would, of course, be more plausible if the
CPI data to be released the morning of the meeting turn out to be benign. Equity prices
could rally, while the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets might change little.
But it cannot be ruled out that financial market participants would adopt a more skeptical
interpretation of limited Federal Reserve action. If a sense that the Committee had fallen
behind the curve of requisite policy firming became prevalent, which would be made more
likely by a disquieting CPI release, longer-term rates could back up, equity prices weaken, and
the dollar come under downward pressure.
(10) If the Committee were persuaded by recent data that the financial conditions
produced by continuing its gradual approach would be insufficient to keep underlying
inflation contained, it might well support the 50 basis point increase in the intended federal
funds rate of alternative D. Further gradual moves might be seen as likely allowing
aggregate demand to grow more rapidly than potential supply for long enough to induce an
intensification of pressures on resources that would noticeably boost underlying inflation.
Given the current tautness of labor markets, recent evidence that real GDP growth is
outpacing the expansion of its potential by even more than projected earlier strengthens the
case for steepening the trajectory for the intended federal funds rate. If the level of output
already has substantially overshot its potential and an acceleration of the underlying trends in
wages and prices is in train, a 50 basis point move at this meeting would be especially
appropriate. Such an increase in nominal interest rates would be more likely to contain
inflation expectations going forward and thereby diminish slightly the amount of cumulative
tightening ultimately needed to keep inflation in check.
(11) The reaction of asset prices to the adoption of alternative D would probably
depend on the Committee's decision about the balance of risks. If the policy move were
accompanied by a statement that the balance of risks remains tilted toward higher inflation,
short-term rates would likely increase slightly as market participants revise up a bit their
expectations for the path of the funds rate. These elevated expectations would tend to boost
the yields on longer-term private instruments a little as well, and equity prices might weaken
some. The increase in rates on Treasury securities, however, could be more limited if
demands for safety and liquidity were to increase in an environment of more aggressive
policy tightening.
(12) If alternative D instead were accompanied by a statement that the risks were
now seen as balanced, the market reaction would be more difficult to predict. On average,
investors appear currently to expect another 100 basis points or so of monetary policy
tightening over the next twelve months, rather than just the 50 basis points at this meeting
embodied in alternative D. Most would infer from such a balance-of-risks statement that
monetary policy would be on hold for a while. Some investors might conclude that inflation
pressures were not as strong as they had previously thought and that the peak in short-term
rates could well have been reached, while others might be concerned that the Federal
Reserve had misgauged the situation and eventually was likely to need to firm policy much
further, particularly given the possibility that subsequent policy adjustment would be too
slow in the near term. On net, longer-term interest rates probably would increase a bit less,
initially, than if the Committee indicated that the balance of risks was skewed toward higher
inflation. If developments over the following weeks were to unfold along the lines of the
staff forecast, most market participants likely would conclude that additional policy firming
was needed. Longer-term yields would then tend to rise further, reflecting increases both in
real rates and in inflation expectations.
(13) Under the Greenbook forecast, the expansion of domestic nonfinancial sector
debt is expected to edge a bit lower in coming months. Borrowing by households should
moderate somewhat from the torrid pace of the first quarter, as the growth of consumer
outlays drops back a little and residential expenditures rise only modestly. Similarly,
borrowing in the business sector is projected to be trimmed, with growth of investment
spending declining slightly, although business debt issuance should remain strong given the
widening financing gap. Business borrowers likely would continue to find credit market
conditions not especially hospitable. Investors probably will remain somewhat selective in
purchasing bonds, continuing to place a high value on quality and liquidity. Also, in an
environment of rising interest rates and slowing economic growth, banks probably will
further firm terms and standards on loans to businesses. In the government sector, credit
demands should remain relatively slack. Net debt issuance by state and local governments is
likely to be held down by strong tax receipts and by the payoff of obligations that previously
had been advance-refunded. Continued federal surpluses will permit further reductions in
Treasury debt, in part through buybacks. From March through September, domestic
nonfinancial sector debt is projected to expand at about a 4-3/4 percent annual rate.
(14) In the staff forecast, the higher money market rates associated with the
tightening of monetary policy and the expected slowing in nominal income growth should
restrain demands for monetary assets in coming months. M2 expansion for the April-to-
September period is projected at a 3-3/4 percent rate. With slower growth of M2 and bank
credit, the expansion of M3 is expected to edge down to a 5-3/4 percent pace from April
through September.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
Alt. C Alt. D
Alt. C Alt. D
M2 M3 Debt
Staff Forecasts
Monthly Growth Rates
Mar-2000
Apr-2000
May-2000
Jun-2000
Jul-2000
Aug-2000
Sep-2000
Growth Rate
From To
Sep-1999 Mar-2000
Dec-1999 Jun-2000
Apr-2000 Sep-2000
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent) May 15, 2000
Short-term Long-term
Treasury bills Cs Comm. U.S. govemen constant I I Municipal mortgagesFederal secondary market secondary pm. U.S.g r meteonstant Indexed yields Moody's Bond primary market
funds market Baa Buyer
Monthly
May 99
Jun 99
Jul 99
Aug 99
Sep 99
Oct 99
Nov 99
Dec 99
Jan 00
Feb 00
Mar 00
Apr 00
p - preliminary data MFMA:IXA
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted
Annual growth rates(%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
Quarterly(average)
1999-Q2
Q3
Q4
Monthly
1999-Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Levels ( billions):
Monthly
Feb.
Mar.
Apr. p
Weekly
2000-Apr.
May Ip
Money stock measures _Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactions components .
M1 M2 M3 government' other' total'
In M2 In M3 only government
p preliminary
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Weekly
January 19
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
May 10
Treasury bills
Net 2 Redemptions
purchases (-)
Net
change
Net purchases Redemptions
Net
Change
Federal
agencies
redemptions
0-
.9- I .9I -
--- 10,337
- 1,893
Net change
outright
holdings
total Net RPs
May 12, 2000
----
