Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) June 23, 2000
Class II -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Market participants did not fully anticipate the FOMC's decision at its May
meeting to raise the target funds rate by 50 basis points and retain a statement judging the
balance of risks as weighted toward conditions that might generate higher inflation. 1
Accordingly, investors marked up their expectations a little for the path of the funds rate
immediately following the announcement, and bond and stock prices generally edged down.
Over the next couple of weeks, concerns about the potential need for aggressive policy
tightening and its possible repercussions on future earnings growth and economic activity
appeared to contribute to a sharp sell-off in the equity market and a widening of risk spreads
on corporate bonds. However, later in the period, investors read a string of economic data
releases as signaling a moderation in the growth of economic activity and relatively well-
contained cost and price pressures, and they concluded that the Federal Reserve probably
would be able to hold inflation in check without much additional policy firming.
(2) On balance, expectations for the trajectory of the funds rate have been revised
down significantly over the intermeeting period, with current readings from futures markets
suggesting that market participants, on average, do not expect a tightening at this meeting
and anticipate at most another quarter-point firming in coming months. This revised
outlook for policy was accompanied by a reduction in uncertainty and a fairly broad-based
easing in financial conditions, on net, over the period (Chart 1). The implied volatilities
derived from options on interest rate and equity index futures contracts all moved down over
the period, suggesting an appreciable decline in market uncertainty. Treasury coupon yields
fell between 10 and 40 basis points, and, consistent with the change in monetary policy
expectations, the declines were associated with especially large revisions to nearer-term
forward rates.2 The ten-year inflation-indexed Treasury yield dropped about half as much as
the nominal ten-year Treasury yield, suggesting declines in both longer-term real interest rates
and investors' required compensation for inflation. Thirty-year fixed-rate mortgage rates fell
about in line with the decline in comparable Treasury yields, as did most investment-grade
bond yields. Junk bond yields, however, were down only a touch, with rising defaults adding
to investors' concerns about credit risk going forward. Lower interest rates helped support
equity prices; most broad stock price indexes were little changed, although the Nasdaq
recovered from its sharp sell-off early in the period to post a 6-1/2 percent gain. By
contrast, regional and money center bank stocks fell considerably on worries about rising
loan losses and shrinking underwriting income.
(3) Declines in U.S. interest rates, together with greater confidence of investors in
the expansion of economic activity in major foreign industrial countries, contributed to a
Selected Private Long-Term Yields
Percent
May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May
1999
Chart 1
Financial Market Indicators
Selected Treasury Yields
Percent
May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May
19992000
Selected Equity Indexes
lndex(6/1/99) = 100
May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May
1999
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Exchange Rates Ind
Daily
SBroad Index
-...... Major Currencies Index
SOther Important Trading
ex(6/1/99 = 100)
Expected Federal Funds Rates Estimated from
Financial Futures* Percent
S- 7.4
........ 5/15/2000
S6/23/2000 7.2
... .** ****.. - 7.0
S .- - 6.8
Jun Aug Oct Dec Feb Apr Jun Aug Oct Dec
2000 2001
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures rates with an
allowance for term premia and other adjustments.
Emerging Market Yield Spread*
Basis points
May Aug Nov Feb May Aug Nov Feb May
1998 1999 2000
*J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index Plus, a market-value-weighted
average of spreads on dollar-denominated instruments over comparable
Treasuries for sixteen emerging market countries. MFMA:MJG
May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May
1999 2000
since the May FOMC meeting. Notable among the changes in the components of the
major currencies index was a 2-1/2 percent drop in the dollar's value vis-a-vis the euro,
abetted no doubt by the European Central Bank's decision to hike its policy rate 1/2
percentage point on June 8, a quarter point more than had been built into market prices.
While the Bank of Japan kept its policy rate at zero, officials hinted frequently that some
tightening was in the offing, and the dollar lost about 4-1/2 percent of its value against the
yen on balance. Even so, Japanese longer-term yields were little changed.
U.S. monetary
authorities did not intervene.
(4) Concerns about a few emerging market countries have cropped up in recent
weeks and appear mostly responsible for the modest appreciation of the dollar against an
index of the currencies of our other important trading partners. Recent polls suggest the
presidential race in Mexico is too close to call, heightening nervousness on the part of some
investors about the potential for unsettled political and economic conditions after the
election. On net, the dollar has gained 4-1/4 percent against the peso. Social unrest in
Indonesia and a pickup in piracy in the Phillippines depressed their currencies and added to
the risk premiums on their foreign debt. In contrast, yield spreads on Brazilian dollar-
denominated debt over U.S. Treasury securities declined and the real appreciated 2 percent
on favorable inflation news that allowed the central bank to ease policy late in the
intermeeting period. On net, average yield spreads of emerging market debt over U.S.
Treasury securities narrowed over the intermeeting period.
(5) Changes in financial conditions have affected funding patterns in recent
months, but overall private credit flows have remained substantial. Through April and much
of May, tight conditions in long-term capital markets prompted businesses to rely more
heavily on bank loans and commercial paper, but more recently bond issuance has picked up,
even among junk bond issuers. Borrowing by businesses has been supported by strength in
investment spending relative to internal funds and by substantial net retirements of equities.
In the household sector, based on fragmentary data, the pace of borrowing is estimated to
have slowed a little recently, consistent with the projected slight decline in nominal spending
on consumer durables and housing in the current quarter. Federal debt continues on a steep
downward trend, with unexpectedly large tax receipts contributing to a huge paydown in the
current quarter. Looking over a longer period, from the fourth quarter of last year to May,
total domestic nonfinancial debt expanded at a 5-1/2 percent rate (Chart 2), well short of the
projected growth in nominal GDP over the first half of the year.3 Over the same period,
federal debt is estimated to have contracted at a 6-1/2 percent pace while nonfederal debt
has expanded at an 8-3/4 percent rate.
(6) M2 fell in May as this year's unusually large tax payments cleared, but it has
rebounded in June. Growth over both months likely has been held down by rising money
Chart 2
Money and Credit Aggregates
$Billions
-- 4800
O N D J F M A M J
1999 2000
$Billions
-- 6800
O N D J F M A M J
1999 2000
D J F M A M
2000
Ratio Scale
Percentage PointsRatio Scale
Q 2 P
M2 Velocity
(left scale)
M2 Opportunity Cost*
(right scale) Q2
* Two-quarter moving average.
p Preliminary.
O N
market interest rates and the associated increase in the opportunity cost of M2. Over the
first half of the year, M2 velocity is estimated to have risen at about a 1-1/4 percent rate,
roughly consistent with the pace that would be expected based on the historical relationship
between M2 velocity and opportunity cost. Nonetheless, boosted by rapid growth in
nominal income, M2 is estimated to have expanded at a 5-1/2 percent rate from the fourth
quarter of 1999 to June of this year.4 M3 growth over the same period is currently estimated
at about a 9 percent rate, buoyed by the strong growth of depository credit.5 The gap
between the growth rates of M3 and M2 so far this year is well above the historical average,
but it is consistent with patterns observed during past episodes of brisk depository credit
growth and rising interest rates.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Apr. May. Jun. Jun.2
Money and Credit Aggregates
M1
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Adjusted
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal plus SLF borrowing
Excess reserves 1152
Longer-Term Strategies
(7) This section examines some of the implications of the path for the economy
presented in the Greenbook for subsequent developments and considers alternative longer-
run policy strategies. It also discusses the effects of alternative possibilities for the NAIRU
and for domestic and foreign productivity growth.
(8) The analysis is built around an extension of the staffs judgmental outlook
presented in the Greenbook. The extension is constructed using the FRB/US model, while
preserving the key qualitative characteristics of the economy embodied in the judgmental
forecast. With regard to fiscal policy, the federal budget is assumed to remain in surplus,
although by less than recently, and government saving declines from a peak of about 2
percent of GDP at the end of 2001 to close to 1 percent by the end of 2010. On the
international side, foreign economies are expected to grow in real terms at about the same
rate as the United States.6 At current exchange rates, the U.S. current account deficit would
tend to widen further as a share of GDP because of the larger income elasticity of U.S.
imports relative to U.S. exports. The associated rapid rise in dollar assets in global
portfolios puts downward pressure on the foreign exchange value of the dollar, whose rate
of decline picks up from a 3 percent pace over the Greenbook interval to a 5 percent rate
thereafter. This more rapid depreciation stabilizes the current account deficit at about 6
percent of GDP in the latter half of the decade.
(9) The dollar's decline has implications for the supply side assumptions in the
baseline. In particular, because of its persistent upward effect on inflation, the steeper fall of
the dollar means that the NAIRU rises from 5-1/4 percent in the Greenbook to about
over the next several years to just under 4 percent near the end of the period, as a slowdown
in the torrid pace of computer and communications equipment accumulation reduces the
rate of capital deepening.
(10) In recent years, the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate--the rate that
would eventually bring aggregate demand into line with the economy's long-run potential--
has risen, as the effect of accelerating productivity has more than offset that of rising
government saving. The policy firming over the past year and a half has lifted the real
federal funds rate--defined as the federal funds rate less the four-quarter change in the core
PCE price index--to the neighborhood of its higher long-run equilibrium value as estimated
in FRB/US. Keeping the real federal funds rate near its equilibrium level would ultimately
raise the unemployment rate to the NAIRU. However, owing to the current imbalance
between demand and potential supply as seen by the Greenbook and the model, inflation
would stabilize at a much higher level than the Committee would likely find acceptable. The
baseline scenario delivers better inflation performance by raising the real federal funds rate
above its equilibrium level for a time, pushing the unemployment rate more promptly
towards the long-run NAIRU. As a result, core PCE inflation stabilizes at a 3 percent rate
by the middle of the decade. To achieve this outcome, the Committee must tighten about 1
percentage point in real terms--about 1-3/4 percentage points on the nominal funds rate--
before allowing the real funds rate to drop to its long-run equilibrium value. The process is
begun by taking the actions assumed in the Greenbook and continues with roughly an
additional percentage point of firming in the years immediately following.
(11) To keep inflation at about its current level of 2 percent, as in the stable
inflation scenario shown by the ball and chain lines in Chart 3, the Committee must
tighten policy enough to put some slack in the economy--that is, to raise the unemployment
rate above the NAIRU for a time. To keep inflation from accelerating significantly given
the pressure already in train from the unusually tight labor markets, increases in the real
federal funds rate must be larger and more prompt than in the baseline scenario, totaling
nearly 1-1/2 percentage points by early next year.7 Inflation is held down in the initial
phases of this tightening by a stronger dollar and then by the effects of slower growth and
reduced pressures on resources. Achieving price stability, shown by the dotted lines,
requires even higher interest rates to create more slack in labor markets for a longer period
Chart 3
Alternative Strategies for Monetary Policy*
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Real Federal Funds Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
....... ..... ............
*Vertical lines mark the beginning and end of the Greenbook forecasts.
*. ..... . -...... . ... ....
of time. Still, economic activity continues to expand, albeit at a modest pace. Credibility for
the new, lower inflation target builds gradually, helping to hold down output losses over
(12) The three alternative paths depicted in Chart 3 show the predictions for key
variables assuming that the model is properly specified, its parameter values are correct, the
data are measured without error, and no shocks will hit the economy in the future. Of
course, none of these conditions holds in practice, rendering forecasts quite uncertain.
Unfortunately, it would be very difficult to quantify the combined effect of these sources of
uncertainty. A sense of the magnitude of some of the uncertainties attendant in model
simulations can be obtained by examining the behavior of key variables when the model is
hit by many different sequences of shocks of the same magnitude as its historical residuals.
Using the resulting distribution of simulated outcomes, one can trace out confidence bands,
which indicate how likely it is to observe an outcome that would lie within this range of the
forecasted value.8
(13) Chart 4 displays approximately 70 percent confidence bands--plus or minus
one standard deviation of the shocks--for unemployment, inflation, and the nominal and real
Chart 4
Baseline Scenario with Confidence Bands*
Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Core PCE Inflation (Q4/Q4)
*Vertical lines mark the beginning and end of the Greenbook forecasts
funds rates in the baseline scenario. In this exercise, as shocks accumulate and drive
inflation away from target or output away from potential, policy in the form of the modified
Taylor rule responds by moving interest rates to limit fluctuations in output and inflation
that would ensue if policy were left on hold. The bands eventually become fairly wide,
about 2-1/2 percentage points for core inflation and about 3-1/2 percentage points for the
unemployment rate. In the long-run, the width of the bands should reflect the historical
degree of variation in those variables and, for this reason, Chart 4 includes the last two
decades of data, which is the period over which the residuals were drawn.
(14) Because one of the key uncertainties in the forecast is the behavior of
productivity in the United States, Chart 5 considers the possibility of both faster and slower
productivity growth. In the former case (ball-and-chain lines), trend productivity growth
gradually increases an additional percentage point, so that the growth of potential output is
further pickup in productivity implies improved income prospects that boost aggregate
demand, keeping the unemployment rate below 4 percent for another three years, despite
rising real interest rates. Improved productivity growth facilitates cost containment, initially
countering incipient inflation pressures. However, unlike the situation in the second half of
the 1990s, this scenario is not accompanied by a fiscal contraction or foreign developments
that help to mitigate inflation pressures. Moreover, the unemployment rate is currently at a
Chart 5
Faster and Slower Productivity Growth*
Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Four-quarter Growth in PCE Prices
(ex. Food and Energy)
*Vertical lines mark the beginning and end of the Greenbook forecasts.
much lower level. Consequently, it takes only about two years for inflation to accelerate
sharply. The improvement in productivity further raises the equilibrium real interest rate.
Ultimately, a policy tightening of 1-3/4 percentage points in real terms is necessary in order
to stabilize inflation at a 3 percent rate. In the slower productivity scenario (dotted lines),
the fall in trend growth puts downward pressure on aggregate demand, in part through a
major correction in the stock market, and leads to a rapid increase in the unemployment
rate, which rises beyond the NAIRU within two years. At the same time, inflation moves
rapidly above the 3 percent baseline target rate. Nominal rates stay close to baseline for
several years owing to the offsetting effects of higher unemployment and higher inflation.
When the unemployment rate exceeds the natural rate, inflation slows and interest rates
(15) To the extent that the U.S. productivity improvements in the second half of
the 1990s were due to innovations in information technology and their productivity-
enhancing application to other sectors, it seems likely that other industrial countries will
eventually experience similar developments. Chart 6 depicts a scenario in which labor
productivity growth in several developed countries rises gradually beginning in early 2002,
eventually stabilizing at 1 percentage point above baseline by early 2004. The simulation is
conducted in the FRB/Global version of the staffs model, which incorporates a more
detailed treatment of the foreign sector. As a result of the productivity shock in these
countries, output in U.S. export markets, on average, grows about 1/2 percentage point per
year faster than in the baseline scenario. The rise in foreign output increases demand for
Chart 6
Faster Foreign Productivity Growth*
Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate
Real Exchange Rate
I I I ~I
1996
- Baseline
..... Faster Growth
a I I I I I I I I
Current Account/GDP
Unemployment Rate
I I I
- Baseline
..... Faster Growth
s -i
Core PCE Inflation Rate
- Baseline
1.5 - ..... Faster Growth
U.S. exports, inducing a slight fall in the U.S. unemployment rate and an edging higher of
consumer price inflation by 2010 compared to the baseline. The real federal funds rate rises
about 1 percentage point, reflecting the combined effects of the rise in the inflation and
output gaps and the perceived increase in the equilibrium real rate. Since foreign real
interest rates, on balance, are increased by a larger amount than U.S. real rates in response to
the shock, the real exchange value of the dollar declines slightly relative to baseline. The
depreciation reinforces the effect of faster foreign growth in contributing to a nearly 1-1/2
percentage points improvement in the U.S. current account deficit as a share of GDP.
(16) Inflation has increased only modestly in the last few years, even in the face of
a sharp run-up in energy prices and a remarkably low level of unemployment. The baseline
scenario interprets this performance as a manifestation of fortuitous shocks temporarily
offsetting strong underlying inflation pressure. An alternative explanation is that the
NAIRU has been substantially lower than the staff estimate in the Greenbook. Chart 7
shows the implications of assuming that the NAIRU has been, and will continue to be,
hand, but less so than in the baseline because the level of potential output is higher. The
nominal funds rate rises gradually for nearly three years. However, the level of the funds
rate stays about 1/2 percentage point below baseline for most of the decade. Moreover, the
real funds rate is essentially flat for the first few years and rises only slightly thereafter.
Chart 7
Lower NAIRU*
Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Four-quarter Growth in PCE Prices
(Excluding Food and Energy)
*Vertical lines mark the beginning and end of the Greenbook forecasts.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(17) In the staffs view, data on economic activity, spending, and prices, although a
tad softer of late than anticipated, have not signaled a fundamental shift in the forces at work
in the U.S. economy. The economy is expected to continue producing appreciably beyond
the level of its potential, fueling an acceleration in core prices that is augmented by a
projected depreciation of the dollar. Accordingly, the staff again assumes in the Greenbook
that policymakers will raise the federal funds rate to 7-1/4 percent by the end of this year.
This policy firming, which is greater than expected by market participants, contributes to a
substantial rise in private long-term interest rates and keeps broad equity indexes in their
recent ranges. These financial conditions help hold growth of real GDP a bit below that of
its potential over the next year and a half and leave the unemployment rate near its current
reading--well below the staffs estimate of its sustainable level. The persistence of these labor
market pressures, along with the pass through of the recent surge in the price of oil and
further increases in non-oil import prices, is expected to push core PCE inflation from 1-1/2
percent over the last four quarters to 2-1/4 percent in 2001 and higher thereafter.
(18) If the Committee is not sure that inflation pressures will intensify going
forward, then it might want to consider leaving the stance of monetary policy unchanged at
this meeting, as under alternative B. Economic growth in the second quarter appears to
have slowed to a rate roughly consistent with its potential even though the full effects of the
earlier rise in interest rates and flattening of equity prices have not yet worked their way
through the pipeline. Moreover, as noted, market participants have interpreted the incoming
data as suggesting that very little further tightening might be necessary to contain inflation.
In these circumstances, the Committee might wish to wait for more evidence on the likely
extent of the slowdown in aggregate demand before taking further action. In addition, the
Committee may be less convinced than the staff that the economy is producing beyond the
level of its potential. Recent data are giving conflicting signals about the acceleration of labor
compensation, and, in any case, the growth of structural productivity has picked up. In view
of the resulting uncertainty regarding unit labor costs, the Committee may have significant
doubts that an upswing of inflation is in train. Judging by survey evidence, longer-term
inflation expectations have not been particularly sensitive to short-run fluctuations in
measured inflation. As a result, the Committee might anticipate that those expectations will
not rise much in the near term, even if the incoming data tend to confirm the staffs forecast,
and might view the costs of waiting for additional information as rather low.
(19) Market participants fully expect the Federal Reserve to stay its hand at this
meeting and repeat the warning that the risks are tilted toward inflation. Thus, financial
market prices probably would not respond initially to a Committee decision that conforms to
those expectations. However, the subsequent accumulation of information over the
intermeeting period that is consistent with the Greenbook forecast is likely to suggest more
inflation pressure than now foreseen by market participants. Bond and equity prices would
be expected to fall as investors came to anticipate additional Federal Reserve tightening.
(20) If the Committee is instead concerned that the odds of rising inflation are still
elevated, as in the staff forecast, a further firming of policy of 25 basis points at this meeting
could be warranted, as under alternative C. Indications of slower expansion are still
tentative, the level of resource utilization remains quite high, and some of the earlier financial
restraint has been unwound by the recent rally in bond and equity markets. In this
environment, the Committee may want more assurance that growth in aggregate demand will
not rebound than is provided by the likely additional effects of previous tightening actions.
The argument for tightening would be even more compelling if the Committee believed that
the growth of aggregate demand has to be restrained to substantially below the pace of
potential output for a while to lessen the intensity of resource use. Accelerating productivity
has held down the growth in unit labor costs, and thereby has helped to restrain inflation for
some time. However, its depressing effect on inflation may be running its course, as intense
competitive pressures in labor markets allow real compensation to catch up to the higher
level of productivity. If so, the unemployment rate consistent with stable inflation would be
rising, even if productivity is continuing to accelerate.
(21) Market participants would be surprised by the 25 basis point tightening of
alternative C. Short-term interest rates would rise immediately by almost 1/4 percentage
point. Especially if the Committee were to retain its existing statement about the balance of
risks, some increase in intermediate- and long-term yields also could be anticipated. The
dollar probably would firm some on foreign exchange markets, while stock prices likely
would decline. An announcement of balanced risks, by contrast, could well be taken by the
public as a signal that the Committee believes it may be finished tightening. Although the
rate hike would move forward in time the tightening that markets have essentially priced in, a
statement of balanced risks could prompt a rally in capital markets as market participants
mark down the odds they place on aggressive further tightening.
(22) In the Greenbook forecast, the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors grows at
a 4-1/4 percent rate from May to December. Over this period, the contraction in federal
debt is expected to pick up to a 9 percent annual rate. The expansion of nonfederal debt is
anticipated to slow somewhat, to a 7-1/2 percent pace, but still to exceed the growth of
nominal spending. Business debt growth is projected to edge lower, but this moderation is
limited by a widening in the financing gap, as heavy capital expenditures increasingly outstrip
internal funds, and by continued substantial net equity retirements associated with brisk
merger-and-acquisition activity. For households, mortgage and consumer credit borrowing is
likely to edge down in light of the moderation in the growth of spending on housing and
consumer durables. The anticipated slowdown in the economic expansion and upturn in
business credit problems should induce lenders to tighten terms somewhat, but not by
enough to affect borrowing significantly. Over 2001, nonfederal debt is projected to grow
implies that overall domestic nonfinancial debt will advance 4-1/2 percent next year, down a
bit from this year's 5 percent increase.
(23) The marked slowing of nominal GDP growth in the second half of 2000 in
the staff forecast, and the effects of past and projected policy tightenings on the spread
between market and deposit interest rates should prompt a moderation in M2 growth from
the average pace over the first half of the year. M2 is expected to expand at a 4-1/4 percent
rate over the June-to-December period, bringing growth over the four quarters of this year
to 5 percent. With short-term interest rates increasing, M2 velocity is projected to rise 1-1/2
percent this year, about in line with the estimate of the staffs standard M2 demand model
(Chart 8). Over the second half of the year, M3 growth slows appreciably as depository
credit decelerates and the effects of higher interest rates damp the growth of institutional
money funds. M3 should advance at the relatively moderate pace of about 6 percent over
the next six months, placing its four-quarter growth for 2000 as a whole at 7-3/4 percent.
(24) With short-term market interest rates flat next year in the staff forecast, the
opportunity cost of holding M2 assets should about level off. Still, the lagged effect of the
previous widening of opportunity cost boosts M2 velocity 1/2 percent in 2001. Despite the
smaller rise in velocity next year, M2 remains on a 5 percent growth pace owing to the
weaker growth of nominal income. In this environment, the need for financing by
depositories lessens, and M3 growth is expected to moderate to 6-1/2 percent. M3 velocity
falls 1 percent next year, slightly faster than its average rate of decline over the last four
Directive and Balance of Risks Language
(25) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for (1) the
directive and (2) the "balance of risks" sentence to be included in the press release issued
after the meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.
To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks
conditions in reserve markets consistent with MAINTAINING/increasing/
DECREASING the federal funds rate AT/to an average of around ___ [DEL: 6-1/2]
(2) "Balance of Risks" Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable
economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes
that the risks are [balanced with respect to prospects for both goals] [weighted
mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures]
[weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness] in the
foreseeable future.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. B Alt. C
M2 M3 Debt
Greenbook Forecast*
Monthly Growth Rates
Apr-2000
May-2000
Jun-2000
Jul-2000
Aug-2000
Sep-2000
Oct-2000
Nov-2000
Dec-2000
Quarterly Averages
1999 Q2
1999 Q3
1999 Q4
2000 Ql
2000 Q2
2000 Q3
2000 Q4
Growth Rate
From To
Sep-1999 Jun-2000
Dec-1999 Jun-2000
May-2000 Dec-2000
Jun-2000 Dec-2000
*This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
