Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) March 17, 2000
Class I -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Over the intermeeting period, private nominal interest rates and the foreign
exchange value of the dollar showed small mixed changes on balance, but most major equity
price indexes moved appreciably higher. The announcement of the Committee's decision to
raise the intended level of the federal funds rate 1/4 percentage point, to 5.75 percent, and of
its view that the risks are weighted toward heightened inflation pressures was widely
anticipated and had little impact on market yields.1 Market rates subsequently moved up in
response to generally strong incoming economic data and to the Chairman's Humphrey-
Hawkins testimony. Since then, however, rates on private intermediate-maturity instruments
have more than rolled back those increases. Perhaps taking their cue from the testimony,
market participants seemed particularly sensitive to the gyrations of equity prices, and many
of the declines in market yields occurred on days of substantial setbacks in the Dow Jones
Industrial Average. The drop in money market futures rates over the intermeeting period
would seem to suggest that those setbacks, along with subdued readings on inflation,
prompted reductions in expectations of Federal Reserve policy tightening. Still, those futures
rates continue to indicate that market participants see a 1/4 percentage point tightening at
this meeting as virtually certain, and two more moves of this size by September almost as
assured. However, participants appear to have reduced the odds of a move to a 6-3/4
percent federal funds rate by year-end. Underlying rate pressures also may have been
reduced somewhat by continued signs of improvement on the fiscal front. Even so, rates on
longer maturity and lower quality corporate bonds were up a bit over the intermeeting
period, while mortgage rates were unchanged. By contrast, thirty-year Treasury yields have
fallen over 40 basis points on net, in part reflecting the sharp response of market participants
to comments by the Treasury that were interpreted as implying substantial reductions in
bond supply going forward (chart 1). In equity markets, the Wilshire 5000 has risen 6-1/2
percent on balance over the intermeeting period, but narrower segments have registered
unusually diverse movements: In volatile markets, the Nasdaq moved up another 18 percent,
while the DJIA declined 4 percent.
(2) The foreign exchange value of the dollar is little changed over the
intermeeting period against a basket of major currencies and a touch weaker against the
currencies of other important trading partners. Monetary authorities in most other
industrial countries raised interest rates about in line with the Federal Reserve. Still, the
dollar has gained almost 1/2 percent against the euro, 1-3/4 percent against the Canadian
dollar, 2-3/4 percent against the British pound, and 4 percent relative to the Australian
dollar, as investors apparently revised down their expectations of the extent of monetary
tightening in many of these countries. Consistent with these revisions to expectations,
longer-term yields on government bonds have fallen 20 to 45 basis points. The evidence on
Chart 1
Interest and Exchange Rates
Selected Treasury Yield Curves
Percent
-- I
...........- 2/1/2000
- 3/17/2000
Selected Long-Term Interest Rates
Percent Percent
SBBB Corporate (left scale) FOMC
Jun Aug Oct Dec Feb
1999 2000
Selected Stock Indexes
lndex(6/1/99) = 100
Jun Aug Oct Dec Feb
1999 2000
Implied Federal Funds Rates Derived from
Financial Futures* Percent
-- 7.0
........ 2/1/2000 ... ***
3/17/2000 .**"
I I I I I
Apr Jun Aug
I I I I
Sept Dec Mar Jun
2000 2001
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures rates with an
allowance for term premia and other adjustments.
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Exchange Rates Index(6/1/99 = 100)
Average Stripped Brady Bond Spread*
Daily
--- Broad Index
- ----- Major Currencies Index
Other Important Trading
Partners
Jun Aug
1999
Oct Dec Feb
2000
May Aug Nov Feb May Aug Nov Feb
1998 1999 2000
*J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index, an average of stripped Brady
bond yields over comparable Treasuries for ten emerging market countries.
Basis points
the Japanese economy released over the intermeeting period was mixed and suggests, on
balance, that recovery has yet to gain a firm foothold in that country. Longer-term yields in
Japan drifted higher, equity prices stalled, and the yen appreciated about 1-1/2 percent
against the dollar. The strength of the yen prompted Japanese authorities to intervene,
purchasing dollars on two occasions and euros once, but those actions left no lasting
imprint on market prices. A brightening of prospects in Latin America--highlighted by
Moody's upgrade of Mexican foreign debt to investment grade--lent support to the
currencies of emerging markets. The dollar depreciated more than 2-3/4 percent against the
Mexican peso and 3-1/4 percent vis-a-vis the Brazilian real, and sovereign bond risk spreads
narrowed considerably further. Indeed, most Brady bond spreads have retreated to near
levels last seen around the time of Russia's default in August 1998. U.S. monetary
authorities did not intervene over the intermeeting period.
(3) Growth of the monetary aggregates decelerated in February, owing in part to
an unwinding of Y2K effects and the greater attractiveness of yields on credit market
instruments as a consequence of recent policy firmings (chart 2).2 In addition, surging prices
of technology-related equities may have encouraged shifts out of M2 into long-term mutual
Chart 2
Money and Bank Credit
Index Scale
9/13/00 = 100
- 106
- 105
- 104
S- 103
- 102
Weekly
Index scale
- 105
- 101
- 100
S O N D J F M S O N D J F M
Ratio Scale
Percentage Points
Q 1"
M2 Velocity
(left scale)
M2 Opportunity Cost*
(right scale)
*-*.............. ... * Q1"*."
* Two-quarter moving average. * estimated
Net Inflows to Bond and Equity Mutual Funds
(excluding reinvested dividends) $ billions
- 35
S* 30
.- 25
- 15
Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb
Bank Credit
Weekly (adjusted for
r mark-to-market effects)
Index scale
9/15/00 = 100
S O N D J F
1999 2000
Ratio Scale
funds.3 M2 growth, at an annual rate of only 2-1/4 percent in February, was slower than
projected at the time of the Committee's last meeting. In contrast, growth of M3, at a 4-1/4
percent rate, was a good bit faster than forecast at that time. With private credit demands
quite brisk, bank credit growth was stronger than forecast and was largely funded by stepped
up issuance of liabilities in M3. Moreover, contrary to expectations, U.S. branches and
agencies of foreign banks failed to unwind the shift to U.S. funding evident in advance of the
century date change.
(4) Growth of nonfinancial debt appears to have been slowed in the early months
of the year by a resumption of large federal debt paydowns following the sharp build-up of
Treasury balances prior to year-end. State and local borrowing also has been restrained, as
high interest rates have cooled advance refunding activity, and borrowing for new capital has
moderated, for now at least, apparently in response to strong tax inflows. Growth of private
debt, by contrast, appears to have remained brisk of late and has kept the expansion of total
nonfinancial debt in the upper end of its range. Increases in consumer loans and residential
mortgage debt have stayed particularly strong, financing a robust pace of household
expenditures and a still-elevated level of home purchases. Strong corporate funding needs
have been met in both equity and debt markets. Indeed, gross equity issuance has been
heavy enough of late to offset retirements through mergers and buyback programs for the
first time in several years.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Dec. Jan. Feb. Feb.2
Money and Credit Aggregates
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Adjusted1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal plus SLF borrowing
Excess reserves 1311
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Policy Alternatives
(5) The staff has responded to indications of stronger-than-expected
consumption and investment demand as well as faster productivity growth by boosting its
projection of economic expansion for the first half of this year. However, with policy
assumed to firm a bit more this year than in the January Greenbook, and private long-term
rates rising to a somewhat higher level than foreseen in January, growth over the rest of the
forecast period is projected to be a touch lower. As a consequence, resource utilization in
the forecast is little changed from January, with the unemployment rate staying around 4
percent this year and edging up in 2001. A higher path for oil prices leads to an appreciable
upward revision in total consumer inflation projected this year, but only to a small mark up
of core consumer inflation over the two years. Core measures are still seen to be on an
upward track, owing to the effects of the tight labor market and the recent rebound in energy
and import prices, and they would seem poised to move higher in 2002. Compared with the
central tendency of Committee members' forecasts last month, the staff sees appreciably
faster growth of real GDP in 2000, though with the same unemployment rate at year-end as
the Committee, and a bigger pickup in overall PCE inflation, with the latter presumably
mostly reflecting higher oil prices.
(6) While the recent increases in oil prices do not leave much of a lasting imprint
on the staff outlook, should those prices persist near current levels--rather than decline
substantially as in the staff forecast--their possible effects would presumably become more
important in monetary policy deliberations. Sustained higher energy prices would tend to
boost inflation, not only through their direct near-term contribution to overall price indexes
but also through secondary ripple effects on core price indexes over time. However, the rise
in oil prices also would tend to damp aggregate demand as higher expenditures on imported
energy cut into domestic spending and foreign oil exporters recycle only part of their
additional receipts from the United States as purchases of U.S.-produced goods and services.
Consequently, in the context of Taylor-type monetary policy responses that give weight to
deviations of both output and inflation from long-term levels, the direction of the effect on
the desired real federal funds rate depends on the relative sizes of the changes in the two
gaps. In FRB/US simulations, the core inflation rate rises by more in percentage point terms
than the output gap declines if the path of real interest rates is kept unchanged.4 Under the
standard specification of the Taylor rule, this outcome would call for an increase in the real
federal funds rate. However, the size of the effects on inflation and output from even a
sustained higher level of oil prices are small, in part because oil now has a relatively modest
weight in the economy. Thus, the path of the real funds rate may not need to be much
different from the one the Committee would otherwise have followed. There are substantial
risks on either side of this result, however. On the one hand, real rates would need to be
lowered if the surge in oil prices persists and erodes consumer and business confidence and
equity values, thereby exerting a more substantial negative effect on output than in the
simulations. On the other hand, higher real rates would be indicated should elevated oil
prices trigger a more appreciable rise in inflation expectations than in the simulations--a
possibility that might be thought more likely given that prices and unit labor costs already
come under pressure from tight labor markets in the staff forecast. Even if higher energy
prices do not add appreciably to long-term inflation expectations, short-term expectations
could well be increased by the higher realized overall inflation. If they are, holding the real
funds rate along a given path would require a higher nominal federal funds rate than
otherwise. Indeed, this was an important reason for the upward adjustment in the federal
funds rate path assumed in the Greenbook.
(7) The Committee may agree that the risks to the inflation outlook are on the
upside, but still wish to stand pat on policy for the time being, as in alternative B. Such a
choice could allow it to better judge whether more near-term tightening is needed or whether
the restraining effects on aggregate demand of previous tightening actions will prove to be
sufficient to bring growth in aggregate demand into reasonable balance with that of potential
supply. Indeed, the amount of slowing required in the growth of output may not be large if
more of the extraordinary growth of productivity over the last few quarters persists than has
been allowed for in the staff forecast--the very rapid growth of activity since mid-year
produced only small declines in the unemployment rate and in the pool of available labor.
Even if the growth of aggregate demand fails to come into balance with that of potential
supply quickly enough to avoid some intensification of strains on resources, the costs of
waiting in terms of faster price increases still might be minimal if structural productivity
continues to accelerate over the next couple of years. The acceleration of structural
productivity would hold down unit labor costs and, with profits running high, competition
would continue to contain business "pricing power." Thus, inflation would remain damped
for some time even with a constant nominal federal funds rate, although, to be sure, a higher
real funds rate would ultimately be required to align market interest rates with improved
returns on capital investments and greater wealth-induced consumption. In effect, the
Committee would be allowing the economy to realize the gains from the extra productivity
growth mainly in temporarily higher output rather than lower inflation.
(8) Keeping the federal funds rate unchanged at 5-3/4 percent would come as a
considerable surprise to financial markets, in that both incoming data and the statements of
the Federal Reserve have reinforced market participants' previous expectation that the
Committee would firm by 1/4 percentage point at this meeting. The resulting rally in bond
and stock markets and decline in the exchange rate would likely be tempered by retention of
language in the press release pointing to the risk of higher inflation. Although keeping
policy unchanged would prompt some confusion about the Committee's intentions and its
strategy, it is likely that market participants would see the next tightening action as merely
postponed, although they also would tend to trim their expectations of the cumulative
amount of tightening in prospect.
(9) Any unwinding of the current degree of restraint in financial markets, which
incorporates 25 basis points of tightening at this meeting, might be viewed by the
Committee as exacerbating the risk of economic overheating. With little evidence in hand
that spending is moderating appreciably, aggregate demand still seems to be expanding more
rapidly than even optimistic estimates of the growth of potential aggregate supply. In these
circumstances, the Committee's assessment of the inflation risks may be such that it favors
an immediate tightening of policy, perhaps by raising the federal funds rate another 1/4
percentage point as in alternative C. The Committee might believe it especially important
to provide continuing evidence of its vigilance as the effect on inflation of the recent surge
in oil prices plays out in coming months. Even if the Committee anticipates that
considerably more policy firming will be needed eventually to contain inflation pressures, it
may still favor the gradual approach embodied in alternative C in light of the considerable
uncertainty about aggregate supply and about the effect of the substantial run-up in short-
and long-term interest rates in recent quarters on aggregate demand. Such gradualism also
may hold appeal because financial markets have been edgy and are potentially vulnerable to
an unexpectedly large policy move.
(10) If the Committee were to choose alternative C, it presumably would also want
to convey to market participants that the balance of risks remains tilted toward inflation.
Such a combination, because it is widely expected, would tend to have little effect on fixed-
income yields and the exchange value of the dollar. Very broad measures of equity prices
over the intermeeting period would be expected to fluctuate near recent levels.
Preannouncements and announcements of corporate earnings will pick up steam in the
weeks ahead, likely keeping volatility in equity markets elevated, which could possibly feed
back on interest rates in a manner similar to recent experience.
(11) The Committee may believe that financial markets have underestimated the
full extent of the policy firming required to keep inflation from picking up. Alternative D
would raise the federal funds rate 50 basis points. Such an action, particularly if
accompanied by an announcement conveying the Committee's view that the balance of risks
remains tilted toward inflation, would prompt a substantial realignment of financial prices
that might be seen by the Committee as more likely to be consistent with a sustainable
trajectory of economic activity. Market participants probably would expect more cumulative
policy firming, boosting interest rates across the maturity spectrum, especially at the front
end of the yield curve. Such prospects for tighter monetary policy and greater restraint on
spending should raise credit risk premiums on corporate bonds and weaken equity prices.
The argument for a substantial tightening in financial conditions would have particular force
if the Committee, like the staff, viewed labor utilization rates as too high to be sustained.
Indeed, in the staff forecast, the assumption of even more tightening than currently evident
in futures rates is still inadequate to keep core inflation from trending higher. Moreover, a
steeper path for the real funds rate might be seen as necessary to counter a risk of a
ratcheting up of longer-term inflation expectations owing to the recent surge in oil prices.
Even if the Committee only wanted to ensure that it was preserving the upward path for the
real federal funds rate that a number of Committee members seemed to have been
contemplating in February, the possible effects of the further jump in oil prices on short-
term inflation expectations suggest that something more than a 1/4 percentage point rise in
the nominal rate might be needed.
(12) The monetary aggregates are projected to accelerate a little from their growth
rates early this year, when they were depressed by the unwinding of Y2K effects.
Nonetheless, expansion of the aggregates, particularly M2, should be restrained by the
influence of earlier policy tightenings, even under the unchanged federal funds rate of
alternative B. Growth rates of M2 in coming months are likely to be erratic, owing to the
effects of the shifting timing of tax refunds and the likely surge in payments, but on average
this aggregate is projected to expand at a rate of 6-1/4 percent over the February-to-June
period under alternative B. With nominal GDP expanding faster than M2, M2 velocity
would increase at a 1-3/4 percent pace in both the first and the second quarters. By June,
M2 would be 5-1/2 percent at an annual rate above its fourth-quarter 1999 base, somewhat
above the upper end of its annual range. Buoyed by rapid bank credit growth, expansion of
M3 is projected at an 8 percent rate over the February-to-June period, keeping this aggregate
well above the upper end of its annual range. Indeed, by June, M3 would be 8 percent at an
annual rate above its fourth-quarter base, compared with the 6 percent upper end of its
(13) Meanwhile, domestic nonfinancial debt is projected to expand at a 5 percent
annual rate over the January-to-June interval, down from the 6 percent pace around year-
end. Paydowns of federal debt are expected to increase, aided by projected large individual
tax receipts in April. Some cooling off in growth of consumer outlays is projected to
restrain expansion in household debt, though the advance of such debt will continue to
outpace that of disposable personal income. With the financing gap remaining elevated,
growth in business debt is expected to persist at a fairly brisk pace even though strong
issuance of equity by firms will be acting to hold down business borrowing. Under the
conditions embodied in the staff forecast, lenders and investors are likely to be a little more
cautious in providing credit but not enough to make much of a dent in spending or
borrowing. By June, total domestic nonfinancial debt would stand just above the midpoint
of its 3 to 7 percent annual range.
Directive and Balance of Risks Language
(14) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording relating to
(1) the new abbreviated directive and (2) the "balance of risks" sentence to be included in
the press release issued after the meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in
reserve markets consistent with MAINTAINING/increasing/DECREASING the
federal funds rate AT/to an average of around ___ [DEL: 5-3/4] percent.
(2) "Balance of Risks" Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable
economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes
that the risks are [balanced with respect to prospects for both goals] [weighted
mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures]
[weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness] in the
foreseeable future.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
M2 M3 Debt
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D All Alternatives
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent) March 20, 2000
Monthly
Mar 99
Apr 99
May 99
Jun 99
Jul 99
Aug 99
Sep 99
Oct 99
Nov 99
Dec 99
Jan 00
Feb 00
Weekly
Jan 14 00
Jan 21 00
Jan 28 00
Feb 4 00
Feb 11 00
Feb 18 00
Feb 25 00
Mar 3 00
Mar 10 00
Mar 17 00
Daily
Mar 1 00
Mar 2 00
Mar 3 00
Mar 6 00
Mar 7 00
Mar 8 00
Mar 9 00
Mar 10 00
Mar 13 00
Mar 14 00
Mar 15 00
Mar 16 00
Mar 17 00
p - preliminary data MFMA:IXA
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Debt Aggregates Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted March 20, 2000
Money stock measures Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactions components
Period M1 M2 M3 U.S. o t h e r  total
In M2 In M3 only government'
Levele (Mbillions):
Monthly
Weekly
2000-Feb. 7 1106.3 4689.6 3583.3 1835.1 6524.7
Mar. 6p 1106.9 4695.6 3588.7 1885.7 6581.3
p preliminary
March 17, 2000
Weekly
December 15
March 1
8
15
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
March 15
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES
1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
I Treasurycoupons
- 2,000 -2,000
3,550 --- 3,550
)64 1,014
150 3,514
- 160
- 10,337
- 1,893
-- 960
170 -170
--- 2,903
--- 6,802
________________ ___________________________I _____________________________________________
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
