Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) August 18, 2000
Class II -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The FOMC's decision at its June meeting to leave the target federal funds rate
unchanged and to retain a statement judging the balance of risks as weighted toward inflation
came as little surprise to market participants.1 However, investors interpreted the
announcement of the FOMC's decision and the Chairman's monetary policy testimony as
emphasizing signs of a moderation in the growth of economic activity. Against that
backdrop, economic data releases over the intermeeting period were viewed on net as
confirming that demand growth was slowing to a sustainable pace and price pressures would
remain damped, and investors marked down their expected level of the funds rate next year
by about 25 basis points (chart 1). Futures markets have priced in virtually no chance of a
tightening at the August meeting and little change in the federal funds rate over the next
(2) The downward revision over the intermeeting period in investors' expectations
for the path of the target funds rate contributed to a modest easing in domestic financial
conditions, on net. Nominal Treasury coupon yields dropped 20 to 30 basis points, while
the ten-year Treasury inflation-indexed yield shed about 5 basis points. The narrowing
spread of nominal over real Treasury yields suggests some decline in inflation compensation,
though survey measures of long-term inflation expectations were little changed. Corporate
bond yields also fell, but generally not by as much as Treasuries. The resulting slight
widening in spreads did not seem to reflect an increased reluctance to bear risk. Investors
purchased sizable offerings of new private bonds, including longer-term issues and lower-tier
credits, as well as both seasoned and initial public offerings of equities. Still, looking over a
somewhat longer period, investors do seem to have become more cautious: Risk spreads for
lower-rated firms are at fairly high levels historically and are a good bit wider now than they
were earlier this year; similarly, banks have reported tightening their terms and standards on
business loans throughout the year. With interest rates down over the most recent
intermeeting period, broad stock price indexes rose 1-1/2 to 3 percent.
(3) The dollar firmed on balance in foreign exchange markets, even though
interest-rate differentials moved against assets denominated in dollars relative to those
denominated in the currencies of other industrial countries. Within the major currency
index, the dollar appreciated about 2-3/4 percent against the yen and 4 percent against the
euro. The Bank of Japan raised its policy rate 25 basis points on August 11 in the face of
objections from the rest of the government, ending the zero-interest-rate policy that had
prevailed for about eighteen months. This move mostly brought forward tightening that had
already been embedded in market prices, and intermediate- and longer-term Japanese yields
changed little, on balance, over the intermeeting period. Japanese equity prices rallied after
the policy tightening, but still declined about 6 percent over the past eight weeks, perhaps
reacting to a rising level of bankruptcies, including that of a prominent retailer. The
European Central Bank has kept policy on hold in recent months, but officials have been
hinting broadly that more tightening is in store given the vigor in spending along with the
uptick in inflation and weakness in the euro. Still, longer-term yields are down 5 to 10 basis
points across Europe, and equity prices have posted mixed changes. There was no
intervention by U.S. monetary authorities over the intermeeting period.
.The exchange value of the dollar depreciated
a little on net against the currencies of other important trading partners, paced by a
substantial rise in the exchange value of the Mexican peso. Prospects brightened in Mexico
on the promise of a peaceful transition of power following the opposition party's victory in
the presidential election along with strength in economic data and higher oil prices.
Emerging market bond spreads narrowed further, with the Mexican spread shedding 75 basis
(4) The moderation in the growth of private spending in the second quarter and
the tightening in financial conditions through May did not seem to affect the pace of
borrowing materially this spring. Growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt in the second
quarter is estimated at a 5-1/4 percent rate, only a touch below that in the first quarter. The
slight slowdown was entirely accounted for by a faster paydown of federal debt; private
borrowing remained quite brisk. In the household sector, growth of mortgage debt and
consumer credit was robust. Borrowing by nonfinancial corporations was boosted by
continued strong investment spending and an upturn in cash-financed mergers and
acquisitions. Partial data for July and early August from banks and securities markets suggest
the pace of household and business borrowing may have moderated somewhat more
recently, in part reflecting a reduced amount of equity retirements.
(5) The growth of M2 has slowed on average in recent months. M2 expanded at a
this month, but only to about a 5 percent pace. The stepdown in monetary expansion most
likely reflects the widening opportunity costs of holding assets in M2 stemming from recent
policy tightenings and perhaps also the slowdown in consumption growth. On average over
the past three months, M2 has been running about in line with the pace that would be
expected from our standard monthly M2 demand model, given actual interest rates and
Greenbook estimates and projections of income. M3 accelerated in July, advancing at a 9
percent clip, and partial data suggest growth at about that rate in August. In large part, the
spurt in M3 growth has been propelled by inflows to institutional money funds.
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Dec. 1999
to
May June July July1
Money and Credit Aggregates
S39 and
1. For nonfinancial debt and its components, December 1999 to June.
2. Adjusted to remove the effects of mark-to-market accounting rules (FIN
FASB 115).
3. Adjusted for discontinuities associated with changes in reserve requirements.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(6) The staffs forecasts of the growth rates of structural labor productivity and
potential GDP through 2001 have been raised noticeably. As a consequence, though the
projected expansion of actual GDP also has been boosted, the unemployment rate edges up
to a slightly higher level than in the last forecast. The higher unemployment rate and the
damping effects of faster productivity growth on unit labor costs trim the pickup in core
inflation relative to the previous forecast. Still, as in the last Greenbook, conditions are such
that inflation is poised to continue to rise beyond the forecast horizon, and the staff has
retained its assumption that the federal funds rate will be increased 3/4 percentage point by
the end of 2001. However, the staff now assumes that these policy actions will be deferred
until next year, when inflation prospects become more evident. As policy begins to firm and
market participants come to realize that the build-up of inflationary pressures will require
considerable additional tightening, private bond and mortgage rates are anticipated to rise by
an amount roughly comparable to the assumed rise in the funds rate, and equity prices are
expected to stay around current levels. In contrast to the June Greenbook, the staff
projection for real GDP growth for 2001 is somewhat above the central tendency of
Committee members' projections reported to the Congress last month. Nonetheless, with
the staff now also forecasting faster growth of potential output, its projections of the
unemployment rate and total PCE inflation for next year remain consistent with the
Committee members' central tendencies.
(7) Recent data on spending, productivity, and labor costs could well be seen by
the Committee as on balance supporting a decision to leave the federal funds rate target
unchanged at 6-1/2 percent, as in alternative B. Signs of an appreciable moderation in
aggregate demand growth no longer seem to be just "tentative and preliminary," and unit
labor costs point toward little near-term pressure on inflation. Indeed, the growth of
aggregate demand may have already slowed enough to keep the unemployment rate from
falling, even before the effects on the economy of previous policy firmings and the flattening
in equity prices have fully played out. The conviction that aggregate demand is now growing
in line with the expansion of potential output would be strengthened if the Committee found
plausible the staff's upward revision to the rate of increase in productivity. However, even if
the current level of resource utilization holds for a time, whether that level will ultimately
prove sustainable remains an open question. In the meantime, with costs contained and
long-term inflation expectations stable or even drifting a bit lower, the Committee might
expect to incur little economic cost by awaiting more information to help answer that
(8) Although the odds that pressures on resources will not intensify may seem
better balanced now than they did eight weeks ago, the Committee may still see the risks as
tilted toward an unacceptable inflation outcome, given the persisting strength in elements of
aggregate demand, the low unemployment rate, and the somewhat elevated current rate of
core inflation. The choice of alternative B, accompanied by a sentence conveying a balance
of risks weighted in an inflationary direction, would accord with the expectations of market
participants. No significant immediate response would be forthcoming in financial markets.
Under the staff forecast, economic data over the intermeeting period are likely to continue to
indicate moderate demand growth and contained inflation and thus should have little net
effect on market prices.
(9) The 25 basis point increase in the targeted funds rate of alternative C would
seem appropriate if the inflation forecasted by the staff were seen as likely and unacceptable.
It might be viewed as unacceptable in part because the already prevailing core CPI inflation
rate of 2-1/2 percent in the Greenbook may be judged to be inconsistent with the Federal
Reserve's longer-run objective of effective price stability. Even if the Committee were
willing to tolerate such a rate of price increase for a while, inflation is headed higher in the
staff forecast in that the economy already has overshot the levels of output and employment
that are sustainable in the longer run. In such circumstances, delaying needed policy firming
could allow inflationary pressures to build, eventually requiring a more disruptive policy
tightening and economic slowdown to achieve the same long-run inflation outcome. Aside
from the current level of resource utilization, the Committee may see significant upside risks
to inflation. Oil prices have remained stubbornly high, and the decline projected by the staff
may not materialize, eliminating a source of prospective price restraint and perhaps inducing
a ratcheting-up of inflation expectations. In addition, the restraint on aggregate demand put
in place by the Committee's prior tightenings has been offset to some extent by the recent
rally in capital markets, and prospective increases in productivity growth may boost wealth
and expected earnings even more than they have already, especially if real interest rates lie
below the higher marginal product of capital.
(10) The choice of alternative C would surprise market participants, raising
questions about the path for monetary policy going forward. Market participants might
wonder whether the Committee has read incoming data as more worrisome than they
themselves have or whether the Committee was intent on attaining a lower inflation
objective than investors previously perceived. The resulting upward adjustment to
participants' impression of the degree of future monetary policy restraint that is likely to be
implemented would be especially pronounced if the Committee retained a balance-of-risks
sentence emphasizing inflationary concerns. Bond rates, particularly in real terms, could be
expected to rise along with short-term yields, the dollar would probably appreciate further,
and stock prices would adjust downward. Conversely, a switch to a sentence conveying a
balanced set of risks would foster a much greater sense of certainty in markets that the peak
in short-term rates had been reached. In this case, the immediate price response in financial
markets would be tempered, apart from an upward adjustment of short-term rates of around
(11) With no change in the funds rate over the rest of the year in the staff forecast,
the growth of the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to slow to a 4-1/2
percent annual rate over the June-to-December period after its 5-1/2 percent pace over the
first six months of the year. The deceleration owes to a slowdown of nonfederal debt
growth to a 7-1/2 percent rate from 9 percent from December to June. Both a moderation
in the growth of nominal spending on consumer durables and fixed investment in the second
half of the year and a slowing in equity retirements lead to some abatement of private-sector
borrowing. The paydown of federal debt is foreseen as continuing at a similar pace over the
last six months of the year, as the federal budget remains in surplus. In the staff forecast, M2
is expected to grow at a 4-3/4 percent annual rate over the five-month period from July to
December, a step-up from the pace of the last three months as the effects of previous
increases in market interest rates wane.
Directive and Balance of Risks Language
(12) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for (1) the
directive and (2) the "balance of risks" sentence to be included in the press release issued
after the meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-
run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/DECREASING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around ____ [DEL: 6-1/2] percent.
(2) "Balance of Risks" Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable
economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes that the
risks are [balanced with respect to prospects for both goals] [weighted mainly toward
conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures] [weighted mainly toward
conditions that may generate economic weakness] in the foreseeable future.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. B Alt. C
M2 M3 Debt
Greenbook Forecast*
Monthly Growth Rates
Jun-2000
Jul-2000
Aug-2000
Sep-2000
Oct-2000
Nov-2000
Dec-2000
Growth Rate
From To
1999 Q4 Jul-2000
Dec-1999 Jul-2000
Jul-2000 Dec-2000
*This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
August 21, 2000
Monthly
Aug 99
Sep 99
Oct 99
Nov 99
Dec 99
Jan 00
Feb 00
Mar 00
Apr 00
May 00
Jun 00
Jul 00
Short-term Long-term
CDs Conventional home
Federal Treasury bills secondary Comm. U.S. government constant Indexed yields Moody's Municipal mortgagesFederal secondary market market paper maturity yields Bond primary market
p - preliminary data MFMA:JWR
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Money and Debt Aggregates 
Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted August 21, 2000
Money stock measures Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactionscomponents
U. S.Period M1 M2 M3 other' total'In M2 In M3 only government'
Levels (Sbillions):
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Strictly Confidential
Class II FOMC
August 18, 2000
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs ~
Agency total
Feb
Mar
Jun
Jul
May 31
Jun 7
Jun 14
Jun 21
Jun 28
Jul 5
Jul 12
Jul 19
Jul 26
Aug 2
Aug 9
Aug 16
Aug 18
Intermeeting Period
Jun 27-Aug 18
Memo LEVEL (bll $)
Auo 18
--- 160
--- 740
R7 R 131
acquired in exchange for maturing bills Excludes maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing issues
- 6,802
o A n c:617 I vI
--- 2,393
om ~i
