Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) January 28, 2000
Class I -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) In the days immediately after the December FOMC meeting, the Trading
Desk continued to conduct a large volume of open market operations, particularly forward
and term repurchase agreements, that brought total repurchase agreements outstanding to
$141 billion by the end of the year. These operations were necessary to offset reserve drains
induced by buildups in currency in circulation, the Treasury's balance at the Federal Reserve,
and the pool of temporary investment orders from foreign central banks. On several days
before year-end, the federal funds rate was below target when the Desk entered the market,
leading some observers to conjecture that the Federal Reserve was "flooding the market with
liquidity" as insurance against potential Y2K problems. On these days, the funds rate tended
to firm in late trading when aggregate reserve supply proved to be less plentiful than market
participants had thought. Since the turn of the year, a bit more than three-quarters of the
Y2K bulge in currency has flowed back to the Federal Reserve and other factors have
returned to more typical levels. The Desk mopped up these additions to reserves by allowing
repurchase agreements to mature without replacement and by arranging several matched
sale-purchase transactions. Operating balances reached very low levels on some days, and
funds rate volatility was elevated, but, in general, the effective rate has been close to the
target since the turn of the year.1 Borrowing from the Special Liquidity Facility was
substantial on only two days over the intermeeting period, and none of the options auctioned
under the Special Financing Facility was exercised. In general, financial markets weathered
the turn of the year well, reflecting in part the cumulative effect of Federal Reserve initiatives
to stave off potential Y2K dislocations. Although the RP rate on Treasury collateral dipped
well below the funds rate and bid-asked spreads in the RP and funds market spiked around
year-end, they quickly returned to more normal configurations. Activity in the markets for
Treasury and corporate securities dropped as year-end approached and subsequently
recovered, but the magnitude of the swings did not differ much from other year-end periods.
(2) Market participants generally anticipated both the FOMC's decision at the
December meeting to leave the stance of policy unchanged and the announcement's
implication that the Committee would be inclined to tighten in February; hence, yields on
coupon securities showed little change that day. Against the background of the Federal
Reserve's expression of concern about the unsustainable pace of economic expansion and
the uneventful passing of the century date change, evidence that aggregate demand retained
considerable momentum pressured market interest rates higher over most of the
intermeeting period. Today, after publication of unexpectedly high readings on
compensation and GDP inflation, most Treasury yields initially rose and private security
prices tumbled. However, as risk spreads widened, the dollar strengthened, and equity prices
fell, something of a flight to quality ensued and Treasury yields reversed course. On balance,
yields on Treasury notes have risen 30 to 40 basis points since the last FOMC meeting, while
the yield on the thirty-year bond is unchanged, and the yield curve now slopes downward
past the five-year maturity. Expectations of changes in relative supplies associated with
agency issuance and the Treasury buyback program and technical factors relating to efforts to
rebalance portfolios contributed to the pivoting of the yield curve. Even with today's
widening of risk spreads, yields on investment grade corporate bonds rose less than Treasury
yields, especially after market participants saw that the century date change had passed
without serious dislocations. Most risk spreads have now more than reversed their runup
Stock prices were quite volatile over the intermeeting period, with tech stocks and other
shares often exhibiting disparate movements day-by-day. Reflecting the countervailing
influences of stronger-than-expected earnings but generally rising interest rates, broad stock
price indexes fell slightly on balance while tech-heavy indexes rose sharply.
(3) The foreign exchange value of the dollar had shown little net change over the
intermeeting period against indexes of both major foreign currencies and those of other
important trading partners. Today, however, the dollar appreciated 1-1/2 percent against
major foreign currencies, as expectations built for more substantial Federal Reserve
tightening. On net over the intermeeting period, the dollar gained 4-1/4 percent against the
yen and 3 percent relative to the euro, but it depreciated around 1 percent vis-a-vis the
British pound and 2 percent against the Canadian dollar. Long-term interest rates in
industrial countries-with the notable exception of Japan-rose appreciably, boosted by
evidence that the economic expansion in Europe had found firmer footing. Against that
backdrop, market participants became increasingly confident that policy tightening would be
forthcoming. Indeed, judging by money market futures, expectations are for official rate
hikes by the European Central Bank of about 1 percentage point over the next year, only a
little less than for the United States. The Bank of England actually tightened, citing
concerns about inflation pressures as justification for a 1/4 percentage point increase in its
repurchase rate on January 13. In Japan, in sharp contrast, market participants apparently
saw little news in recent weeks to lead them to believe that the Bank of Japan will change its
zero-interest-rate policy any time soon as economic recovery there continues to proceed in
fits and starts. Japanese long-term yields edged lower over the intermeeting period,
supporting the dollar. Japanese monetary authorities intervened to weaken the yen on two
days early in the period.
; U.S. monetary authorities
did not intervene. Financial market conditions in emerging market economies generally
improved further over the intermeeting period, with sovereign debt spreads narrowing and
equity prices rising.
(4) M2 growth rose to a 7-1/4 percent annual rate in December and edged up
further to an 8-1/4 percent pace in January.3 Growth over the two months was above that
expected at the time of the December Committee meeting. Extra demands for liquidity and
safety may have added a little to M2 growth in December and, through the monthly
averaging process, to January as well. However, there were more substantial, though largely
offsetting, influences on M2 components. Currency in the hands of the public expanded
rapidly in the second half of December, and, as depositors exchanged money in the bank for
money in their pockets, liquid deposits in M2 weakened. In January, the public ran down its
currency holdings, but at a gradual rate, and liquid deposits have rebounded in recent weeks.
(5) M3 was more affected by Y2K positioning than M2. Issuance of large time
deposits exploded in the fourth quarter of 1999 for several reasons: Banks wanted to build
up their liquid assets, many faced very high credit demands that needed to be funded, and
institutional depositors saw banks as safe harbors in which to ride out the century date
change. In addition, institutional money funds surged because firms viewed them as
convenient parking places for some of their extra precautionary liquid balances. Overall, M3
growth reached an annual rate of 16-1/2 percent in December. A pronounced deceleration
in large time deposits helped bring the growth of M3 in January down to 8-3/4 percent.
Banks have seen demands for credit ease considerably in January, especially in the
components (business and security loans) most likely to have been affected by Y2K.4
(6) Total domestic nonfinancial debt is estimated to have grown 6-1/4 percent in
the fourth quarter of 1999, including a growth rate of 7 percent in December. To some
extent, borrowing was boosted late in the year by desires to build liquid assets. This was
clearly the case for the federal sector, as the runoff in debt came to a temporary halt in
December to allow the Treasury to build up its cash balance. Paydowns resumed in January
and included the redemption of $54 billion in cash management bills. Nonfederal debt is
estimated to have increased at an 8-1/2 percent annual rate in December, in line with its rate
of growth over the second half of 1999. Thus far this year, nonfinancial businesses have
returned to credit markets albeit somewhat tentatively to bond markets, as issuers have
pulled back in response to the rise in bond yields. Households appear to have taken on
consumer debt at a more rapid pace in December, in line with reports of exceptionally strong
holiday sales, and commercial bank data for January indicate that consumer loans are still
expanding briskly. Home mortgage debt apparently has continued to grow rapidly in recent
months despite an increase of more than a percentage point in mortgage interest rates over
the past year. Responses to the January Senior Loan Officer Survey, however, provided
some evidence of slowing demand for home mortgages.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Dec. Jan. 1999:Q4 Jan.
Money and Credit Aggregates
Ml
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Adjusted 1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal plus SLF borrowing
Excess reserves 1311
Longer-Term Strategies
(7) This section considers alternative longer-term strategies for monetary policy
and examines some aspects of conducting monetary policy in a setting of elevated
uncertainty about the supply side of the economy.
(8) The first set of scenarios, presented in Chart 3, starts with a baseline that
judgmentally extends the Greenbook forecast. Then, the FRB/US model is used to
examine policies designed to achieve alternative rates of inflation over the longer run.5 On
the supply side of the economy, in all three scenarios the long-run NAIRU is about 5-1/4
percent and growth of potential output is initially around 4 percent, as in the Greenbook.
However, labor productivity growth begins to slow at mid-decade as the pace of capital
accumulation (and the rate of increase in services that capital provides) moderates.6
(9) Among the factors affecting aggregate demand, the federal budget surplus as a
percent of nominal GDP is assumed to decline slowly on a NIPA basis from a peak of a bit
less than 2-1/2 percent next year to about 1-1/2 percent at the end of the decade.7
Household demand is affected importantly by a projected decrease in the ratio of household
wealth to GDP. In part, this occurs because the personal saving rate is currently too low to
maintain wealth-to-income ratios absent rising asset prices. In addition, the value of
corporate equity falls relative to GDP owing to higher real interest rates, slowing
productivity growth, and a decline in the profit share of output. Ultimately, as household
wealth declines relative to income, the personal saving rate rebounds to 4 percent by the end
of the decade. Growth of foreign activity is about in line with that of the U.S. economy.
Because the income elasticity of imports in the United States is much higher than in its
trading partners, the U.S. current account deficit would continue to widen without
significant dollar depreciation. As a result, portfolio balance considerations are assumed to
lead to a modest secular depreciation of the real foreign exchange value of the dollar over
the remainder of the decade, at about the same annual rate built into the Greenbook for
(10) Although dollar depreciation and the decline in the federal budget surplus put
upward pressure on equilibrium interest rates, those effects are more than offset by a rising
personal saving rate and slowing productivity growth in the last half of the decade. Over
the next few years, however, the equilibrium rate remains at an exceptionally high level,
having been elevated by the acceleration in productivity and wealth-induced declines in the
saving rate in recent years.
(11) In the baseline scenario, shown by the solid lines in Chart 3, core PCE
inflation continues to rise beyond the Greenbook horizon, as the unemployment rate is a
percentage point below the NAIRU at the beginning of 2002. The Committee is assumed
to lean against this upward drift in inflation by tightening policy further to slowly push the
unemployment rate up to the NAIRU by mid-decade. This policy entails raising the
nominal federal funds rate to 8 percent by the end of 2004, an action that pushes the real
funds rate up to 5-1/4 percent-a little beyond the 5 percent equilibrium real rate.8
Consequently, the unemployment rate increases to the NAIRU in 2006, allowing inflation to
stabilize at just under 3 percent.
(12) In the stable inflation scenario, shown by the dot-dashed lines, the
Committee seeks to maintain core PCE inflation close to its current rate of 2 percent.
Continuing to increase the funds rate in 2001 by almost a further percentage point-rather
than leaving it unchanged, as in the Greenbook forecast-accomplishes this objective. This
preemptive action raises the real rate and weakens aggregate spending enough to boost the
unemployment rate somewhat above the long-run NAIRU. Such slack is needed for a while
to offset the inflationary impetus of the initial leveling off, and later moderation, in
productivity growth.
(13) The price stability scenario, shown by the dotted lines, brings core PCE
inflation down to 3/4 percent - close to the estimated measurement bias in this price index.
To achieve price stability, the Committee is seen to start raising the nominal funds rate
immediately, to a peak of about 7-3/4 percent by late next year. This policy yields a much
steeper and higher trajectory of real interest rates, pushing the unemployment rate up to
the economy does not come close to falling into recession in this scenario; the faster growth
of potential that has developed in recent years means that a substantial rise in the
unemployment rate can occur even with a significantly positive pace of economic
expansion. As inflation approaches its target, policy eases and real interest rates drift back
down to their equilibrium level, leading to a drift down in unemployment back to the
(14) In the stable-inflation and price-stability scenarios, the Committee is assumed
to choose a smooth trajectory for the nominal federal funds rate that minimizes the squared
deviations of the expected paths of future inflation from its target rate and of
unemployment from the NAIRU. In this process, the current funds rate is set based on
estimates of the NAIRU and productivity growth going forward (as well as on forecasts of
other factors). However, given the experience of the past several years, both of these
supply-side estimates are subject to outsized uncertainty. The Committee might respond to
this heightened uncertainty by placing less emphasis on forecasts and by downweighting the
importance of economic indicators whose interpretation is contingent on knowledge of the
NAIRU or trend productivity growth.
(15) Chart 4 shows that under the circumstances portrayed in the Greenbook, a
policy looking only at recent inflation developments can do reasonably well at stabilizing the
economy, although not as well as one using forecasts of economic conditions based on
accurate assessments of the supply side. With the realized-inflation rule (shown by the
dotted lines), the Committee is seen as changing the nominal federal funds rate in response
to the realized change in inflation and to deviations of current inflation from a long-run
target of 2 percent.9 The forecast-based strategy (the solid lines) is the same as the "stable
inflation" scenario of Chart 3, and is re-labeled to highlight its dependence on forecasts of
future conditions that in addition are assumed to be accurate. Because under the realized-
inflation rule the policymaker does not use as much information about the state of the
economy, that rule produces greater fluctuations in inflation and unemployment, but the
differences are contained and do not persist. To do even this well, however, the funds rate
must react very strongly to inflation data. In the rule shown, the nominal funds rate is more
than twice as sensitive in the short run to a change in inflation as it is in the standard Taylor
(16) It is also useful to examine how such a strategy performs in a variety of
situations in which developments do not conform with expectations. Charts 5, 6, and 7
Percentage points
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
- Taylor Rule
...... Realized-Inflation Rule
compare the behavior of the economy in three such situations under the realized-inflation
rule and under the Taylor rule. The Taylor rule also relies on current inflation data, but in
addition includes responses to the perceived current value of the output gap and the
estimated equilibrium real interest rate.
(17) Chart 5 portrays a situation in which the current NAIRU is, and for some
time has been, 4 percent. A policymaker who knew the true values of the NAIRU and
potential GDP could do quite well by responding to movements in both output and
inflation, as indicated by the solid lines showing the performance of the Taylor rule without
measurement error. In contrast, the dot-dashed lines illustrate a situation in which the
policymaker incorrectly estimates the NAIRU to be 5-1/4 percent, but gradually lowers this
estimate to 4 percent as inflation persistently comes in below expectations.10 Initially, owing
to the misestimation of the NAIRU, the policymaker tightens inappropriately to raise real
interest rates and unemployment to their perceived equilibrium levels. The resultant
overshoot in unemployment and undershoot in inflation is only slowly eliminated. As
indicated by the dotted line, the realized-inflation rule also would prescribe a substantial
increase in the funds rate this year, because of the 1/2 percentage point pickup in core
inflation. However, as time passes and inflation declines, responding to actual inflation
would lead to a fairly prompt reversal of policy, and the unemployment rate could thereby
be kept much closer to 4 percent and inflation held more tightly in the vicinity of 2 percent
compared to the Taylor rule with error.
(18) Aside from questions about the sustainable level of unemployment, the
Committee also must wrestle with how best to discern and respond to changes in potential
growth. Chart 6 considers a situation in which productivity growth turns out to be a
percentage point faster than the staffs projection; results are reported as deviations from
the baseline scenario of Chart 3, in order to better illustrate the effects of the productivity
surprise. The realized-inflation rule (the dotted lines) allows the gains of the productivity
acceleration to be taken in the form of lower unemployment for several years. With time,
however, tighter labor market conditions cause inflation to begin to rise, and these
developments lead in turn to higher interest rates." By contrast, when policy is based on
the Taylor rule and the increase in productivity growth is perceived only gradually (the solid
lines), policymakers misjudge the inflation implications of the strength in aggregate demand
spurred by the higher growth of productivity and they raise the funds rate more quickly
(particularly in real terms). The Taylor rule causes the initial productivity surprise to
primarily lower inflation rather than the unemployment rate. Only as policymakers gradually
learn that the acceleration in productivity is permanent and adjust their estimates of the
output gap are they able to bring inflation back to its desired level.12 ,13
(19) Of course, not all the uncertainty about the outlook concerns the supply side;
the Committee is also likely to face swings in aggregate demand not associated with
productivity shocks. In Chart 7, we consider a gradual but prolonged slide in the stock
market.14 As indicated by the dotted lines, the realized-inflation rule does not lead to as
quick a response of interest rates to the downturn in aggregate demand as does the Taylor
rule; instead, policymakers wait until the weakness in output shows up as lower inflation.
As a result, unemployment rises almost a percentage point relative to baseline, leading to a
shortfall of inflation with respect to the target rate. By contrast, the Taylor rule (the solid
lines) prompts a response to the weakness in output, and therefore more quickly stabilizes
both unemployment and inflation.
output-such as the Taylor rule.
Projections and Ranges for Money and Debt
(20) The growth rates of the monetary and debt aggregates in 1999 and projected
for 2000 are shown in the table below, along with those for nominal GDP. A discussion of
alternative ranges for money and debt growth in 2000 begins in paragraph 25.
Growth of Money and Debt
(percent)
(21) M2 grew 6-1/4 percent over 1999, and its velocity declined slightly. Although
M2 velocity tracked the rise in its opportunity cost rather well over the second half of the
year, as shown in chart 8, that conformance with historical relationships followed a period
when movements in velocity were not so readily explained. From the end of 1995 through
mid-1999, velocity rose and then declined, despite rather stable opportunity costs. The
demand for M2 assets over that period is not fully understood, but we believe that it was
importantly affected by interactions with household stock market investments. Increases in
velocity up to mid-1997 were associated with strong flows into stock mutual funds,
suggesting substitution of equity investments for M2 assets. As capital gains boosted stock
market wealth over the next two years, however, flows into stock mutual funds slowed
noticeably, and M2 strengthened relative to income, perhaps reflecting some portfolio
rebalancing by households.15 Whatever the causes, as shown in the lower panel, those
departures of velocity from what would be predicted by opportunity costs are much smaller
than in the early 1990s. As regards M3, growth for the year came to 7-1/2 percent boosted
to some extent by a Y2K-related surge in institutional money funds and large time deposits.
(22) M2 growth is expected to moderate substantially in 2000--to 4-3/4percent--
despite projected growth of nominal GDP remaining at about 6 percent. The slowing in
M2 growth owes importantly to the staffs assumption of an increase in the federal funds
rate of 1-1/4 percentage point over this year, which should help to induce a rise in M2 velocity
of about 1-1/4 percent. The increase in M2 is a little more than would be predicted by
historical relationships between opportunity costs and velocity; the forecast assumes a little
support for M2 demand owing to disappointing returns for investors in the stock market
this year, which could prompt some shifts to M2 assets.
(23) M3 is expected to decelerate more than M2 and post 6-1/4 percent growth in
particular, the growth of institutional money funds should slow substantially as the buildup
of corporate liquidity in late 1999 dissipates and as investors find yields on market
instruments to be more attractive than the lagging returns on such funds. Managed
liabilities of banks in M3 should grow more slowly this year as well, as banks pare back the
extraordinary Y2K-related pace of issuance of the fourth quarter. Nevertheless, despite
some increase in real interest rates and a slightly more conservative lending stance by banks
and other depositories, bank lending is expected to pick up markedly this year, contributing
to the faster growth of M3 than of GDP.
(24) After growing 6-1/2 percent in 1999, the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors
is projected to increase 5-1/4 percent this year, somewhat below the anticipated growth of
nominal GDP. Only a small portion of the deceleration owes to the unwinding of extra
borrowing late in 1999 associated with Y2K. More fundamentally, rising government
surpluses induce faster paydowns of Treasury debt, and some moderation in private
spending slows nonfederal debt growth to a still rapid 8-1/4 percent. Moreover, both equity
retirements and the accumulation of liquid assets held by businesses are projected to
moderate from their rapid rates of increase in 1999, holding down business credit demands.
Offsetting these influences in part is the widening gap between capital expenditures and
internal funds, as investment remains strong while profit growth slows. Household debt
growth is expected to ease somewhat after its surge toward the end of 1999, as spending on
big ticket items is restrained by higher interest rates and lower realized returns on equity
investments. While banks may tighten up a bit further on lending terms and conditions,
credit costs to private borrowers are unlikely to rise by much more than benchmark yields.
Ranges for Money and Debt
(25) The ranges for money and debt in 2000 that the Committee selected on a
provisional basis last July are presented below, along with an alternative that adjusts the
money ranges for faster growth of potential GDP. As in other recent years, the Committee
chose provisional ranges for the monetary aggregates in 2000 that it saw as benchmarks for
money growth under conditions of long-term price stability and historically typical velocity
trends, while the range for domestic nonfinancial debt was better aligned with projected
growth of that aggregate in 2000. The provisional range for debt, at 3 to 7 percent, is
centered not far from the staff's projection for debt growth in 2000, and therefore no
alternative setting for that range is offered for consideration. 16 The provisional ranges, listed
as alternative I, are the same set that has been in place since the middle of 1995. The
Committee may wish once again to retain these ranges as an implicit indication to the public
of the low weight it places on the monetary and debt aggregates in formulating monetary
policy. The existing ranges might also be chosen if the increases in productivity observed in
recent years were seen as likely to be transitory.
Alternative Ranges for Money and Debt in 2000
(percent)
Memo:
Alt. I Projected
Provisional Alt. II Growth
(26) If, however, the faster productivity growth of recent years is expected to
persist or even pick up further, the ranges in use since the mid-1990s would no longer be
centered around money growth expected when prices were stable. In alternative II, the
ranges for M2 and M3 are adjusted upward to allow for faster growth of potential output.
When the Committee shifted to using price stability ranges in the mid-1990s, the staffs
estimate of potential output growth was about 2-1/4 percent and there was thought to be
perhaps a percentage point of upward bias in the implicit GDP deflator. Over the last four
years, however, the staff estimates that potential GDP growth has averaged about 3-1/2
percent, while the bias in the implicit deflator is now about 1/2 percentage point. Potential
GDP growth is deduced from estimates of structural productivity growth averaging 2-1/2
percent, plus about 1 percent growth in labor inputs.17,18 The midpoints of the ranges in
alternative II are consistent with these estimates of recent potential output growth and
residual bias in the implicit GDP deflator, assuming historically typical velocity behavior.
With stable velocity, M2 would be expected to grow at the implied 4 percent pace of
nominal GDP. The range for M3 would be a percentage point higher than that for M2,
reflecting the faster average growth of the broader aggregate over history. 19
(27) For a variety of reasons, however, desired steady state growth of the monetary
aggregates might be faster than the midpoints of the ranges in alternative II. The staff
estimates that, owing to accelerating productivity, the growth of potential GDP will be yet
more elevated going forward--4 percent over this year and next. Moreover, the Committee
may believe that a small positive true inflation rate is desirable in the long run because of
possible nominal rigidities in the economy or because of potential risks to the ability of
policy to react forcefully to economic weakness if the nominal federal funds rate were close
to the lower bound of zero.20 The Committee may view a small positive true inflation rate
as still consistent with effective price stability in that such a rate may be sufficiently low as to
have no influence on the decision-making of households and businesses. If the Committee
did decide to adjust the monetary ranges up by a percentage point or more, the Humphrey
Hawkins report and testimony could clarify that no greater weight was intended to be placed
on the aggregates in the formulation of policy. The July 1999 Humphrey Hawkins report
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(28) In view of continued and surprising vigor in incoming spending data and a
slightly higher projected path for equity prices, the staff has again notched up its assessment
of the underlying strength of aggregate demand. At the same time, the forecasts for
productivity growth and expansion of potential GDP have been revised up a touch. The
staff has assumed that the FOMC will respond to inflationary pressures by raising the
federal funds rate 1-1/4 percentage points, 1/2 percentage points more than in the December
Greenbook. These firming actions are assumed to occur a bit sooner than currently built
into the yield curve and are expected to be accompanied by an edging higher of long-term
yields and a plateauing of equity prices not much above current levels. The growth of real
GDP is now projected at 4 percent in 2000 and 3-3/4 percent in 2001, compared with 3-
remaining around 4 percent over the forecast period. This degree of pressure on resources
is expected to lead to a noticeable acceleration of core consumer prices, with the PCE chain
price index excluding food and energy projected to be rising at a 2-1/4 percent rate in the
second half of 2001, compared with 1-1/2 percent during 1999. Foreign economies are
projected to continue growing briskly, prompting increases in official interest rates in many
major trading partners this year that about match those assumed for the United States. As a
result, the foreign exchange value of the dollar is expected to hold around current levels
through 2000 before depreciating moderately next year as U.S. interest rates flatten out and
swelling volumes of dollar-denominated debt associated with a high and rising current
account deficit weigh on international investment portfolios.
(29) This bluebook proposes three short-run monetary policy alternatives for the
Committee's consideration at this meeting: an unchanged stance of monetary policy
(alternative B); a 25 basis point firming of the federal funds rate (alternative C); and a 50
basis point tightening (alternative D).
(30) Despite the significant inflation risk embodied in the staff forecast and
identified in the Federal Reserve's announcement following the December meeting, the
Committee might not yet be convinced that policy action is necessary and hence might be
inclined to choose alternative B. Even though labor markets have remained tight for some
time, readings on core prices generally have been well behaved, excepting the pickup in
various NIPA inflation measures for the fourth quarter reported today. While these reports
may be disquieting, the four-quarter changes in these measures remain moderate. Taken
together with other price reports, the recent behavior of core inflation may still be
consistent with trend productivity growth that is strong enough, or a natural rate of
unemployment that is low enough, to restrain inflation for considerably longer than in the
staff forecast. In light of this possibility, the Committee may wish to wait awhile in order
better to assess the extent of inflationary pressures. If the Committee were to keep the
stance of policy unchanged, however, it presumably would want to accompany
announcement of that choice with a statement, under its new policy, that "the risks are
weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures in the
foreseeable future," given the high rate of labor utilization and the continued strength in
demand that could push that rate even higher.
(31) In view of the macroeconomic situation and recent Federal Reserve
statements, market participants uniformly seem to expect a tightening of monetary policy at
this meeting, with considerable weight currently being placed on a 25 basis point move and
some probability on a 50 basis point increase. In these circumstances, implementation of
the unchanged money market conditions of alternative B, even if accompanied by a
statement that the balance of risks remains tilted to the upside, would confuse investors.
Nonetheless, financial markets, especially for equities, would rally if investors trimmed their
expectations of the extent of cumulative monetary tightening. Short-term market interest
rates would drop nearly 1/4 percentage point, and the dollar would weaken on foreign
exchange markets.
(32) The announcement following the December meeting indicated that the
FOMC was concerned that a continuation of rapid demand growth could lead to an
escalation of inflation pressures. If anything, the upside risks to the economy and inflation
seem to have intensified over the intermeeting period, perhaps inclining the Committee
toward the 25 basis point firming of policy of alternative C. Indeed, those risks would
mount should financial markets rally as a result of policy inaction. And although
productivity may still be accelerating, the momentum of spending risks outstripping the
expansion in available labor, exacerbating strains in already-taut labor markets. The staffs
assessment is that considerable policy firming will be necessary to contain inflation. Even if
the Committee finds this assessment plausible, it still may want to proceed incrementally, as
it typically has done, because of uncertainty about the response of financial markets to its
actions, about the sensitivity of spending to financial market conditions, and about the
reaction of inflation to labor market conditions. Moreover, long-term inflation expectations
remain damped, suggesting that a rapid shift in the stance of policy is not essential at this
point. Still, the Committee may wish to express the view that, even after the 100 basis
points of cumulative tightening since mid-1999, the risks remain tilted toward increased
inflation pressures.
(33) Investors appear to be anticipating a 25 basis point firming and a statement
that the balance of risks is weighted toward inflation. As a result, these choices would likely
result in little change in market prices. As this is the first Committee meeting under the new
disclosure policy, however, an assessment of the market reaction is somewhat more
uncertain than usual. There is a good chance that market participants would read the
announcement as suggesting that another firming could well be in the offing, but such an
expectation is already consistent with current readings on federal funds futures rates, which
imply a near-certainty of another 25 basis point move at the March meeting.
(34) If the Committee sees recent data as tending to confirm that substantial
monetary restraint will need to be applied over the next year or so to keep inflation in check,
as implied by the staff forecast, it might choose the 50 basis point tightening of policy
contemplated in alternative D. In this circumstance, the Committee might see advantages
to moving well along in the process relatively quickly, to minimize the odds that inflation
expectations begin to rise and to reduce the probability that a protracted period of
tightening will be required. And, it might also want to adopt a statement that it saw the
risks as still being tilted toward higher inflation, which would convey a sense that further
policy tightening might well be needed. On the other hand, if the Committee thought that a
prompt 50 basis point adjustment had a reasonable chance of being sufficient to contain
inflation to a satisfactory level, at least for some time, it presumably would indicate, under
the formula laid out in its new disclosure policy, that "the Committee believes that the risks
are balanced with respect to prospects for" "its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth."
(35) The 50 basis point tightening at this meeting contemplated under alternative
D is not fully incorporated in market prices, and thus implementation of this alternative
would probably result in nearly a quarter-point rise in money market yields. The effects on
longer-term yields and on equity prices would probably be conditioned importantly by the
FOMC's statement regarding the balance of risks. With a statement of symmetric risks "for
the foreseeable future," any drop in bond prices might be damped as the effects of the
tighter-than-expected stance of policy over the near term are partly offset by some flattening
of investors' expectations of policy tightening after March. If the FOMC instead chose to
link its tightening action with wording indicating that it saw the balance of risks as still tilted
toward inflation, market participants would likely revise upward their expected path of
Federal Reserve tightening. Hence, bond and stock markets would probably sell off, and
the dollar would appreciate on foreign exchange markets.
(36) Under the unchanged money market conditions of alternative B, M2 growth
is projected to pick up a bit, to a 6 percent annual rate over the December to June period,
from the 5-1/2 percent rate from September to December, despite a small drag from the
unwinding of Y2K effects. M2 would be somewhat above its provisional 1 to 5 percent
annual range in June. M3 is expected to decelerate sharply, to a 5-1/4 percent rate over the
December to June period from the 14 percent pace of September to December. Adjusted
for Y2K influences, M3 growth is expected to be about the same in the two periods. M3
also would be above its provisional 2 to 6 percent annual range in June. Growth of the debt
of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to slow, dropping to a 5-1/4 percent rate over
the December to June interval from the 6 percent pace between September and December,
leaving this aggregate a bit above the middle of its provisional 3 to 7 percent annual range in
Directive and Balance of Risks Language
(37) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording relating to
(1) the Committee's ranges for the aggregates in 2000 that will constitute the first paragraph
of the new abbreviated directive, (2) the sentence comprising the second or operational
paragraph of the directive concerning the objective for the federal funds rate, and (3) the
"balance of risks" sentence to be included in the press release issued after the meeting (not
part of the directive).
I. Growth Ranges for 2000
The wording shown below incorporates changes in the last sentence (relating
to prices) that were proposed in Governor Ferguson's memo of December 17, 1999.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in
output. In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this meeting
established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of __ to __ [DEL: 4 to 5] percent and
__ to __ [DEL: 2 to 6] percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of
nonfinancial debt was set at __ to __ [DEL: 3 to 7] percent for the year. The
behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light
of movements in their velocities and developments in prices, the economy,
and financial markets.
II. Operational Paragraph Sentence
To further the Committee's long-run objectives of price stability and
sustainable economic growth, the Committee in the immediate future seeks
conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining/INCREASING/DECREASING the federal funds rate at/TO an
average of around ___ [DEL: 5-1/2] percent.
III. "Balance of Risks" Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the
Committee believes that the risks are [balanced with respect to prospects for both
goals] [weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation
pressures] [ weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic
weakness] in the foreseeable future.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
M2 M3 Debt
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D All Alternatives
- -Actual Le
* Projected
Feb Apr Jun
