Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) November 9, 2000
Class II -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Incoming evidence on slower economic growth, wide swings in and
uncertainty about the price of oil on world markets, and mixed news on corporate earnings
triggered volatility in financial markets over the intermeeting period and raised concerns
about risk.' Equity prices have varied over an especially wide range, responding to earnings
reports and warnings as well as to uncertainties about the election outcome (chart 1). On
balance, the most comprehensive equity price indexes are down about 3-1/2 percent, though
the Nasdaq has dropped a bit over 10 percent. Increasing investor concern about corporate
performance led to substantial increases in yields on lower-rated investment-grade and junk
bonds-about 25 and 90 basis points, respectively. The firming of credit conditions in capital
markets has been accompanied by widespread further tightening of bank lending standards
and terms, as reported on the early November survey of senior loan officers. However,
yields on high-grade corporate debt, as well as swaps, were about unchanged over the
intermeeting period. Nominal Treasury coupon yields edged down even though, as gauged
by indexed securities, inflation compensation increased a bit at short- and intermediate-
Chart 1
Financial Market Indicators
Expected Federal Funds Rates Estimated from Selected Treasury Yields
Financial Futures* Percent
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures rates with an
allowance for term premia and other adjustments.
Selected Private Long-Term Yields
Percent Percent
Vertical line indicates last FOMC date.
Selected Risk Spreads*
Basis Points
Vertical line indicates last FOMC date.
Selected Equity Indexes
Index(9/1/98) = 100
High Yield
*The spreads compare the yields on the Merrill Lynch 175 and BBB indexes
with the ten-year swap rate. Vertical line indicates last FOMC date.
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Exchange Rates Index(9/1/98 = 100)
Daily 10
Vertical line indicates last FOMC date.
Vertical line indicates last FOMC date.
maturities. Market expectations for the path of future policy show little net change since the
October meeting and continue to incorporate policy easing during the first half of next year.
(2) The more stringent lending standards and terms at banks and the steep rise in
financing costs for lower-rated borrowers in bond markets apparently contributed to a
considerable weakening in the growth of credit to nonfinancial businesses in October,
though moderating demands for credit in a slowing economy likely also accounted for some
of the falloff (chart 2). Gross bond issuance by both investment- and speculative-grade
firms dropped off sharply last month, while commercial paper edged down and bank loans
remained flat. To some extent, firms may only have been postponing issuance because of
turbulent market conditions, and in recent weeks business borrowing has revived. In the
household sector, consumer debt growth slowed substantially in September, and data from
banks suggest the more subdued pace continued in October. Residential mortgage growth,
by contrast, seems to have remained relatively strong, supported by lower mortgage rates.
Federal debt has continued to contract at a rapid clip.
(3) Expansion in the monetary aggregates also slowed in October, with M2
growth falling to a 4 percent annual rate. The slowdown in M2 followed two months of
strong expansion, however, and smoothing through the monthly fluctuations, M2 has
advanced at about a 6 percent rate since June. This pace is a little stronger than would be
expected given the estimated increase in spending and the lagged effects of earlier monetary
tightenings. M3 growth also slipped in October, to a 4-1/4 percent rate, in part reflecting
weakness in bank credit. Bank loans in all major categories grew more slowly-or not at
Chart 2
Money and Credit Aggregates
M2 Annual Ratio Scale
Growth Rate Ratio Scale Percentage Points
- 2.2
- 12
t10ilt ia(left scale)/1.9 -
6
M2 Opportunity Cost*
1.8 - (right scale) Q3
S- 4
. . . . . . . . ... ... . ... 2.
Q1 Q2
* Two-quarter moving average.
Debt of Domestic Nonfinancial Sectors
Total Annual Nonfederal 
Annual
Growth Rate Growth Rate
- 12 - - 12
all-and banks reduced their holdings of securities. The growth rate of M3 has averaged
nearly 8 percent since June.
(4) A small net appreciation of the dollar also contributed to the firming of
financial conditions. The foreign exchange value of the dollar rose noticeably through much
of October, but over the past two weeks the dollar has given up about one-half of those
gains. On net, the dollar increased 1-3/4 percent against an index of major currencies,
appreciating 2-3/4 percent against the euro, 3 percent against the British pound, and 2-1/4
percent against the Canadian dollar, while depreciating 1-1/4 percent against the Japanese
yen. The euro's value in terms of the dollar touched a new low in late October, about 6
percent below that at the start of the month, even though the European Central Bank (ECB)
firmed its target policy rates 1/4 percentage point on October 5. A welter of statements on
policy by European officials and a perception that prospects for growth in the United States
remained stronger than those in Europe apparently weakened the euro. But perceptions
about relative economic growth seemed to shift a little after the release of weaker-than-
expected third-quarter U.S. GDP, and the euro has since rallied.
(5) Concerns about a few emerging market economies have cropped up in recent
weeks and, interacting with heightened sensitivity to risk more generally, appear mostly
responsible for the 1-3/4 percent appreciation of the dollar vis-a-vis an index of the
currencies of other important trading partners. Yield spreads on Argentinian dollar-
denominated securities widened 3-1/2 percentage points, on net, as doubts surfaced about
the government's ability to roll over its substantial maturing obligations. Other Latin
American economies appeared caught in the wake of investors' worries about Argentina,
with the dollar appreciating 2-1/2 percent and 6-1/4 percent, respectively, against the
Mexican peso and the Brazilian real Social unrest in Indonesia and an apparent unraveling
of the presidential administration in the Phillippines depressed the currencies of those
countries and added to the risk premium on their foreign debt.
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Dec. 1999
to
Aug. 2000 Sep. 2000 Oct. 2000 Oct. 20001
Money and Credit Aggregates
Policy Alternatives
(6) The tightening of financial conditions over the intermeeting period, along with
the slightly weaker cast to incoming data on spending, has led the staff to trim its forecast for
aggregate demand. Further firming of monetary policy is now assumed to be deferred until
less than in the last forecast. Because investment spending accounts for much of the
downward revision in aggregate demand, the staff also has marked down a touch the growth
of structural productivity, which now is seen as leveling out by 2002. On balance, aggregate
demand is again projected to grow noticeably below potential output, importantly reflecting
the restraining effects on consumption growth of a flat path for equity prices. The
unemployment rate is anticipated to move up gradually to around 4-1/2 percent by the end
of 2002, remaining a little below its estimated sustainable level. Core inflation continues to
edge higher, as the effects of pressures on resources and the forecasted slide in the dollar
more than offset the feed-through to core prices of a projected decline in energy prices.
(7) Aggregate demand now has slowed more convincingly to a pace below that of
its potential, and, in the staff view, the unemployment rate seems more likely to rise than to
fall over coming quarters. If the Committee shares that assessment, it may see financial
conditions as probably already tight enough, at least for a time, to limit any further step-up in
core inflation and may select alternative B, which keeps the federal funds rate unchanged.
Indeed, if the Committee views the data on unit costs and prices of the last few years as
indicating that the sustainable rate of unemployment is below that in the staff forecast, it
might judge the present stance of policy as adequate to cap underlying inflation at the current
rate, not just to limit the rise. In addition, the Committee might be concerned that the
deterioration in financial markets witnessed over the past few months might be more likely
to continue than to be reversed, suggesting greater downside than upside risks to aggregate
demand. To be sure, oil prices, whose rise seems to explain a recent boost in near-term
inflation expectations, could remain high and pose an inflationary threat. But long-term
inflation expectations have been stable, and the staff and the futures markets expect a good
deal of the runup in energy prices to be reversed.
(8) Given that labor markets are about as taut as they were at the time of the last
meeting and oil prices remain quite elevated, the Committee may still assess the balance of
risks to be weighted toward heightened inflation pressures. However, the Committee, like the
staff, may see economic growth as likely to fall short of the growth rate of its potential by a
little more than was anticipated at the time of the last meeting. In light of its other objective
of achieving sustainable economic growth, the Committee may now view the risk of
"economic weakness"-that is, growth in output below that of its potential-as about
offsetting the risk of higher inflation. If so, the Committee could select a statement of
balanced risks at this meeting despite an assessment that resource use is currently above
sustainable levels and inflation is possibly moving up a bit over the near term.
(9) Markets expect no adjustment in the funds rate at this meeting, but
participants appear to have somewhat diverse views about the Committee's choice of the
balance of risks. Thus, their reaction to the choice of alternative B will depend largely on
that balance assessment. Anecdotal reports suggest that most investors still anticipate a
statement of continued imbalance toward inflation risks, but a growing number do not and
market prices have built in a policy easing by early next year. In these circumstances, the
retention of an imbalance toward inflation risks at this meeting would induce market
participants to push back the timing of policy easings, causing bond and stock prices to
decline modestly. But prices would likely be bid up somewhat if balanced risks were chosen
because participants would see this choice as raising the possibility of a near-term reduction
in the target funds rate.
(10) If the Committee judges that core inflation probably will trend higher, as in
the staff forecast, and finds the likely degree of economic weakness to be less of a concern,
then it might want to act promptly to resist the acceleration in prices by tightening policy 25
basis points, as in alternative C. The need for action might seem particularly pressing if
core inflation were viewed as having already moved above the range consistent with effective
price stability in the long run. Moreover, the Committee may see a good chance that the
trajectory of prices may be steeper than in the staff forecast. In that forecast, underlying
inflation rises as productivity growth levels out and labor compensation continues to
accelerate, reflecting in part the catch-up of real wages to previous increases in productivity.
With the labor market quite taut and real wages having been held down recently by the
effects of higher energy prices on overall inflation, the pressures for faster nominal wage
increases might intensify more than the staff envisions. Any increase in inflation
expectations would accelerate that process. In that regard, the recent rise in near-term
inflation expectations underscores the risk that longer-term inflation expectations may not
remain anchored should oil prices fail to retreat.
(11) With no policy action expected at this meeting and the next move of the
FOMC seen to be an easing early next year, markets would probably sell off sharply on
announcement of a policy tightening, especially if the Committee retained a statement of
risks weighted toward higher inflation. The stock market could fall substantially, and risk
spreads likely would widen further as market participants become more concerned about
credit quality, with higher interest rates and weaker growth expected to add to debt
repayment problems. The likely rise in the dollar could be damped by the drop in the stock
market, but less so should the weakness spread to foreign equity markets. These financial
market effects would be tempered if the Committee were to adopt a statement that risks
were now balanced, which would presumably be interpreted as indicating that further
tightening was not likely any time soon.
(12) If the Committee believes that economic growth likely will remain below that
of its potential at the current funds rate, along the lines of the staff forecast, but thinks that
the existing level of resource use may be sustainable, then it might choose the 25 basis point
easing of alternative A in order to forestall an unnecessary rise in the unemployment rate.
The argument for this policy choice would be stronger if the Committee put significant
weight on the possibility that aggregate demand would prove weaker than in the staff
forecast. Such an eventuality could occur if softer economic performance leads to further
deterioration of financial conditions and more cautious spending behavior by households
and businesses.
(13) While money market futures embed the expectation of policy easing at some
point, market participants do not anticipate such action at this meeting, in part because after
its previous meeting the Committee stated that it continued to view the risks as weighted
toward higher inflation. Adoption of alternative A, therefore, would trigger a rally in bond
and stock markets, though the extent would depend on the accompanying statement of the
balance of risks. If the Committee announced that it believes the risks to be in balance,
investors could well interpret the easing as mostly bringing forward in time policy actions
they had already anticipated, attenuating price gains. If the Committee instead announced a
view that risks are weighted toward economic weakness, the rally in the Treasury market
would be more vigorous as investors came to expect a larger cumulative policy easing. The
Federal Reserve's evident concerns about a slowing economy and deteriorating financial
conditions might lead investors to become more worried about repayment prospects, causing
risk spreads to widen some. However, the Committee's willingness to act would likely
reassure market participants that downside risks would be limited.
(14) Under the staff forecast, the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected
to decelerate to a 4-3/4 percent pace through March of next year, nearly a percentage point
below the growth rate of nominal GDP. Federal surpluses are expected to result in
continued substantial paydowns of Treasury debt. Growth of nonfederal debt is projected to
moderate but remain above that of nominal spending. Business borrowing picks up after the
pause in October, but with credit conditions likely to remain more restrictive and investment
growth continuing to be less robust, to a pace well below that of earlier this year. Borrowing
by households also is likely to be more restrained, reflecting sluggish spending on durables.
(15) From October through March, M2 is projected to moderate to a 5-1/4 percent
pace; the effect on money demand of the slowing in nominal income growth is partly offset
by a narrowing of opportunity costs as deposit interest rates catch up to previous increases in
short-term market interest rates. After a sluggish performance in October, M3 growth is
projected to rebound with a resumption of bank credit expansion, but bank lending and M3
are both projected to grow less rapidly in the months ahead than over the first three quarters
of this year.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(16) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for (1) the
directive and (2) the balance-of-risks sentence to be included in the press release issued after
the meeting.
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further
its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in
reserve markets consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/DECREASING the
federal funds rate at/TO an average of around ___ [DEL: 6-1/2] percent.
(2) Balance-of-Risks Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable
economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes
that the risks [ARE BALANCED WITH RESPECT TO PROSPECTS FOR BOTH
GOALS] [continue to be weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate
heightened inflation pressures] [ARE WEIGHTED MAINLY TOWARD
CONDITIONS THAT MAY GENERATE ECONOMIC WEAKNESS] in the
foreseeable future.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M2 M3 Debt
Greenbook Forecast*
Growth Rate
From To
Dec-1999 Oct-2000
Oct-2000 Mar-2001
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
November 10, 2000
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-term Long-term
T edr CDs Conventional home
Feeral se ary blse a Comm. U.S. government cnstant Indexed yields Moody's Municipal mortgagesfunds secondary market market maturity yields Ba Bond primary market
3-month 6-month 1-year 3-month 1-month 2-year 5-year 10-year 30-year 5-year 10-year Fixed-rate ARM
Monthly
Nov 99
Dec 99
Jan 00
Feb 00
Mar 00
Apr 00
May 00
Jun 00
Jul 00
Aug 00
Sep 00
Oct 00
p - preliminary data MFMA:JWR
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class II FOMC
Money and Debt Aggregates November 13, 2000
Seasonally adusedNovember3,2000
Seasonally adjusted
_____ __Money stock measures Domestic nonfinancial ebt
nontransactions components U.S.
Period M1 M2 M3 government1 other 1  total'
In M2 In M3 only government
Annual arowth rate(m):i
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
Levels (billions)
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Strictly Confidential
Class II FOMC
November 9,2000
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5
Agency total
OilQIIl
QIII
May
Jun
Jul
Sep
Oct
Aug 23
Aug 30
Sep 6
Sep 13
Sep 20
Sep 27
Oct 4
Oct 11
Oct 18
Oct 25
Nov 1
Nov 8
Intermeeting Period
Oct 3-Nov 9
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
Nov 9
--- 1,582
--- 3,732
--- 4,095
- 2,078
- 750
- 1,372
- 500
- 734
acquired in exchange for maturing bills. Excludes maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing issues.
--- 2,496
- 3,562
