Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) September 29, 2000
Class II - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Financial conditions have registered mixed changes over the intermeeting
period.' Most short- and intermediate-term interest rates have declined as many as 30 basis
points, but most long-term yields have been about unchanged to 15 basis points higher,
major equity price indexes have shed 2-1/2 to 7 percent, and the dollar has appreciated
expectations about the near-term course of interest rates have been revised down in light of
the Committee's statement following its August meeting, which was read as indicating that
the Federal Reserve was more confident that the growth rates of aggregate demand and
supply were coming into better alignment, and subsequent data releases, which tended to
support the view that the economic expansion had slowed. Judging from futures market
quotes, investors have lowered their expected path for the federal funds rate over the second
half of 2001 by about 1/4 percentage point and now place higher odds on the next policy
action being an easing rather than a tightening. The contrary movement of a number of
long-term yields seemed to owe in part to increased uncertainty associated with volatility in
oil prices and to heavy corporate bond issuance. Heightened skepticism about the political
will to preserve projected budget surpluses also pushed up bond yields, particularly in the
Chart 1
Financial Market Indicators
Expected Federal Funds Rates Estimated from Selected Treasury Yields
Financial Futures* Percent
S-1 7.0 .. Two-vyar
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar
2000 2001 2002
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures rates with an
allowance for term premia and other adjustments.
Selected Private Long-Term Yields
Percent Percent
Daily Corporate BBB 
FO M C
High Yield (right scale)
Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep
1999 2000
Selected Equity Indexes
lndex(9/1/99) = 100
FOMC -
Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep
1999 2000
Selected Risk Spreads*
Basis Points
Daily FOMC
High Yield
BBB . .. ...'**--. ....
Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep
1999 2000
*The spreads compare the yields on the Merrill Lynch 175 and BBB indexes
with the ten-year swap rate.
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Exchange Rates lndex(9/1/99 = 100)
1-" FOMC - 11C
Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep
1999 2000
Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep
1999 2000
'' ''
.5. ~
Treasury market where some of the scarcity premiums at ten- and thirty-year maturities
appeared to unwind. Meanwhile, equity prices have been depressed by a larger-than-usual
number of warnings about corporate earnings and revenues.
(2) The foreign exchange value of the dollar has appreciated 1 1/2 percent on net
against a basket of major currencies over the intermeeting period; a gain of around 2 percent
against the euro was offset only partially by a 1/2 percent depreciation against the Japanese
yen. European interest rates changed little relative to U.S. interest rates, even though the
European Central Bank firmed policy 1/4 percentage point on August 31. Still, over most of
the period, the dollar steadily gained ground on the euro, reportedly supported by capital
flows favoring U.S. assets and conflicting statements from European officials regarding their
attitude toward a weak euro. The slide in the euro over the intermeeting period cumulated to
about 5 1/2 percent by September 20, but it was rolled back some on September 22 by
intervention in the exchange market that day, initiated by the ECB and joined by the U.S.
monetary authorities and the central banks ofJapan, the United Kingdom, and Canada.
. Purchases of euros against dollars aggregated to with
the U.S. share of that totaling $1.3 billion, split evenly between the Federal Reserve and the
Treasury. This action was the only U.S. intervention in foreign exchange markets over the
intermeeting period;
(3) The exchange value of the dollar also has posted widespread gains against the
currencies of other important trading partners, pulling the dollar's nominal value against a
basket of those currencies up about 1 percent over the intermeeting period. In general,
uncertainties associated with the effects of movements in oil prices on global economic
growth have appeared partly responsible for a weakening of emerging market asset prices.
Asian stock prices were also hurt by heightened investor concerns about progress in business
and financial restructuring. Yield spreads on emerging market debt have widened in recent
weeks, reversing a narrowing early in the intermeeting period.
(4) Growth of debt of the domestic nonfinancial sectors slowed to a 4-3/4 percent
pace on balance in July and August, about 1-1/2 percentage points less than in the second
quarter (chart 2). This slowing was more than accounted for by a downshift in private
borrowing, which was only partly offset by a less rapid paydown of federal government debt.
Nonetheless, both household and business borrowing appear to have remained brisk, in part
reflecting continued strong expenditures on consumer durables and business capital.
Improved conditions in long-term debt markets over most of the third quarter prompted
corporations to rely less on borrowing in short-term funding markets and households to
shift mortgage borrowing toward fixed-rate instruments. Lenders continued to become a bit
more selective about higher-risk borrowers. According to the August Survey of Terms of
Business Lending, spreads charged on large loans having above-average risk were snugged
some between May and August. In the bond market, credit risk spreads for junk bonds have
risen appreciably in recent months.
Chart 2
Money and Credit Aggregates
Ratio Scale
Percentage PointsRatio Scale
p - Projected based on partial data.
M2 Velocity
(left scale)
M2 Opportunity Cost*
(right scale) Q3"'
* Two-quarter moving average.
** Q3 data are staff estimates.
Debt of Domestic Nonfinancial Sectors
Total Annual
Growth Rate
Nonfederal Annual
Growth Rate
J A
Annual
Growth Rate
(5) M2 growth rebounded considerably in August and September from
surprisingly weak growth in June and July. This stronger expansion might in part reflect the
vigor of consumer spending of late. Growth on average for the third quarter held at a pace
well below that of the first half of the year. This slower growth is about in line with
projections from the staffs money demand model and in part reflects the lagged effects of
wider opportunity costs over the first half of 2000. M3 growth has continued to be brisk in
recent months, although it was a bit slower in the third quarter than over the first half of the
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Dec. 1999
to
July Aug. Sep. Sep.1
Money and Credit Aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt 4.8 4.7 n.a. 5.5
Federal -3.7 -7.3 n.a. -7.0
Nonfederal 6.9 7.6 n.a. 8.9
Policy Alternatives
(6) In the staff forecast, the growth rate of aggregate demand is projected to
remain below that of potential GDP through 2002, but core inflation still is seen to be on a
slight upward trajectory. This relatively moderate pace of demand growth reflects the lagged
effects of previous monetary tightening actions, the influence of some additional firming
steps assumed for late 2001 and 2002, and a falling wealth-to-income ratio stemming from a
flat stock market. Restraint from these sources is only partly offset by a projected decline in
the foreign exchange value of the dollar. Although the unemployment rate edges up to
with stable underlying inflation. Core PCE prices are projected to accelerate about 1/2
percentage point through 2002 from their pace over the past twelve months. The projected
path of oil prices is about $2 per barrel above that in the August forecast. The higher track
for energy prices boosts slightly the forecast for total PCE inflation in 2000 relative to the
August Greenbook, bringing the increase to 2-1/2 percent; the rate falls back to 2 percent later
in the projection as energy prices decline.
(7) While the Committee may find the pickup in core inflation in the staff forecast
to be worrisome, it may still favor keeping the stance of monetary policy unchanged at this
meeting, as under alternative B. The uptrend to core inflation in that outlook is gradual and
far from certain to come to pass. Based on incoming data, the Committee might now be
even more confident that aggregate demand growth has slowed significantly, likely to below
the growth of potential supply. Moreover, with the slippage in equity prices over the
intermeeting period, the prospects have improved that pressures on resources will not
intensify and could even begin to ebb. Higher energy prices would pose a threat to longer-
term price performance if they became embedded in inflation expectations or in wage
demands, as workers attempt to preserve purchasing power. However, oil prices have fallen
from their peaks, and, to date, longer-term inflation expectations have not shown a tendency
to move higher. Moreover, the risks stemming from oil market developments are not all in
one direction. In particular, higher oil prices could restrain aggregate demand beyond the
effects of transferring income to foreign oil producers if they induced an erosion of
consumer confidence or a substantial selloff in equities in light of the reduced economic
efficiency of the existing stock of capital. Market participants, taking into account oil prices
along with other incoming information since the last FOMC meeting, have marked down the
expected path of the federal funds rate for the next few years. In these circumstances, the
Committee may see little to be lost by waiting to obtain more information on trends in
output and inflation.
(8) Market prices incorporate the expectation that the target federal funds rate and
the balance-of-risks sentence will be left unchanged at this meeting. Consequently,
implementation of alternative B, along with the retention of the statement that the
Committee regarded the balance of risks as weighted toward increased inflationary pressures,
should have little effect on financial markets. The Committee might well see the revised
outlook for oil prices, coming at a time when it was already concerned about potential price
pressures from the unusually low unemployment rate, as reinforcing a judgment that the
balance of risks is weighted toward higher inflation. However, the Committee may now
believe that growth of aggregate demand is not likely to exceed that of potential output, that
current levels of resource utilization are sustainable, and that oil prices probably will not
leave a lasting imprint on inflation. If so, it could consider issuing a statement that indicated
balanced risks to achieving its goals for price stability and sustainable economic growth. In
this case, bond and equity markets would likely rally, as investors marked up the odds on an
easing trend in monetary policy over coming months, and the value of the dollar on foreign
exchange markets would probably edge lower.
(9) The FOMC instead might choose the 25 basis point increase in the federal
funds rate of alternative C. Core inflation has risen and may already be above rates that
Committee members find acceptable over the long run. Moreover, although underlying
trends in aggregate demand apparently have slowed, the current and projected levels of
resource utilization may imply, based on historical experience, a likelihood that core inflation
will continue to increase, as in the staff forecast. Furthermore, the Committee may see
upside risks to inflation even relative to that forecast. While the staff has trimmed the
amount of fiscal restraint in the outlook, recent news might be read as suggesting a distinct
possibility of even greater erosion in federal budget surpluses. In addition, if oil prices do
not fall as in the staff forecast and futures market quotes, short-term inflation expectations
may deteriorate further, which, absent monetary policy firming, would reduce the real federal
funds rate. In simulations of staff econometric models, such as that shown in the
international section of Part I of the Greenbook, holding the nominal funds rate along the
baseline path in the face of an upward shock to oil prices sets in motion a process of ever-
rising core inflation relative to the baseline outcome as lower real interest rates boost output
relative to potential.
(10) The market reaction to implementation of alternative C would likely be sharp.
With investors expecting no change in the stance of monetary policy at this meeting and
apparently anticipating that the next move will be toward easing, short-term interest rates
would probably jump by at least the 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate.
Especially if the announcement indicated that the Committee continued to see the balance of
risks as weighted toward higher inflation, capital markets could sell off significantly, as
market participants adjusted prices to incorporate expectations of a higher path for short-
term interest rates. Any decline in inflation expectations would probably offset only part of
the effect on nominal bond yields of the higher real rates brought about by the tightening.
The value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets would firm against most currencies. An
announcement of balanced risks would likely be seen by market participants as a signal that
the Committee believed that this phase of policy tightening had been completed. In this
case, the response to a 25 basis point tightening at this meeting would be muted.
(11) Under the interest rate assumptions of the Greenbook, the average growth of
domestic nonfinancial sector debt over the next several quarters is forecast to be a bit below
the 5-1/2 percent rate of the first three quarters of 2000. In the household sector, the rate of
borrowing is projected to remain fairly brisk, although it ebbs gradually, in line with a
slowing pace of residential investment and moderating growth of expenditures on consumer
durables. With profit growth tailing off, business borrowing stays relatively rapid to finance
strong merger activity and robust capital spending. As debt-service burdens rise in the
household and business sectors, terms and conditions available to weaker borrowers are
likely to firm a bit further. Despite the projected relaxation of fiscal discipline, federal debt
remains on a downward trajectory over the projection period.
(12) M2 growth is projected to move lower in coming months, to an average of
around 5-3/4 percent through next March, from its unusually elevated rates of the past couple
of months. Nonetheless, the expansion of this aggregate runs at a higher rate than on
average over the third quarter, as the influence of past monetary tightenings begins to wane.
M3 growth from September to March is projected to drop back to about a 6-3/4 percent
annual. For 2000 as a whole, M2 and M3 are forecast to expand 6 and 9 percent,
respectively, compared with the 6-3/4 percent increase projected for nominal GDP.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(13) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for (1) the
directive and (2) the balance-of-risks sentence to be included in the press release issued after
the meeting.
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further
its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in
reserve markets consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/DECREASING the
federal funds rate at/TO an average of around ___ [DEL: 6-1/2] percent.
(2) Balance-of-Risks Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and sustainable
economic growth and of the information currently available, the Committee believes
that the risks are [balanced with respect to prospects for both goals] [weighted mainly
toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures] [weighted mainly
toward conditions that may generate economic weakness] in the foreseeable future.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. B Alt. C
M2 M3 Debt
Greenbook Forecast*
Monthly Growth Rates
Sep-2000
Oct-2000
Nov-2000
Dec-2000
Jan-2001
Feb-2001
Mar-2001
Quarterly Averages
2000 Q1
2000 Q2
2000 Q3
2000 Q4
2001 Q1
Growth Rate
From To
Dec-1999 Sep-2000
Sep-2000 Mar-2001
*This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Monthly
Sep 99
Oct 99
Nov 99
Dec 99
Jan 00
Feb 00
Mar 00
Apr 00
May 00
Jun 00
Jul 00
Aug 00
Weekly
Jul 28 00
Aug 4 00
Aug 11 00
Aug 18 00
Aug 25 00
Sep 1 00
Sep 8 00
Sep 15 00
Sep 22 00
Sep 29 00
Daily
Sep 13 00
Sep 14 00
Sep 15 00
Sep 18 00
Sep 19 00
Sep 20 00
Sep 21 00
Sep 22 00
Sep 25 00
Sep 26 00
Sep 27 00
Sep 28 00
Sep 29 00
October 2, 2000
p - preliminary data MFMA:JWR
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Debt Aggregates Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted October 2, 2000
Money stock measures Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactions components .
Period M1 M2 M3 other' total'In M2 In M3 only government'
o t he r
Annual arowth rates(%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
Levels (Sbillions):
Monthly
Weekly
2000-Aug. 7 1088.9 4816.2 3727.3 2011.9 6828.1
Sep. 4 1106.8 4846.4 3739.7 2023.6 6870.0
llp 1089.3 4850.8 3761.5 2023.7 6874.5
18p 1091.5 4869.2 3777.6 2038.7 6907.9
p preliminary
pe preliminaryestimate
Changes in System Holdings of Securities
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Strictly Confidential
Class II FOMC
September 29, 2000
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs
Agency total
Net Redemptions Net Net Purchases 3  Redemptions Net Redemptions outright Short- Long- Net
Purchases 2 (-) Change < 1 1-5 5-10 Over 10 (-) Change (-) holdings 4 Term
Oill
01VQIV
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Jul 12
Jul 19
Jul26
Aug 2
Aug 9
Aug 16
Aug 23
Aug 30
Sep 6
Sep 13
Sep 20
Sep 27
Sep 29
Intermeeting Period
Aug 22-Sep 29
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
Sen 29
-- 93
- 55
- 2,496
--- -271
acquired in exchange for maturing bills. Excludes maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing issues.
