Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (F.R.)       December 6, 2001
Class II -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) In advance of the November FOM C meeting , investors were uncertain
whether the Committee would choose to ease po licy 25 or 50 basis points, but they
seemed sure that the Committee would continue to view the risks to the outlook as
weighted toward economic weakness.  In the event, the announcement of the 50 basis
point rate cut–along with the expected statement of unbalanced risks–led market
participants to mark down short- and intermediate-term interest rates and to boost
equity prices, while leaving longer-term rates about unchanged.1  Subsequent
economic data came in  on the high side of expectations on balance, and with military
operations in Afghanistan making substantial progress, investors appeared to become
more optimistic about economic prospects  and increasingly wi lling to  take on risk.
Futures market quotes indicate that investors place high odds on a further 25 basis
point easing move at this meeting; the federal funds rate is apparently expected to rise
thereafter, reaching about 4¾ percent by the  end of 2003–a level about 100 basis
points higher than  was expected  at the t ime of the November meeting (Chart 1).
(2) Reflecting these changed economic and policy expectations, as well as
the ebbing of flight-to-safety demands, yields on Treasury coupon securities have
climbed 65 to  80 basis points, w ith the largest increases posted at interm ediate
maturities (see the  box on “F inancial Market Cond itions” on the next page).2  Yields
on Treasury inflation-indexed securities have moved up about 35 to 55 basis points,
suggesting that much of the increase in nominal yields owed to their real  components.
With concerns about the economic outlook diminishing, yields on investment-grade
corporate bonds have increased considerably less than those on comparable
Treasuries, while yields on speculative-grade bonds have declined  substantially,
bringing risk spreads on such bonds back to the levels of early September.  The failure
of Enron Corporation, a major wholesale energy trading firm, put some pressure on
the securities of firms in similar and related businesses, as well as on those of banks
thought to have substantial exposures to Enron.  Although liquidity in  energy markets
was reportedly reduced and price movements were volatile at times, effects in financial
markets more generally were muted.  Broad stock price indexes have increased
roughly 6 percent over the period, while the N asdaq has risen  more than  14 percent.
(3) The trade-weighted index of the do llar’s exchange value against other
major currencies has risen slightly on balance over the intermeeting period.  Amid
indications of flagging activity, the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, and
the Bank of Canada lowered their policy rates 50 basis points.  Central bank action,
along with better U.S. data, contributed to the perception that a  widespread economic
rebound was in train, pushing up yields on long-term government bonds abroad,
although the increases have been less than in the United States.  Stock prices have
risen about 6½ percent on average in Europe and 7¾ percent in Canada.  Once again,
Japan was an exception as economic news proved disappointing: Government bond
yields have edged higher, and broad stock indexes are flat on net.  Comments from
Financial Market Conditions
Over the intermeeting period, interest rates have been  especially  volatile and appear to
have been  unusually sensitive to econom ic news and  statements by o fficials.  In part, this
may owe to the uncertainty surrounding the current economic outlook as market
participants seek out clues as to whether an economic rebound is at hand.  In the
Treasury market, some of the backup in yields probably represented an unwinding of the
abrupt declines that followed the announcement on October 31 of the suspension of
issuance of thirty-year bonds.  Overall, upward movements in long-term yields may have
been amplified to some extent by investors’ attempts to reduce the dura tion of their
portfolios as higher rates trimmed the prepayment risk of m ortgage-backed securities.
Market reports suggest that the Treasury market has been less liquid than typical, perhaps
contributing to the volatility in yields.  Bid-asked spreads on Treasury securities widened
at times, and the amounts bid or offered have been smaller than usual.  Some market
participants have reportedly closed out positions ahead of year-end and may have been
reluctant to assume new positions amid the extensive volatility of asset prices.  Some
withdrawal from the market associated with year-end positioning also may have
contributed to a recent rise in fails-to-deliver Treasury securities, although the elevated
level of fails likely also  reflects the low level of short-term in terest rates.
To date, year-end pressures in financing markets have generally been in the range
observed in recent years.  In the federal funds and eurodollar deposit markets, the rates at
which  banks can borrow funds over  year-end have  risen on ly slightly re lative to the rate
on Treasury repurchase agreements of similar maturity (Chart 2).  Similarly, highly rated
firms in the commercial paper market have had to pay only a small premium to borrow
funds over year-end.  Spreads for lower-rated issuers of commercial paper, which have
been elevated since September, have increased noticeably for instrumen ts spanning year-
end.
Japanese officials about possible intervention to weaken the yen and reports that the
Bank of Japan may consider purchasing foreign currency bonds contributed to a
; U .S. monetary
authorities did not intervene.
(4) Deepening concerns over the Argentine government’s chances of
staving off default apparently have had little spillover to other emerging market
economies, and the dollar’s exchange value against the currencies of our other
important trading partners has decl ined somewhat over the intermeeting period.
Argentine officials began to implement a debt exchange and, faced with mounting
pressures on the nation’s banks, announced  a set of measures to limit withdrawals
from the banking system and to restrict capital outflows.  On balance, the yield spread
of Argentina’s debt over Treasuries has risen more than 900 basis points over the
period.  In contrast, in Mexico and Brazil, bond yield spreads over Treasuries have
narrowed substantially.  The Mexican peso has changed little on net against the dollar,
but the Brazilian real has appreciated 6½ percent.  Stock prices in Asian developing
economies with significant technology-based export sectors have posted increases
between 10 and 30 percent.
(5) Nonfederal debt has expanded at about a 5¾ percent average pace in
recent months (Chart 3).  Despite declining investment spending, business debt
growth appears to have picked up in October and November.  Low yields on
investment-grade bonds evidently have encouraged many firms to lock-in longer-term
financing, while the recovery of the junk bond m arket from the effects of the terrorist
attacks in September has allowed selected speculat ive-grade borrowers to issue as well.
Firms appear to have used the proceeds to strengthen their balance sheets by paying
down short-term debt and accumulating liquid assets.  Household mortgage debt
growth has remained fairly strong, as very low mortgage rates have supported robust
housing and refinancing activity.  The heavy volum e of auto sales posted in October
and November has likely boosted consumer credit growth some.  With the funding of
rebate checks completed, federa l debt changed little (on a seasonally adjusted basis) in
October and November.  The cutback in federal debt issuance restrained growth in
total domestic nonfinancial debt to a 4½ percent pace in October from an average of
about 6 percent in the prior few months.
(6) M2 growth, at a 9¼ percent rate in November, remained robust but was
below its average pace over September and October, owing in part to some further
unwinding of the high level of business demand deposits that accumulated in the
aftermath of the September terrorist attacks and that were not completely drawn
down until late in October.  Growth in M2 money funds slowed appreciably as
reduced concerns about the economic outlook and  increases in equity values likely led
some investors to reallocate balances from money funds back into equities.  Indeed,
there were inflows into equity mutual funds in November following a sizable outflow
in September and little net change in October.  For the year, M2 is estimated to have
expanded 10¼ percent on a four-quarter basis, compared with projected growth of
nominal income of on ly 1½ percent.  M2 growth was boosted largely by declines in
opportunity costs, the heavy pace of mortgage refinancing, and the disenchantment of
investors with the stock market.  (An appendix contains a discussion of money and
credit  in 2001.)
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Aug 2001 Sep 2001 Oct 2001 Nov 2001 (p)
Money and Credit Aggregates
Short-run Policy Alternatives
(7)  On balance, economic  data over the in termeeting period have tended to
run somewhat firmer than had been expected by the staff at the time of the
November meeting, and equity prices have risen.  As a consequence, the Greenbook
forecast for real activity has been strengthened slightly.  Under the assumption that
the Committee leaves the target funds rate unchanged through 2002 before firming
policy during 2003, the staff projects that long-term interest rates will drift down a
little, the foreign exchange value of the dollar will hold near its current level, and stock
prices will stay about flat through next year and edge higher thereafter.  The forecast
again assumes the passage of legislation that will provide substantial additional fiscal
stimulus starting  in the first half of next year.  Against this backdrop, real GDP is
anticipated to flatten out early next year and then rebound to a growth rate somewhat
above that of its potential over the remainder of the pro jection period.  The near-term
decline in output is expected to push the unemployment rate to about 6 percent next
year, and unemployment then edges lower over 2003.  The slack in resource
utilization, declining energy costs, and reduced inflation expectations lead to some
diminution of underlying inflation, with the increase in the core PCE index falling to
about 1 percent in 2003 from  its recent peak of about 2 percent.
(8) Even though the prospect of further near-term deterioration in the
economy is unappea ling, the Committee may view this outcome as unavo idable given
the lags in monetary policy.  If the Committee  saw good prospects of a rela tively
strong rebound in the economy beginning in the next few quarters, it might leave the
stance of monetary policy unchanged .  The unexpected strength of several indicators
of consumption and investment cou ld be read as supporting a v iew that economic
weakness is abating and a turnaround in spending is in train.  Indeed, the  rise in equity
prices and real in terest rates of late likely provides evidence that market par ticipants
have become more optimistic on that score.  Such a turnaround would be supported
by the monetary stimulus pu t in place–a substantial portion of which has occurred
only recently–that has positioned the real federal funds rate well below the range of
estimates of its equilibrium value (see Chart 4 and the tab le on the next page).  In
these circumstances, the Com mittee may w ish to bide its time, awaiting data that will
help it gauge the effects of policy actions to date as well as the resolution of
uncertainty on  the fiscal policy front.
(9) Because market prices appear to incorporate high odds on a 25 basis
point easing of monetary policy at this meeting, leaving the target federal funds rate at
Longer-term yields could rise somewhat as well; the extent of the backup, however,
would probably be lim ited as long as the Committee, as expected by investors,
reiterated its assessment that the balance of risks is weighted toward economic
weakness.  However, long-term yields would likely rise by more, and the do llar could
firm, if the Committee’s announcement suggested some optimism about economic
prospects despite its formal assessment of the balance of risks and, especially, if the
Committee shifted to a statement that the risks were balanced.  Equity prices might
drop initially, but, again, any sense conveyed in the announcement of good odds that
the economy would begin to recover before long would probably limit the decline.
(10) The Committee might choose to ease policy  25 basis points if it viewed
the recent positive news on spending as quite tentative and not providing sufficient
assurance that a rebound is in store before long.  Moreover, the Committee might be
worr ied about the possibility o f specif ic shocks that  could  derail  the recovery .
Consumer sentiment could decline further in the event of additional terrorist actions
or if the current military conflict proves more difficult and protracted  than expected.
And, equity prices may be seen as embedding unrealistically high expectations for
earnings as well as an unusually low equity risk premium.  Should investor
expectations be disappointed or the equity premium move back toward its historical
norm, equ ity prices could reverse their recent gains, adding to the drag on household
spending.  In addition, the appearance of stalemate in the Congressional debate on a
fiscal stimulus package may be seen as raising the odds that agreement will not be
forthcoming.  An alternative simulation in the Greenbook illustrated that, without
additional fiscal stimulus, the economic recovery  could be noticeably more  anemic
than envisioned in the baseline forecast.  While these downside risks may not
materialize, the Committee might view the cost of erring on the side of ease as low at
this time given the degree of slack at present in resource utilization and the likelihood
that inflation will remain subdued or drift down somewhat in the near term.
(11) Because investors expect the Committee  to ease 25 basis po ints and to
retain its assessment that the risks are weighted toward economic weakness, financial
market prices would likely change little in response to such a policy decision.  Market
participants probably would perceive the 25  basis point move, following three larger
steps, as an indication that the easing cycle could be drawing to a close.  If the
Committee wanted to underscore that perception in markets, it could indicate that the
risks were now balanced.  In that event, market interest rates could rise as investors
moved forward their prevailing expectations of policy tightening, but stock prices and
the foreign exchange value  of the dollar would be supported if the Federal Reserve’s
less pessimistic outlook led market participants to revise up their expectations for the
rebound in economic activity.
(12) The Committee might consider reducing the target federal funds rate 50
basis points at this meeting if it thought an unacceptably large opening of slack in the
economy was likely.  As discussed in the box “A ‘Perfect Foresight’ Policy” on page
outlook to determine a path for the funds rate that minimizes squared output and
inflation gaps over the entire forecast period calls for considerable additional near-
term policy easing to counter the projected upward pressure on the unemployment
rate.  A further sizable easing may be justified not only on the grounds of generating
better results than in the staff forecast, but also on the view that the forecast itself has
overestimated effective policy stimulus or does not give sufficient weight to forces
that will continue to hold back the economy.  In particular, if inflation expectations
are lower than is embedded  in the baseline forecast, then the real short-term interest
rate is higher and that will keep real long-term rates elevated and reduce inflation even
further than in the staff forecast.  Adjusting the nominal funds rate lower in response
to the apparen t drop in inflation  expectations m ight be viewed  as especially desirab le
if the Committee believed that substantial restraints to private domestic spending
persist or that the downturn abroad is likely to  be exacerbated  by financial strains in
certain foreign economies.  Moreover, as discussed in a box in the November
bluebook, the possibility that conventional monetary policy action ultimately could be
constrained by the zero bound to nominal interest rates might incline the Committee
to take prompter and more aggressive action now to stimulate economic activity.  The
Committee might also v iew the 1 percent core PCE inflation rate projected to prevail
toward the end of the forecast interval as too low to provide a comfortable buffer
against hitting the zero bound to nominal interest rates in the event of a substantial
adverse shock to the economy in the future.
(13) A 50 basis point policy easing  at this meeting would be larger than is
embedded in financial market prices.  Although short-term rates would decline
sharply, the response of long-term yields, stock prices, and the dollar would depend  in
part on whether investors saw the extent of the move as suggesting, on the one hand,
A “Perfect Foresight” Policy
Examining the policy dubbed “perfect foresight” in the June bluebook may provide some
perspective on the Committee’s decision at this meeting.  Under this policy, the
policym aker is assumed to choose a path  for the federal funds rate w ith complete
knowledge of all the forces shaping the outlook.  The experiment extends the Greenbook
outlook  through  2006 using the  FRB/US m odel w ith certain  judgmental adju stments to
the model that preserve the central features underlying the staff outlook.  In particular, the
rate of increase in potential output is a little over 3 percent after 2003, a slight rise from
this year and next.  The degree of labor market slack consistent with stable inflation (the
effective NAIRU) holds at about 5¼ percent.  Growth abroad strengthens to 3¾ percent
by 2003, and the dollar is assumed to depreciate at a 3 percent annual rate in real terms
after 2003, keeping the ratio of the current account deficit to GDP about flat.  Lastly, the
fiscal assumptions in the extension hold the unified budget surplus at about 1 percent of
nominal GDP, up from about zero in 2003.
The sol id line in the upper left pane l of Chart 5 shows the path  for the federal funds rate
assumed in the Greenbook out to 2003.  The dotted line plots the federal funds rate that
would be chosen by a policymaker assumed to have perfect foresight starting at the
beginning of next year.  Effectively, this assumes that the policymaker is certain that the
model accurately describes the economy and that the baseline correctly captures all of the
forces impinging on the economy.  The funds rate path is chosen to minimize the sum of
squared deviations of output from its estimated potential and inflation from an assumed
long-run target of 1 percent, with a small penalty applied to changing the funds rate.  The
policymaker is assumed to view both the output and inflation gaps with equal distaste, and
the penalty on interest-rate changes was selected to deliver policy predictions that make
the funds rate about as volatile as it has been over the past ten years.  This rule calls for
additional aggressive easing by holding the funds rate lower for longer than either the
Greenbook a ssumption or the expectations now  implicit in market prices.  However,
given this ease early in the forecast period, a perfect-foresight  policy has to firm earlier
and more abruptly than  the path assum ed in the Greenbook  and to run substantially
tighter for longer in the latter part of the simulation period to achieve the longer-run
inflation objective.
that the economy was considerably weaker than they had perceived or, on the other,
that the Com mittee was intent on restoring  strong growth more quickly and with
more certainty than previously appreciated.  In the first case, bond yields, equity
prices, and the exchange value of the dollar all could drop significantly, while, in the
second, the decline in bond yields would be significantly smaller and stock prices and
the do llar could ra lly.
(14) Given the interest rate assumptions and nominal income projection of
the Greenbook forecast, M2 growth is forecast to slow somewhat in coming months
from its average pace over 2001, as the influence of previous easings on opportunity
costs and the demand for  M2 begins to ebb.  Still, M2 growth is expected to remain
relatively brisk:  The record surge in mortgage refinancing that is now under way
should buoy M2, and  continued strong demands for U.S . currency abroad owing to
unsettled conditions in some countries and, perhaps, a temporary surge in demands
for U.S. banknotes around the time of the introduction of euro notes early next year
could also spur that aggregate.  On balance, M2 is expected to expand at a 7¾ percent
annual rate over the November-to-March period.  With M2 growth staying well above
that of nominal income, velocity continues to drop in the first quarter, although the
decline is expected to slow to a 6¼ percent annual rate.
(15) Over the period from October to March, the expansion of nonfederal
debt is expected to remain near the 6 percent pace of recent months.  In the business
sector, borrowing again should be concentrated heavily in the bond market, as firms
take advantage of relatively low long-term interest rates.  C&I loan growth and
commercial paper issuance probably w ill stay weak, main ly reflecting the shift to
longer-term funding, although continued firming of loan terms and standards and
investor resistance to relatively low-grade commercial paper cou ld also play a role.  In
the household sector, the refinancing boom should augment the expansion of
mortgage debt over the next few months, while consumer credit is likely to edge
higher on net, owing in part to a drop-off in growth of expenditures on consumer
durables.  With federal debt again expanding, total domestic nonfinancial sector debt
is projected to rise at a 5 percent annual rate from October through March.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
M2                            M2        M3       Debt
                                      ------------------------------          ------------------------------
                                        Alt. B     Alt. A    Alt. A’              Greenbook Forecast* 
                                      ------------------------------          ------------------------------
Monthly Growth Rates
                 Apr-2001                  10.1      10.1      10.1                10.1      19.1       5.2
                 May-2001                   5.3       5.3       5.3                 5.3      13.7       6.6
                 Jun-2001                   9.9       9.9       9.9                 9.9      13.0       6.1
                 Jul-2001                   9.1       9.1       9.1                 9.1       6.9       3.8
                 Aug-2001                   8.2       8.2       8.2                 8.2       0.8       6.7
                 Sep-2001                  26.7      26.7      26.7                26.7      25.0       8.0
                 Oct-2001                  -1.5      -1.5      -1.5                -1.5      10.6       4.4
                 Nov-2001                   9.2       9.2       9.2                 9.2      15.9       4.6
                 Dec-2001                   8.5       8.7       8.9                 8.5      10.5       5.8
                 Jan-2002                   8.3       8.9       9.5                 8.3       9.5       3.2
                 Feb-2002                   8.0       8.8       9.6                 8.0       9.0       4.4
                 Mar-2002                   6.2       7.0       7.7                 6.2       7.6       6.8
Quarterly Averages
                  2000 Q2                   6.3       6.3       6.3                 6.3       9.0       6.1
                  2000 Q3                   5.6       5.6       5.6                 5.6       9.1       5.0
                  2000 Q4                   6.0       6.0       6.0                 6.0       7.3       4.4
                  2001 Q1                   9.8       9.8       9.8                 9.8      13.1       4.8
                  2001 Q2                   9.7       9.7       9.7                 9.7      14.7       5.9
                  2001 Q3                  10.7      10.7      10.7                10.7       9.7       5.8
                  2001 Q4                   9.3       9.4       9.4                 9.3      14.0       5.7
                  2002 Q1                   8.2       8.7       9.2                 8.2      10.2       4.6
Growth Rate
                  From         To
                 Dec-2000    Oct-2001      10.6      10.6      10.6                10.6      13.4       5.7
                 Dec-2000    Nov-2001      10.5      10.5      10.5                10.5      13.8       5.6
                 Oct-2001    Mar-2002       8.1       8.6       9.1                 8.1      10.7       5.0
                 Nov-2001    Mar-2002       7.8       8.4       9.0                 7.8       9.3       5.1
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(16) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for
(1) the directive and (2) the “balance of risks” sentence to be included in the press
release issued after the  meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote
sustainable growth in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the
Committee in the immediate future seeks  conditions in  reserve markets
consistent with MAINTAINING/INCREASING/reducing the federal
funds rate AT/to an average of around ___2 percent.
(2) “Balance o f Risks” Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available,
the Committee believes that the risks [ARE BALANCED WITH
RESPECT TO PROSPECTS FOR BOTH GOALS] [ARE
WEIGHTED MAINLY TOWARD CONDITIONS THAT MAY
GENERATE HEIGHTENED INFLATION PRESSURES] [continue
to be weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic
weakness] in the foreseeable future.
Appendix:  Review of Debt and Money Growth in 2001
The economic contraction and decline in interest rates this year left a noticeable
imprint on the composition of financial flows.  In general, credit flows shifted toward
bonds and mortgages, as borrowers took advantage of lower long-term interest rates . 
A decline in capital expenditures and inventory financing needs led to a sharp slowing
in overall business borrowing, but lower in terest rates helped to  keep household credit
expansion brisk.  Federal debt contracted at a much slower pace than in 2000, as the
federal government resumed net borrowing in the second half of the year in response
to a reemergence of unified budget deficits.  The decline in short-term interest rates
resulting from the easing of monetary policy, combined with increased safe-haven
demand for liquid assets that likely reflected investors’ disenchantment with the stock
market, contributed to rapid growth of the broad monetary aggregates in 2001.
     
Domestic Nonfinancial Sector Debt
Despite anem ic expansion in  nominal income, the aggregate debt of domestic
nonfinancial sectors expanded 5½ percent in 2001, a bit faster than in the previous
year.3  Nonfederal debt grew briskly over the first half of the year, but slowed
somewhat in the second half as the economy contracted.  On balance, nonfederal debt
decelerated to about 7¼ percent in 2001 from 8½ percent last year.  By contrast,
federal debt continued to shrink earlier in the year, but then resumed growing in the
second half, as the budget swung into deficit  owing to a deterioration in tax receipts. 
For the year as a  whole, the federal government paid down only 1½ percent of its
debt, all of it during the first half, compared with 6¾ percent last year.
Overall business borrowing slowed substantially from its strong pace of the
previous several years.  The financing gap contracted considerably as a drop in capital
expenditures outpaced a shrinkage in internal funds that stemmed from weaker
profits.  The composition of business borrow ing shifted toward longer-term markets. 
Nonfinancial firms, especially those rated investment grade, took advantage of
attractive longer-term interest rates and issued a large volume of bonds, using the
proceeds to strengthen their balance sheets by paying down bank loans and
commercial paper and  by boosting liquid assets.  The commercial paper market
suffered severe setbacks in 2001, and the level of commercial paper outstanding  fell
sharply over the year.  Early on, defaults of two California utilities and downgrades of
the debt of other firms caused spreads between lower- and higher-tier issuers to soar
for a time.  More recently, market disruptions in the wake of the September 11
terrorist attacks, considerable year-end pressures, and concerns stemming from the
bankruptcy of Enron Corporation led spreads for lower-rated  issuers to widen again. 
In the banking sector, worries about deteriorating credit quality in an environment of
declining economic activity led to a further tightening of business lending standards
and terms over the course of the year.  Banks reported weaker demand for C&I loans,
mainly owing to reduced business outlays on capital equipment and inventories and a
slower pace of merger activity.  These factors, along with the shift to financing
through the bond market, caused C&I loans at commercial banks to shrink for the
first calendar  year since 1993.
Growth in commercial mortgage debt remained brisk in 2001, even though
nonresidential construction spending fell.  Issuance of commercial mortgage-backed
securities, buoyed by low interest rates, remained fair ly robust throughout 2001.  With
office vacancies on the rise and delinquency rates on commercial mortgages edging up
from their recent historical lows, commercial banks, on net, firmed standards on
comm ercial real estate loans.
In the household sector, strength in durable goods expenditures led to an
acceleration of consumer credit in the first quarter.  Growth in consumption spending
slowed over the spring and sum mer, and the increase in consumer credit fell back
sharply, resulting in a moderate gain for the year as a whole.  By contrast, the low
levels of mortgage rates spurred  home mortgage debt to a rapid 10 percent advance in
2001.
With the expansion of overall household debt continuing to outrun that of
disposable personal income, the household debt-service burden rose fairly stead ily
over the year, edging closer to the previous peak.  At the same time, the ratio of
household assets to disposable income moved lower through the third quarter of the
year, reflecting the decline in equity prices.  In this environment, measures of
household credit quality deteriorated somewhat over the year.  Delinquency rates rose
on credit cards, home mortgages, and other consumer loans.  Personal bankruptcy
filings shot up to a record level early in the year, and remained well above their year-
earlier levels; part of the increase, though, reflected a rush to file before the passage of
bankruptcy reform legislation.
Despite the falling and volatile stock market, households continued net
purchases of equity mutua l funds during the first half of the year.  But when equity
prices dropped further during the summer, households responded by shifting
investments from equities to bond and money funds, a pattern that became more
pronounced when equ ity markets reopened following the terrorist attacks. 
Encouraged by a recovery in share prices beginning in October, households resumed
accumulating equity mutual funds.
State and local government debt expanded fairly rapidly this year, following
slow growth in 2000.  Gross issuance of municipal bonds accelerated early on, as local
governments took advantage of lower yields to refund outstanding debt.  Spurred by
falling interest rates and  declining tax revenues, issuance of long-term bonds to
finance new capita l projects maintained a rapid clip over  the course of the year. 
Credit quality in the municipal market appeared to be topping out late in the year, as
tax receipts softened owing to the contracting economy.
The federal government continued to  pay down sizable amounts of marketable
debt over the first half of the year.  By the middle of the summer, however, the tax
cut, combined with the weakening in the economy, led to a deterioration in receipts,
and the Treasury announced that it planned to resume borrowing over the rest of the
year.  Emergency spending in the wake of the terrorist attacks further boosted the
Treasury’s borrowing needs.  Following a 6 percent rate of contraction in the first
half, the federal nonfinancial debt grew at a 3¼ percent pace over the second half of
2001.
Depository Credit
Growth of depository credit this year was well below that of total nonfinancial
debt.  Bank credit decelerated sign ificantly over the course of the year as loan growth
slowed sharply, although bank loans bulged temporarily after September 11 as
businesses tapped backup lines of credit.  Anemic loan growth at domestic
commercial banks for the year as a whole was partially offset by robust acquisition of
securities.  The expansion of thrift credit is estimated to have slowed slightly from last
year’s pace despite the rapid growth in home mortgage debt.
The deceleration in bank loans in 2001 reflected a drop-off in loan demand
from businesses and consumers as well as a  tightening of banks’ lending standards in
response to growing concerns about worsening asset quality.  The net percentage of
domestic banks that tightened standards and terms on business loans, which had
trended up substantially  in 2000, began to decline over the  first ha lf of the  year. 
However, in light of dimming economic prospects following the terrorist attacks, the
proportion of banks tightening business lending policies again increased.  Commercial
banks reported that the weaker demand for C&I loans over the course of the year
owed mainly to a continued decline in customers’ need to finance capital expend itures,
mergers and  acquisitions, and inventories.  In the  second half of the year, a moderate
net percentage of banks also started to tighten credit conditions for household loans.
Monetary Aggregates
M2 expanded at a rapid 10¼ percent pace this year, significantly above its 6
percent rate of growth in 2000.  The fallout from  the events of September 11  is
estimated to have directly contributed only a bit to M2 growth in 2001.  More
significantly, sharp declines in short-term interest rates, resulting from the easing of
monetary policy over the year, lowered the opportunity cost of holding M2 assets and
helped induce a record decline in M 2 velocity.  In addition, households’ preferences
for liquidity and safety apparently intensified in response to elevated stock market
volatility and reduced expectations for corporate earnings growth, further boosting
M2 growth.  The unprecedented level of mortgage refinancing activity and large
currency shipments abroad also spurred this aggregate.
Reflecting in part a surge in its M2 component, M3 grew 13½ percent in 2001,
far outpacing the 9½ percent rate of increase last year.  Institutional money funds
experienced exceptional inflows in response to the decline in short-term interest rates
in 2001.  By contrast, the flattening of bank credit resulted  in a sharp dece leration in
the issuance of managed liabilities, including large time deposits.  With growth in
nominal income slowing sharply, M3 velocity dropped for the seventh year in the row.
GROWTH OF THE CREDIT, MONETARY, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(in percent)1
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
Ratio Scale
Ratio Scale
Percentage Points
* Two-quarter moving average.     * Two-quarter moving average.
M2 Velocity
(left scale)
M2 Opportunity Cost*
(right scale)
M2 Velocity
Opportunity Cost (ratio scale)
•••••• •
••
••
••
• •
• •
•
•
• •
•
•
•
••••
••• •
• •• • ••••
•
•••
•
••
• ••
• • •
• •• •
••
• ••
••
•• •
•
•• • • •
• • •
••
• •
••
• ••• •••• •
• • •
• •
• ••
• •
•
• •
•
•
•
•
•
•••
•
••
•
•
• ••••••••
•• • • •
•
•• • •
•
Fit from 1959:Q2 - 1989:Q4
Intercept Fit from 1994:Q3 - 2001:Q4
(slope taken from lower regression line)
Ratio scale
M3 Velocity
Ratio scale
Domestic Nonfinancial Debt Velocity
