Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) June 22, 2001
Class II – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent D evelopments1
(1) Short-term interest rates in the United States moved down somewhat on
the announcement of a 50 basis point easing at the May 15 FOMC meeting.2  Market
participants evidently were placing some odds on a 25 basis point move or at least
were anticipating an indication that the Com mittee might subsequently slow the pace
of easing.  Since the meeting, news on econom ic activity and corporate earnings–both
in the United S tates and abroad–has generally been weaker than market expecta tions.
As a consequence, the trajectory for the expected funds rate shifted down further,
triggering declines in other money market rates, which ended the intermeeting period
at the upcoming meeting and a l ittle more than an even chance of a half-point  move.
Yields on long-term Treasury and investment-grade corporate securities fell about 15
to 35 basis points over the intermeeting period (chart 1).  Rates on speculative-grade
bonds, however, jumped in response to adverse earnings warnings, particularly in the
telecom sector, widening spreads substantially.  Earnings warnings also weighed on
equity prices, which have declined about 1½  percent on net since the May meeting.
These declines in long-term interest rates and equity prices have reversed only part of
the increases registered from late-M arch to mid-May, suggesting that investors remain
somewhat more  optimistic about economic prospects  than they were in la te March.
The yield curve retains its upward slope, and futures markets still expect an
appreciable rise in short-term rates next year.
(2) With indicators of economic activity in Japan and Europe also suggesting
softening, the exchange value of the dollar in terms of the major currencies index rose
slightly on net over the intermeeting period (chart 2).  The decline in first-quarter
Japanese GDP surprised observers, and Japanese share prices, especially those of
high-tech and banking sector companies, dropped sharply; yields on Japanese
government debt with maturities out to two years fell to near zero.  In the large
European economies, economic prospects dimmed but infla tion concerns mounted.
Long-term interest rates were little changed on net until late in the period, when they
declined 8 to 10 basis points, but broad share price indexes fell 1 to 5 percent.  Market
participants apparently interpreted recent upticks in inflation as lowering the odds that
the European Central Bank will ease as much as was previously expected and
eliminating any chance for further easing by the Bank of England.  Although most
other industrial-country central banks did not act during the intermeeting period, the
Bank of Canada eased  by a quarter point near the end of M ay.
(3)  The dollar’s value against the currencies of other important trading
partners edged up on net over the intermeeting period.  In early June, Argentina
swapped shorter-term for longer-term debt to reduce its debt-servicing burden in the
near term.  Even though this exchange required generous longer-term yields to entice
a large volume of propositions, spreads on Argentine dollar-denominated debt
declined substantially from their levels in mid-May.  In mid-June, Argentina
introduced an exchange-rate-linked system of export subsidies and import taxes,
which effectively lowered the value of the peso for traded goods but kept the dollar
peg for other types of transactions.  The implementation of this program led to fears
that it was a prelude to a full devaluation, and financial markets erased some earlier
gains, leaving Argentine bond spreads over comparable U.S. Treasury securities down
only about 120 basis points for the intermeeting period as a whole.  The Brazilian real
was battered over the intermeeting period by spillovers from Argentina , problems in
the energy sector arising from drought, and domestic political scandals, but central
bank intervention and a tightening of monetary policy in late June helped the currency
to battle back and end the period down only  about 3½ percent  versus the dollar.
Benefitting from continued foreign interest in M exican investments and high  oil
prices, Mexico’s currency appreciated about 1½ percent against the dollar, while the
yield spread of Mexican sovereign debt over Treasuries declined about 30 basis points.
(4) The debt of nonfederal sectors has continued to increase at a  good clip
in recent months, expanding at about a 6½ percent annual rate in April and, based on
preliminary data, at a somewhat faster pace in M ay.  With bond markets quite
receptive and long-term rates viewed as attractive, nonfinancial businesses borrowed
huge amounts in the bond market in May, and data for early June suggest another
strong month.  A portion of this issuance was used to repay bank loans and
commercial paper, but much of it represented new financing as internal funds have
dropped off.  Although the growth of household  debt is projected  to slow to about a
of disposable income, pushing up  debt-servicing burdens despite declines in consumer
loan rates.  Problems servicing debt continued to increase in certain market segments
but restraint on  credit supplies has been quite lim ited.  State and local governments
have continued to  raise funds at  a rapid  clip, especially  for new capital pro jects.
Outstanding marketable debt of the federal government shrank substantially further
over the intermeeting period.  From the fourth quarter of 2000 through May 2001,
total nonfinancial debt is estimated to have expanded at about a 4½ percent annual
rate, only slightly faster than the projected  growth of nominal GDP over the first half
of the year.
(5) M2 growth slowed in May, as a large amount of final individual tax
payments cleared, but has rebounded smartly in June to an estimated 8¼ percent
annual rate (chart 3).  On a quarterly average basis, therefore, M2 has hardly slowed at
all this quarter.  Overall, from the fourth quarter  of last year through June, M2 is
estimated to have grown at about a 10 percent pace, bolstered importantly by the
reduction in the opportunity costs of hold ing liquid deposits and money market
mutual funds engendered by five policy easings in quick succession.  Moreover, a drop
in mortgage rates, which began about a year ago, had progressed far enough by the
end of 2000 to kick off a wave of refinancing that elevated M2 this year, as the
proceeds earm arked to pay off previously secur itized mortgages were temporarily held
in escrow in M2 deposit accounts.  A further influence supporting M2 growth in the
first part of the year may have been the reduced attractiveness and greater volatility of
stock market returns.  M3 growth, wh ich has come down from Apr il’s unusually
strong pace, is still quite robust.  Institution-only money funds, which expanded
rapidly during the first quarter because of the effects of policy easing and a continued
strong trend toward their use for corporate cash management, have kept growing
rapidly in recent months.  From the fourth quarter of last year through June, M3 has
increased at a 13 percent annual rate.
Longer-Term Strategies
(6) This section examines some implications of the Greenbook outlook for
longer-term strategies for monetary policy and considers the implications for policy of
alternative possibilities for productivity growth.  The experiments are constructed
from a baseline scenario in which the Greenbook forecast is extended through 2006
using the FRB/US model, with certain judgmental adjustments to the model that
preserve the central features underlying the staff outlook.  Potential output growth in
the baseline is driven by several key considerations:  Multifactor productivity growth
continues at its 2002 pace; overall investment in capital equipment accelerates beyond
the Greenbook horizon, buoying the expansion of capital services; and the degree of
labor market slack consistent with stable inflation (the effective NAIRU) rises from
about 5¼ percent in 2002 to 5½ percent by 2005.  Taking  all these factors together,
the rate of increase in potential output is a tad above 3½ percent after 2003, a slight
rise from this year and next.  Growth abroad strengthens to 3¾ percent by 2003, and
the dollar is assumed to depreciate at a 3 percent annual rate in real terms, keeping the
ratio of the current account deficit to GDP about flat.  Lastly, the fiscal assumptions
in the extension hold the unified budget surplus at about 2 percent of nominal GDP,
modestly higher than the surplus in calendar 2002.
(7) The baseline strategy in chart 4 is designed to hold core PCE inflation
at 1¾ percent, a touch below the rate at the end of the Greenbook horizon.
Monetary policy is relatively accommodative at the start of the extension, with a real
federal funds rate  of about 2¼ percent, more than a percentage point below its
equilibrium level implied by the baseline at that time.  Consequently, monetary policy
must tighten in this scenario, by raising the nominal funds rate to 5½ percent by mid-
decade and the real rate to about its equilibrium level of 3¾ percent.  The purple ball-
and-chain line  in chart 4 shows a path for policy that is sufficient to reduce inflation to
near price stability , defined here as 1¼ percent growth in core PCE prices.  To
achieve this outcome, the real funds rate needs to rise above its long-run equilibrium
level to induce slack in the economy.  In this exercise , the nomina l rate peaks at 6
percent by the end of 2004, enough to push the unemployment rate above 6 percent
and bring inflation down to its target level by 2006.  Policy, which begins to ease in
further after 2006 to bring the unemployment rate back to the NAIRU.
(8) The 2½ percentage point decline in the funds rate so far this year
represents the swiftest monetary policy easing since the autumn of 1984.  To provide
perspective on this action, chart 5 compares this outcome with those that would have
occurred under two monetary policy rules.  As in chart 4, the black solid line in the
upper left panel shows the nominal federal funds rate for the extended Greenbook
baseline.  The blue dashed line shows the path predicted by a Taylor rule .  The rule
employed here uses standard coefficients on the contemporaneous inflation and
output gaps beginning in 2001:Q1, but incorporates the baseline’s time-varying
equilibrium real funds rate and its inflation target of 1¾ percent.  In the first half of
One possible explanation for this discrepancy is that policy choice was informed by
more than the limited information used in the Taylor rule, especially forecasts of the
economy.  To provide a perspective on this possibility, the red dotted line presents the
federal funds rate that would be chosen by a policymaker with perfect foresight
starting at the beginning of this year.  Specifically, the policymaker is assumed to be
certain that the model accurately described the economy and that the baseline
correctly described all of the forces impinging on the economy.4  The actual path for
the funds rate in the first half of this year has been much closer to that of the perfect
foresight policy than to that of the Taylor rule.
(9) The staff forecast is arguably at odds with the market’s view, which
appears to incorporate expectations of both a rapid reversal of the funds rate and
stronger corporate earnings.  Chart 6 considers the possibility that the market’s outlook
can be rationalized by faster growth of potential output than projected by the staff.  In
these exercises, structural labor productivity accelerates ¾ percentage point to 3¼
percent beginning in 2001:Q3, about the same as estimated for 1999-2000.  As before,
the black solid line plots the extended baseline, shown for reference purposes.  The
blue dashed line and the red dotted line show the funds rates from the Taylor rule and
the perfect foresight policy, respectively, operating in the context of the higher
structural productivity growth.  Both rules initially hold the federal funds rate around
its current value in  response to near-term economic weakness and ultimately raise it
enough to be consistent with the higher returns to capital provided by faster long-run
growth.5  However, because the Taylor rule does not respond to the productivity surge
until it becomes manifest in output, imbalances in inflation and output arise.  By
contrast, the funds rate under the perfect foresight policy increases much more rapidly,
beginning next year in a pattern similar to that seen in financial futures markets, and
fosters a smoother path for inflation and unemployment.6
(10) The reduction in corporate earnings of late, should it continue, might be
taken as signaling that structural labor productivity growth will continue to slow.  To
consider the implications of this possibility, we examine simulations in which
productivity growth steps down to 1¾ percent, about ¾ percentage point below that
projected in the Greenbook for this year and next.  Chart 7 plots the funds rate in the
baseline case for reference and, with this new assumption for productivity growth, the
funds rate paths produced by the Taylor rule (the blue dashed line) and the perfect
foresight policy (the red dotted line).  The productivity deceleration reduces current
and expected  income and leads to a marked weakening in aggregate demand relative to
the baseline, while adding to pressures on costs that boost inflation.  The effects of the
downshift in demand predominate for each of the policy rules, and so both call for
sharp declines in  the funds rate in  early 2002.  Unlike chart 6, where  the Taylor ru le
falls behind emerging economic developments, here it does considerably better.  The
main reason  for the Taylor rule’s more appealing performance is that the productivity
deceleration in this simulation exacerbates the economic sluggishness currently in train,
which  was already prompting the backward-looking Taylor rule to prescribe easing.
Without the need for the kind of near-term reversal in the stance of policy that was
required in chart 6, the myopia of the Taylor rule does not turn out to be a serious
liability for the conduct of monetary policy.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(11) Incoming data have prompted the staff to revise down its outlook for
investment spending over the next year and a half, directly restraining the expansion of
economic activity.  This slower accumulation of capital also pulls down the estimated
growth of structural productivity, and associated  reductions in expected returns to
labor and capital work to damp further the forecast of aggregate demand.  The effects
of these developments on consumption spending are partly offset by greater stimulus
from tax cuts than assumed in the last Greenbook.  On net, economic growth is
expected to be somewhat slower this year and the unemployment rate to rise more
sharply than in the last forecast.  Although lower productivity growth implies more
intense inflation pressures at any given unemployment rate, the economy is sufficiently
weak in the forecast to put effective slack in labor markets by late this year.  This slack
and the indirect effects of lower oil prices cause core consumer inflation to edge down
in 2002 from the higher pace experienced this year.  In the staff’s assessment, an
unchanged federal funds rate over the next year and a half, as assumed in the
Greenbook, is moderately accommodative and helps growth of aggregate demand rise
a little above that of potential output by the second half of next year, halting the climb
in the unemployment rate.
(12) The chart on the next page shows an update of the range of estimates of
the equilibrium real federal funds rate presented in the previous bluebook.7  The range
for the current equilibrium rate is roughly the same as that shown last time.8  The ½
percentage po int policy easing a t the May meeting has put the estimated real funds rate
noticeably below that range.  This gap provides a measure of the stimulus from the
current stance of monetary policy, but one that depends on the many assumptions that
went into constructing the estimates of the equilibrium funds rate, importantly
including the staff’s estimate of structural productivity growth and the level of the
NAIRU.9  The real federal funds rates implied by the policy alternatives discussed
below for this meeting–cuts of 25 and 50 basis points as well as an unchanged funds
rate–are also plotted.
(13) With much of the effect on spending of the 250 basis points of easing still
to be realized and the real funds rate already seemingly below its equilibrium value, the
Committee may wish to keep the federal funds rate unchanged  at this meeting, as
assumed in  the Greenbook.  In the staff outlook, with an unchanged federal funds rate
the effective NAIRU rises along with the unemployment rate over the forecast period,
and therefore only a moderate amount of slack opens up in labor markets.  The
Committee may see that slack as needed to lean against the recent updrift in a number
of measures of inflation, especially if it wishes to make further progress toward price
stability over time.  In the Greenbook forecast, the growth of real activity would
already be drawing close to that of its potential and headed higher by the time an
easing at this m eeting would beg in to have a noticeable impact on the economy.
Indeed, the Committee  may be concerned that the  recent behavior in financial markets
suggests that investors could rev ise up their inflation  expectations should growth
revive especially rapidly.  In light of the uncertainties about the response of the
economy to the steep easing of po licy so far this year, a pause may be considered
appropriate a t present to assess better whether the previous po licy actions are likely to
induce a suitable rebound in economic activity.
(14) A decision to hold the funds rate unchanged at this meeting–even with a
statement ind icating that the Committee  still saw risks weighted toward economic
weakness–would take financial market participants by surprise.  The extent of the
surprise would depend in part on the data on durable goods orders, home sales, and
consumer confidence that will be received just before the FOMC meeting, but judging
from current futures market quotes, short-term rates would back up sharply, likely by
more than ¼ percentage point, as markets became uncertain about whether any
additional easing would be forthcoming this year.  The resulting upward pressure on
long-term yields, though, would likely be offset somewhat by a decline in stock prices,
which could be sharp.10
(15) Instead, the Committee may deem it appropriate to ease policy at this
meeting.  Aggregate demand again has proven weaker than anticipated and has yet to
show concrete signs of firming, while declines in  resource utilization are likely to
relieve pressures on prices.  In these circumstances, the Committee may view the
staff’s assessment of the economic outlook as reasonably likely and acceptable, but it
may see the risk to that forecast as uncomfortably weighted to the downside.  With the
economy already soft for three quarters, the extent and further duration of the forces
acting to restrain spending still very unclear, and the degree of the countervailing
stimulus from the easier monetary and fiscal policies quite uncertain, an additional
easing of policy by 25 basis points would provide greater assurance of a satisfactory
strengthening  of economic activity.  Moreover, a rate cut smaller than those earlier this
year would  be appropriate if the Committee saw policy as already reasonably
accommodative and therefore wished to proceed more cautiously on the thought that
the easing cycle might need to be brought to a close before long.  Braking the pace of
easing would likely limit the tendency of market participants, observed after recent
policy actions, to extrapolate further easing, which might otherwise lead to financial
conditions that the Com mittee viewed as excessive ly stimulative.
(16) With market participants putting a little more than even odds on a 50
basis point move at this meeting, short-term interest rates would move up on an
announcement of a 25 basis point easing, even if accompanied by a statement that the
risks were still tilted toward weakness.  Market participants are unlikely to revise up
significantly their forecast of the low point for the target funds rate, but they probably
would push that po int further into the future, implying that intermediate- and longer-
term interest rates would only edge higher.  With the Federal Reserve still expected to
ease again, the negative reaction in stock markets could well be lim ited.  However, if
the smaller size of the action and the words of the announcement fostered the belief
that the easing cyc le had come to an end, a more pronounced reaction in markets
would be likely.
(17) Alternatively, the Committee may see aggregate demand or inflation
pressures as likely to be noticeably weaker than in the staff forecast, arguing for a more
forceful easing of 50 basis points.  The near-term prospects for corporate earnings are
bleak, raising the possibility of larger declines in equity prices than are built into the
staff forecast.  The resu lting hit to household wealth , along with the  more rapid  rise in
unemployment, could sap consumption spending considerably.  Even if the staff has
judged the fundamentals of spending correctly, the Committee may view the inflation
outlook to be more favorable than in the Greenbook.  In particular, the Committee
may interpret the good inflation performance of the past few years as resulting more
from lasting changes in underlying labor market conditions and less from the
temporary  effects of the acceleration  of productiv ity than is implicit in  the staff
forecast.  If so, the equilibrium real funds rate would also be lower than is implicit in
the Greenbook, and more forceful policy ease could be seen as necessary to achieve
the correct configuration of the actual and equilibr ium real rates.
(18) If the Committee reduces the funds rate 50 basis points while retaining a
statement of risks weighted toward economic weakness, short-term interest rates
would likely fall, especially as markets build in further easing this year and defer some
of the policy tightening now expected for 2002.  Equity markets would be buoyed by
the move, but the rally could prove transitory if subsequent earnings reports prove
disappointing as is likely under the staff forecast.  Real bond yields would likely fall as a
consequence of the policy action, and–un less the initial equity market rally were
particularly vigorous–nom inal yields could decline some as well.  Any increase in
inflation expectations would be short-lived if, consistent with the Committee’s
rationale for its action, the markets subsequently receive evidence of persisting
weakness in economic activity and damped inflation.
(19) Borrowing by nonfederal sectors is expected to moderate slightly in the
second half of the year, in line with the slowing in nominal income growth under the
Greenbook forecast.  Cred it supply cond itions for businesses are likely to continue to
tighten in coming months amid signs of further deterioration in the qua lity of weaker
borrowers and unfavorable news on corporate earnings.  Nevertheless, with the
economy strengthening later this year and  in 2002, a widespread contraction in credit
availability is not foreseen under the staff forecast.  Businesses are anticipated to
maintain a moderate pace of borrowing, despite softness in capital expenditures and a
reduced rate of equity retirements, as sluggish cash flow prompts firms to rely more on
external funds.  Household debt growth is forecast to drift down, reflecting a slower
pace of spending on consumer durables and the paydown of some credit card debt
with a portion of the tax rebates.  In the months just ahead, the Treasury is projected
to become a net borrower to finance tax rebates, but then to resume paying down debt
over the final months of the year.  Mainly reflecting this pattern, growth of total
domestic nonfinancial debt is forecast to pick up some in the next few months and
then to move down over the rest of the year, bringing growth for the year to 5 percent.
(20) With the waning of the effects o f previous policy easings on opportunity
cost and money demand, M2 is projected to slow to a 5½ percent growth rate over the
June-to-December period under the staff forecast.  While tax rebates should boost M2
holdings somewhat in the months ahead, a reduced level of mortgage refinancings
likely will restrain growth of this aggregate.  Given the Greenbook forecast of only a
small decline in equity prices, the projection does not incorporate a renewal of investor
shifts from the stock market to M2 assets.  M2 is expected to post growth of 8¼
percent this year, implying a 4¼ percent decline  in its velocity.  The expansion of M 3 is
projected to slow to a 7½ percent pace over the June-to-December period, as growth
of insti tutional money funds slows with the s tabiliz ing of short- term interest rates.
Over the four quarters of the year, M3 would expand 11 percent.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(21) Presented below for the mem bers' consideration is draft wording for
(1) the directive and (2) the “balance-of-risks” sentence to be included in the press
release issued after the  meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stab ility and promote sustainable growth in
output.  To further its long-run  objectives, the Committee in the immediate
future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with MAINTAINING/
INCREASING/reducing the federal funds rate AT/to an average of around
___4 percent.
(2) “Balance-of-Risks” Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the
Committee believes that the risks [ARE BALANCED WITH RESPECT TO
PROSPECTS FOR BOTH GOALS] [CONTINUE TO BE WEIGHTED
MAINLY TOWARD CONDITIONS THAT MAY  GENERATE
HEIGHTEN ED INFLATION PRESSURES] [continue to be  weighted mainly
toward conditions that may generate economic weakness] in the foreseeable
The reaction of financial markets to changes in monetary policy this year has
varied considerably and proved difficult to predict.  The table below indicates how
stock prices and Treasury coupon yields have responded to the five easings undertaken
earlier in the year.  The first column shows the “surprise” component of each
adjustment in the target funds rate, which is inferred from the change in a near-term
federal funds futures contract around the time of a policy announcement.  In the
afternoons following the first three easings this year, equity prices responded rather
strongly to the surprise in policy actions, probably because investors were quite
uncertain and concerned about the near-term outlook for the economy, and the
“surprise” affected confidence as well as the outlook for interest rates.  The
consequences for the economy and for  future policy of the shift in attitudes and equity
market reactions appeared to cause nominal Treasury yields to move in the same
direction as stock prices, rather than in  the direction of the policy surpr ises.  In April,
however, with investors already becoming more optimistic about the economic future,
a traditional response of market interest rates occurred following the unexpected policy
easing–the equity price rise was more moderate relative to the degree of surprise and
yields fell.  In the wake of the easing at the May FO MC meeting, which was a little
greater than the average of market expectations, short-term Treasury yields dropped, as
would traditionally be expected, but stock prices and long-term yields were about
unchanged.
Policy Surprises and the Responses of Equities and Treasuries
Date of
Policy
Move
Policy 
Surprise
(b. p.)
Wilshire
 Index
Yield
(b. p.)
Yield
(b. p.)
Memo:
Nominal long
rates responded
primarily to:
M2                                  M3                         M2       M3      Debt
                      ---------------------------         ---------------------------         ---------------------------
                          Ease     Ease   No move             Ease     Ease   No move             Greenbook Forecast*
                         50 b.p.  25 b.p.                    50 b.p.  25 b.p.
                      ---------------------------         ---------------------------         ---------------------------
    Monthly Growth Rates
    Feb-2001              10.9     10.9     10.9               9.9      9.9      9.9              10.9      9.9      5.0
    Mar-2001              14.4     14.4     14.4               9.5      9.5      9.5              14.4      9.5      6.0
    Apr-2001              10.4     10.4     10.4              17.6     17.6     17.6              10.4     17.6      3.4
    May-2001               5.1      5.1      5.1              13.3     13.3     13.3               5.1     13.3      3.2
    Jun-2001               8.2      8.2      8.2              11.5     11.5     11.5               8.2     11.5      5.7
    Jul-2001               6.7      6.3      5.9               8.7      8.5      8.3               5.9      8.3      5.4
    Aug-2001               7.5      6.7      5.9               8.0      7.6      7.2               5.9      7.2      6.2
    Sep-2001               8.4      7.6      6.8               8.0      7.6      7.2               6.8      7.2      5.9
    Oct-2001               6.9      6.2      5.5               7.9      7.5      7.1               5.5      7.1      3.3
    Nov-2001               4.7      4.2      3.7               7.5      7.2      6.9               3.7      6.9      3.6
    Dec-2001               4.9      4.5      4.1               7.2      7.0      6.8               4.1      6.8      4.0
Quarterly Averages
        2000 Q2            6.4      6.4      6.4               9.0      9.0      9.0               6.4      9.0      6.1
        2000 Q3            5.7      5.7      5.7               8.8      8.8      8.8               5.7      8.8      4.6
        2000 Q4            6.3      6.3      6.3               7.0      7.0      7.0               6.3      7.0      4.5
        2001 Q1           10.7     10.7     10.7              12.2     12.2     12.2              10.7     12.2      4.8
        2001 Q2           10.0     10.0     10.0              13.5     13.5     13.5              10.0     13.5      4.4
        2001 Q3            7.3      6.9      6.5               9.7      9.5      9.3               6.5      9.3      5.5
        2001 Q4            6.6      6.0      5.3               7.8      7.5      7.1               5.3      7.1      4.4
Growth Rate
      From      To
    Dec-2000 May-2001     10.8     10.8     10.8              13.5     13.5     13.5              10.8     13.5      4.2
    Dec-2000 Jun-2001     10.4     10.4     10.4              13.3     13.3     13.3              10.4     13.3      4.5
    May-2001 Dec-2001      6.9      6.3      5.8               8.6      8.3      8.0               5.8      8.0      4.9
    Jun-2001 Dec-2001      6.6      6.0      5.4               8.0      7.7      7.4               5.4      7.4      4.8
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
