Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) January 26, 2001
Class II – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent D evelopments
(1) Interest rates backed up slightly and equity markets sold off following
the announcement that the FOM C had left the stance of policy unchanged at its
December meeting.1  However, yields generally declined over subsequent days, as the
wording of the Committee’s announcement and weaker economic data apparently
fostered a sense that an easing of monetary policy was imminent.  Even so, the timing
and size of the FOM C’s 50 basis point cut in the target federal funds rate on January 3
surprised market participants, and many inferred that additional monetary easings
would occur sooner than they had expected.  Over the entire intermeeting period,
interest rates on short-term Treasury securities and the highest-grade private debt fell
substantially, in some cases by nearly a percentage point, with only a small portion of
the declines on private debt reflecting an unwinding of year-end premiums.  Current
futures quotes indicate that investors place high odds on an additional 50 basis point
easing at this meeting and anticipate that the federal funds rate will be about 125 basis
points below its current level by year-end (chart 1).  However, options quotes suggest
a relatively high degree of uncertainty  about this extended out look.
(2) The Committee’s action and the market’s inference about the likelihood
Chart 1
Financial Market Indicators
Jan Apr Jul Oct Jan Apr Jul Oct
2001 2002
December 18, 2000
January 26, 2001
Expected Federal Funds Rates Estimated from
Financial Futures*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures rates with an
allowance for term premia and other adjustments.
Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan
2000
Selected Treasury Yields
Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan
2000
High Yield
(left scale)
Corporate BBB
 (right scale)
Thirty-year
Mortgage
(weekly, right scale)
Ten-year Swap
(right scale)
Selected Private Long-Term Yields
Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan
2000
High Yield
Selected Risk Spreads*
*These spreads are the difference between the yields on the Merrill Lynch 
175 and BBB indexes and that on the Merrill Lynch AAA index.
Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan
2000
Wilshire 5000
Selected Equity Indexes
Spread of Low-Tier CP Rate
over High-Tier CP Rate*
Daily
*30-day nonfinancial, A2/P2 rate less AA rate.
Oct Nov Dec Jan
of future easings apparently contributed to a sense that the odds of a prolonged
period of economic weakness had diminished.  This revision to sentiment bolstered
equity markets, with broad equity price indexes increasing, on balance, over the
intermeeting period despite further substantial downward revisions to analysts’ near-
term earnings expectations.  Moreover, yields on lower-tier investment-grade bonds
and junk bonds fell 35 and  116 basis points, respectively.  The abatement of safe
haven demands, along with heightened prospects for a large tax cut and perhaps some
increase in inflation compensation, contributed to a small rise in longer-term Treasury
yields.  In some segments of financial markets, however, concerns about risk appeared
to escalate.  Results from the January Senior Loan Officer O pinion Survey indicate
that a majority of banks have further tightened their standards and terms on business
loans.  Moreover, risk spreads on lower-rated com mercial paper have widened
significantly since early January, as the defaults of California utilities, along with the
earlier downgrades of other prominent commercial paper issuers, seem to have
increased investor wariness.  To date, fallout from the difficulties of the California
utilities has been limited, although rating agencies have announced that the debts of
some corporations and municipalities affected by the West Coast electricity situation
have been downgraded or are being mon itored for possible downgrade.
(3) In December, overall business debt grew at a moderate pace, but the
patterns of financing continued to reflect heightened investor concerns about risk
(chart 2).  Although issuance of investment-grade bonds was brisk, virtually no
equities or junk bonds were brought to market.  Bank business loans grew rapidly,
with the advance owing  partly to lower-rated comm ercial paper issuers  temporarily
drawing down lines of credit at banks to avoid paying high year-end premiums, and
commercial paper outstanding declined.  Since the intermeeting po licy move in early
January, a substantial volume of corporate bonds, including a number of junk bonds,
Chart 2
Financial Flows and Exchange Rates
O N D J
p - Preliminary.
M2 Growth
Percent
O N D
Total Debt
Annualized
Percent
p - Preliminary.
O N D
Business Debt
Sum of Selected Components*
Annualized
Percent
*Bonds, commercial paper, and C&I loans.
Growth of Debt of Domestic Nonfinancial Sectors
Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan
1999 2000
Broad
Index
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Trading Partners
Index(9/1/99) = 100
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Exchange Rates
Solid vertical line indicates last FOMC meeting.
Dashed vertical line indicates January 3 cut in target federal funds rate.
*30-day rolling standard deviation of the
daily percentage change.
*30-day rolling standard deviation of the
daily percentage change.
S&P 500 Volatility*
has been issued in response to lower yields in more receptive markets.  Business loans
have continued to advance briskly in January, likely boosted by further substitution
out of the commercial paper market.  With lower-rated borrowers dissuaded by
elevated interest rates and unable to issue at maturities beyond a few days, the
outstanding amount of commercial paper has continued to run off in January.  In the
household  sector, consumer credit is estimated  to have decelera ted sharply in
December , and bank loan data suggest continued  moderation early  this year.
Mortgage growth is estimated to have remained relatively strong, however, supported
by declines in mortgage rates.  Federal debt continued to contract late last year and in
January.  Data for debt growth in recent months are partial and preliminary, but on
balance it appears that nonfederal and total debt expanded at a moderate pace, similar
to that recorded in the third quarter of last year.
(4) M2 growth p icked up sharply in December and appears to have risen
further in January.2  The strength likely reflects in part investors’ decisions to seek the
safety and liquid ity of M2 assets, such as retail money funds and liquid deposits, in
response to the rise in equity market volatility in November and December.  Also, the
recent declines in short- and intermediate-term rates have narrowed the opportunity
cost of holding M2.  M3 has grown even more rapidly than M2, boosted in part by
faster issuance of large time deposits to fund a pickup in bank credit, which
accelerated to an 11 percent annual growth rate in December.  In addition,
institutional money funds have ballooned  as their yields, which  adjust to changes in
market rates with a lag, have become more attractive with the fall in short-term
market interest rates.
(5) While the weaker econom ic outlook in the United Sta tes, along with
lower interest rates, tended to put downward pressure on the foreign exchange value
of the dollar, economic stagnation in Japan exerted  a countervailing influence.  Since
the December FOMC meeting, the dollar was about unchanged, on net, against the
currencies of the major industrialized countries.  The dollar lost 3 percent of its value
relative to the euro , on net, as econom ic growth in Europe came to be seen as likely to
outpace that in the United States.  The dollar also depreciated vis-à-vis the Canadian
dollar as the momentum in domestic spending and the prospect of considerable fiscal
stimulus in Canada were thought likely to cushion the impact on Canadian exports of
softening U.S. aggregate demand.  By contrast, incoming economic data for Japan
proved disappointing to hopes that economic recovery had gained a foothold, and the
dollar appreciated 4½ percent against the yen over the intermeeting period.  The bleak
Japanese economic picture revived talk that the Bank of Japan may return its official
interest rate, now at ¼ percent, to zero, and money market futures rates, as well as
longer-term yields, shifted down a touch.  The exchange value of the dollar rose about
General concerns about the effects on Latin America of a slow ing in U.S. growth
supported the dollar relative to the Mexican peso and the Brazilian real.  The
currencies of many Asian em erging market economies that are viewed as especially
vulnerable to a slowing in global demand for electronic goods also slipped against the
dollar.  Still, in most emerging markets, bond spreads narrowed somewhat, and prices
rose in equity markets.  U.S. authorities did not intervene in foreign exchange markets
over the intermeeting period;
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Oct. 2000 Nov. 2000 Dec. 2000 Jan. 2001 (p)
Money and Credit Aggregates
Longer-Term Strategies
(6) This section considers longer-term strategies for m onetary policy as well
as the policy implications of several of the alternative scenarios presented in the
Greenbook.3  All of the charts include a baseline scenario in which the Greenbook
forecast is extended through 2005 using the FRB/US model, adjusted to preserve the
key characteristics of the economy embodied in the judgmental forecast.  In this
extension, potential supply is assumed to expand  at the same rate  as in 2002, with
structural labor productivity growth continu ing at 3 percent per year.  The earlier
acceleration of structural productivity had helped to hold down price increases
because efficiency gains outpaced the lagging pickup in real wages.  But with the
leveling out of structural productivity growth, this disinflationary effect wanes, and the
degree of labor market slack consistent with steady inflation (the effective NAIRU)
edges up from about 4¾ percent currently to about 5¼ percent by 2005.4  Also after
of about 2 percent of GDP.  The dollar is predicted to depreciate at a 5 percent rate
per year in real terms, and foreign economic growth picks up somewhat.  Together,
these last two factors roughly stabilize the ratio of the current account deficit to GDP.
(7) In the alternative strategies for monetary policy shown in chart 3, the
baseline policy keeps the federal funds rate unchanged at 5¾  percent beyond 2002.  In
contrast to the conditions underlying the long-run scenario section of a number of
bluebooks in recent years, potential supply and aggregate demand are approximately
in balance at the end of the Greenbook forecast in 2002, and little impetus to raise or
lower inflation rates is in the pipeline.  Moreover, the real federal funds rate at that
Chart 3
Alternative Strategies for Monetary Policy
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
Baseline
Taylor Rule
Price Stability
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
Baseline
Taylor Rule
Price Stability
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Percent Percent
Baseline
Taylor Rule
Price Stability
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
Baseline
Taylor Rule
Price Stability
time is close to its equilibrium level (recognizing , of course, the cons iderable
uncertainty that surrounds this  and al l other  aspects of our projections).
Consequently, under this policy, the unemployment rate remains in the vicinity of the
effective NAIRU from 2002 to 2005, and core PCE inflation is little changed.  The
Taylor rule policy sets the federal funds rate in response to core PCE inflation and the
gap between actual output and the level of output consistent with the effective
NAIRU.5  The equilibrium real interest rate used in the rule is that implicit in the
extended Greenbook baseline (slightly above 4 percent), while targeted inflation is set
at 1½ percent.  As shown by the dot-dash lines, the path for the federal funds rate
given by the Taylor rule follows the baseline assumption reasonably closely, although
the nominal and real federa l funds rates are a b it lower in the near term and a bit
higher later.6  With the price stability policy, the Committee p laces inflation on a  path
to virtual price stability–as measured by core PCE inflation at a 1 percent rate.  In
order to accomplish this objective, policy has to be tighter than the baseline at some
point.  In the alternative shown, the funds rate is kept at its current 6 percent level for
a time so that the required tightness occurs early in the simulation period, and thus
inflation is on a perceptible downward track beginning in 2002.
(8)  Chart 4 presents alternative supply-side scenarios.  The 4 percent
NAIRU scenario has been designed to  explain the good performance of inflation in
recent years in terms of a permanently lower long-run NAIRU, rather than on the
basis of transitory effects o f accelerating productivity.  Again , monetary po licy is
assumed to  follow a Taylor rule, but one that incorporates a lower inflation  target
Chart 4
Alternative Supply-Side Scenarios
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
Baseline (chart 1)
4 Percent NAIRU
Productivity Slowdown
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
Baseline (chart 1)
4 Percent NAIRU
Productivity Slowdown
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Percent Percent
Baseline (chart 1)
4 Percent NAIRU
Productivity Slowdown
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
Baseline (chart 1)
4 Percent NAIRU
Productivity Slowdown
(1 percent) than was used in the baseline’s Taylor rule, as the Committee takes
advantage of the “opportun ity” of emerging slack to make further progress toward
price stability.7  As shown by the dot-dash line, the federal funds rate is eased
aggressively over the next two years to limit the rise in the unemployment rate, but the
lower NAIRU means that a decline in inflation to 1 percent still can be achieved.  The
productivity slowdown scenario retains the staff view of the NAIRU and the role of
changes in structural productivity growth in the inflation process, but assumes that the
rate of structural productivity growth going forward falls permanently to 1½ percent
(its 1973-94 average)  rather  than continuing to run at 3 percent as in the baseline.
Slower trend growth raises the effective NAIRU sharply, which  puts upward pressure
on inflation, but it also weakens demand; on balance, demand is restrained more than
potential supply relative to the baseline, lowering the equilibrium real interest rate.  If
policy follows the Taylor rule, as assumed in this scenario, the federal funds rate drifts
down, but by less than the decline in the equ ilibrium real funds rate in order to check
the rise in inflation.
(9) Chart 5 considers the implications of alternative demand-side
scenarios presented in the Greenbook, but under the assumption that monetary
policy follows the Taylor rule.  In the recession scenario (dot-dash lines), weakness in
aggregate demand is more pronounced than in the baseline by enough to push the
economy into an outr ight recession.  The downward impetus to demand reverses fully
during 2002.  As shown, the unemployment rate rises to 6 percent in 2002 even
though the  federa l funds rate is  reduced to about 4½ percent  by the end of 2001.
Even with the unemployment rate rising well above the effective NAIRU, inflation
Chart 5
Alternative Demand-Side Scenarios
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
Baseline (chart 1)
Recession
Growth Pause
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
Baseline (chart 1)
Recession
Growth Pause
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Percent Percent
Baseline (chart 1)
Recession
Growth Pause
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
Baseline (chart 1)
Recession
Growth Pause
increases slightly in 2002 as lower interest rates induce a steeper drop in the exchange
value of the dollar than in the baseline, raising import prices.  In the growth pause
scenario, the near-term weakness in aggregate demand stems solely from excess
business inventor ies and not also from a slowing in final demand, as in the baseline.
After excess inventories are worked off, the greater underlying strength in final
demand shows through to aggregate output growth.  As shown by the dotted line, the
Committee lowers the federal funds rate to 5¾ percent in the current quarter but
promptly reverses this action.  With final demand persistently stronger than in the
baseline scenario, after 2001 both nominal and real interest rates need to rise further.
Medium-term Projections of M2 Growth
(10) This section briefly reviews the growth of M2 last year and presents staff
projections for the  next two years that are consistent  with the Greenbook forecast.
(See table below.)  Since the mid-1990s, in contrast to earlier in that decade, the
demand for this aggregate has conformed fairly well on average with historical
relationships to opportunity cost and spending (chart 6).  In that context, analysis of
the deviations of M2 growth from projections, against the backdrop of other
developments in financial markets, could be helpful in understanding the evolution of
financial conditions and their implications for the economic outlook.  Moreover, in
the very long run, trends in M2 and prices should be related.
Growth  Rates of M 2 and M2 Velocity
(in percent)
Actual Projected
M2 6.1 5½ 5½
V2 0.0 -1½ 0
Memo:
Nominal
GDP
(11) Even though velocity and opportunity cost have moved together on
average over recent years, significant divergences also are apparent that may be related
in part to the unusual behavior of the equity market.  Beginning in 1996, investors
apparently began to view equity returns as quite attractive, and flows into equ ity
mutual funds surged at the expense of M2, with the result that velocity trended higher
through mid-1997.  However, velocity subsequently moved back down as the further
runup of equity prices boosted stock market wealth appreciably relative to income,
and households seemed to take steps to rebalance portfolios by reallocating funds to
assets in M2.  M2 velocity has been flat over the past two years.  In 2000, the damping
effect on money demand of the rise in opportunity cost appeared to be offset by the
response of households to equity market volatility and to a flat, and at times inverted,
yield curve, which gave investors little incentive to shift funds out of M2 assets and
into longer-m aturity capital market instruments.
(12) M2 growth is expected to moderate somewhat in 2001 as the expansion
of nominal income slows.  The downshift in M2 growth is tempered, however, by the
reduction in short-term interest rates stemming from the assumed 75 basis points of
policy easing in the first quarter and by the anticipated flatness of the yield curve.  In
addition, lower mortgage rates in the forecast spur a wave of mortgage refinancing
activity that pushes up M2 growth as mortgage servicing agents temporarily place the
prepayments in transaction accounts before remitting them to holders of mortgage-
backed securities.  Moreover, households are expected to favor M2 assets in view of
the disappoin ting returns in the equity market anticipated in  the staff forecast.  With
M2 growth slowing considerably less than nominal income, M2 velocity is projected  to
fall notably this year.  In 2002, the staff assumes that short-term rates hold steady and
that savers will have largely completed their adjustments to the flat yield curve and
lower expected returns on holding equities.  In this environment, M2 growth is
expected to level out, running at about the same pace as nominal income.  Even
though inflation persists over the next two years in the staff forecast, M2 growth on
average in 2001 and 2002 is only modestly above the 4½ percent average pace that
would be associated with price stability because of shortfalls in the growth of real
output relative to  that of potential.8
Short-run policy alternatives
(13) The staff has again revised down its outlook for economic growth in the
near term, reflecting weaker expansion in aggregate dem and than previously projected
and more aggressive production  cutbacks to a lign inventories better wi th sales.
However, final demands over the forecast horizon are supported by the effects on
consumption and investment of continuing elevated structural productivity gains and
are augmented by the substantial declines in most interest rates over recent months as
well as by projected decreases in energy prices and the foreign exchange value of the
dollar.  As a result, the inventory correction is completed fairly promptly, and
projected economic growth resumes in  the spring and  picks up thereafter.  Despite
the economic rebound, the sizable shortfall from potential output growth in the next
few quarters quickly pushes up the unemployment rate to around 5¼ percent by year-
end.  By then, though, aggregate demand is expanding at a pace just short of potential
and the unemploym ent rate edges only a bit higher over the remainder of the forecast
period.  With structural productivity growth leveling out, the rise in the
unemployment rate is seen as necessary to keep core consumer inflation rates near
current levels.  Against this backdrop, the staff forecast assumes only a small
addit ional cut in the federal funds rate in  the near term .
(14) If the Committee found the staff assessment o f the outlook to  be both
reasonable and acceptable, it might opt for alternative A, which would lower the
federal funds rate 25 basis points to 5¾ percent.  In the context of this forecast, such
an easing leans against softness in aggregate demand while resisting an eventual pickup
of inflation in circumstances of continued pressures on labor resources.  In light of
the considerable uncertainty about the prospects for spending, such a measured step
could be seen  as striking a balance between two possible scenarios for aggregate
demand discussed earlier–a recession and a growth pause.  To be sure, the market has
a more substantial easing at this meeting built into interest rates, but this expectation
was shaped in part by the Committee ’s unexpectedly aggressive action earlier this
month.  Over a som ewhat longer horizon, the structure of interest rates incorporates
a drop in the funds rate to 4¾ percent by year-end–more than  the Committee may see
as likely to be necessary to restore acceptable growth.  If so, it may view disappointing
markets a little as possibly fostering more sustainable and stabilizing financial
conditions.  Indeed, the Committee may be concerned that another 50 basis point
action hard on the heels of the January 3 move risks leading investors to expect even
more ease at future meetings than currently.  Such a reaction would heighten the
possibility that the stimulus emanating from financial markets would give additional
impetus to a rebound in  spending that might soon be underway in any event.  Given
the lags in the effects of monetary policy, any resulting price pressures could be
difficult to contain even with a relatively quick turnaround in po licy.
(15) If the Committee were to  choose this alternative, it might want to retain
the current statement that the risks are  weighted toward economic weakness, unless it
were confident tha t the economy had s tabilized and  moderate growth  was in  prospect.
With on ly a 25 basis point easing, market in terest rates probab ly would back up, credit
spreads would widen some, and stock prices wou ld decline as the policy move fell
short of market expectations and concerns about a pro longed period of economic
weakness re-intensified.
(16) If the Committee thought the economy might well be weaker than in the
staff forecast, it may wish to take another substantial easing action by cutting the
federal funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting, as in alternative AN.  As the
recession simulation illustrated, a substantial shortfall in demand would require
prompt and forceful policy action.  Even  if the Committee thought the staff forecast
was the most reasonable po int estimate, it might still favor a 50 basis point easing if it
perceived that the probabilities around that outcom e were skewed toward
considerably softer demand than in that forecast.  With inflation and inflation
expectations likely to remain quiescent for a while, a substantial easing to cushion
downside risks to economic activity is unlikely to boost materially the risk of greater
inflation pressures.  Indeed, a substantial easing might also be viewed as appropria te if
the Committee did not see outsized downside risks to demand but thought price
pressures were unlikely to intensify at an unemployment rate near its current level, as
in the 4 percent NAIRU simulation earlier in this bluebook.  Financial market
participants currently have built in high odds of a ½ percentage point cut in the funds
rate at this meeting.  Although conditions in some segments of financial markets have
improved in recent weeks, developments in the commercial paper and bank loan
markets indicate that suppliers of funds remain quite wary.  Under these
circumstances, the effects of surprising the markets with a smaller easing could be
especially adverse.
(17) The market response to a 50 basis point reduction in the federal funds
rate would depend importantly on the wording of the announcement and balance of
risks statement that accompanied the action.  Retaining  a statement of risks weighted
toward economic weakness would seem appropriate if, in light of the evident
softening in demand and subdued readings on price and wage inflation, the
Committee saw the possibility of below-trend growth as a more serious problem in
the foreseeable futu re than the chance of a rise in inflation.  Market participants
expect the Committee  to announce continued unbalanced  risks toward economic
weakness as well as to ease policy by 50 basis points.  S till, markets might rally some if
participants see th is combination as confirming that the Federal Reserve intended to
continue to counter economic weakness relatively aggressively.  The dollar  could
weaken on foreign exchange markets as m ajor foreign central banks are unlikely to
match the System easing at this time.  A statement that risks were balanced would be
justified if the Com mittee thought the 100 basis points of easing over the last month
were likely to be sufficient to promote a rapid return to sustainab le growth, which
would keep labor markets relatively tight.  Such a statement would cause market
participants to reassess the prospects for future policy actions and roll back much of
the expected easing going forward.  In consequence, asset prices could give back some
of their recent gains while the dollar could even strengthen a bit on foreign exchange
(18) The Committee may choose the unchanged federal funds rate of
alternative B if it is dissatisfied with recent rates of core inflation  and wants to
establish a downward trajectory for inflation, as in the price stability scenario in the
second section of this bluebook.  The rationale for this policy choice would be
strengthened if the Committee saw the recent slowdown in the  growth of aggregate
demand as likely to be more temporary than does the staff and thus the recent policy
easing as probably sufficient to counter the sluggishness in the econom y that emerged
recently.  Regard less of the balance of risks statement, leaving the funds rate
unchanged would come as a considerable surprise to market participants and would
spark a sell-off in asset markets as participants reassessed the economic outlook and
the Committee’s posture.  The backup in interest rates and drop in equity prices
would prompt still more caution on the part of loan officers and investors.
(19) Under the Greenbook forecast, borrowing by the business and
household sectors combined over the first half of 2001 is expected to stay around the
reduced pace of the second half of last year.  Consumer cred it is projected to
decelerate further over the first half, largely reflecting weaker outlays on consumer
durables and  some rising caution by households experiencing uncomfortable  debt-
servicing burdens.  Recent declines in mortgage rates are expected to spur continued
heavy mortgage refinancing activity, mostly to reduce debt-servicing costs on existing
debt but in a number of cases also to extract some equity.  Lower bond rates and an
improved tone to the corporate bond market already have begun to boost issuance;
going forward, overall business borrowing should run somewhat above the subdued
pace of the latter part of last year, when firms seemed inclined to ho ld off on their
borrowing plans.  Business borrowing from banks is expected to m oderate, in part
reflecting the increased reliance on bond offerings but also the more restrictive
posture of loan  officers.  Debt of nonfederal sectors is projected to grow at about a
held down by paydowns of federal debt.
(20) M2 is projected to grow at a 5½ percent annual rate over the January-to-
June period under the Greenbook forecast, well above the projected 2¾ percent
growth of nominal GDP over the first half of this year.  M2 growth should be
boosted relative to that of nominal income by the decline in short-term market rates
following the January policy easings and by a continuation of the heightened
preferences of households for the more stable assets that comprise M2.  Mortgage
refinancing activity  also is likely to lift M2 notably over th is period.  M3 is expected to
grow at a 7 percent annual rate over the January-to-June period.  Growth of
institutional money funds is projected to be quite brisk as the yields on these funds lag
the downward m ove in short-term market interest rates.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
M2                                   M3                          M2       M3      Debt
                        ----------------------------         ----------------------------         ---------------------------
                           Alt. A’  Alt. A   Alt. B             Alt. A’  Alt. A   Alt. B              Greenbook Forecast* 
                        ----------------------------         ----------------------------         ---------------------------
    Monthly Growth Rates
      Nov-2000               4.2      4.2      4.2                4.2      4.2       4.2               4.2      4.2      4.6
      Dec-2000               9.6      9.6      9.6               12.5     12.5      12.5               9.6     12.5      4.6
      Jan-2001              11.2     11.2     11.2               15.7     15.7      15.7              11.2     15.7      2.9
      Feb-2001               8.4      8.0      7.6               11.6     11.4      11.2               8.0     11.4      5.4
      Mar-2001               7.3      6.5      5.7                8.4      8.0       7.6               6.5      8.0      6.2
      Apr-2001               8.1      7.3      6.5                8.0      7.6       7.2               7.3      7.6      3.3
      May-2001               2.7      2.0      1.3                3.8      3.5       3.2               2.0      3.5      3.4
      Jun-2001               3.8      3.3      2.8                4.6      4.4       4.2               3.3      4.4      4.3
Quarterly Growth Rates
        2000 Q1              5.8      5.8      5.8               10.5     10.5      10.5               5.8     10.5      5.6
        2000 Q2              6.2      6.2      6.2                8.8      8.8       8.8               6.2      8.8      6.2
        2000 Q3              5.6      5.6      5.6                8.8      8.8       8.8               5.6      8.8      4.7
        2000 Q4              6.5      6.5      6.5                7.0      7.0       7.0               6.5      7.0      4.1
        2001 Q1              9.1      8.9      8.7               12.1     12.0      11.9               8.9     12.0      4.4
        2001 Q2              6.3      5.6      4.9                7.2      6.9       6.5               5.6      6.9      4.3
Growth Rate Ranges
          From       To
      Dec-1999 Dec-2000      6.2      6.2      6.2                8.6      8.6       8.6               6.2      8.6      5.2
      Dec-2000 Jun-2001      7.0      6.5      5.9                8.8      8.6       8.3               6.5      8.6      4.3
      Jan-2001 Jun-2001      6.1      5.5      4.8                7.4      7.1       6.8               5.5      7.1      4.6
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(21) Presented below for the mem bers' consideration is draft wording for
(1) the directive and (2) the “balance of risks” sentence to be included in the press
release issued after the  meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stab ility and promote sustainable growth in
output.  To further its long-run  objectives, the Committee in the immediate
future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with MAINTAINING/
INCREASING/reducing the federal funds rate AT/to an average of around
___ 6 percen t.
(2) “Balance-of-Risks” Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the
Committee believes that the risks [ARE BALANCED WITH RESPECT TO
PROSPECTS FOR BOTH GOALS] [CONTINUE TO BE WEIGHTED
MAINLY TOWARD CONDITIONS THAT MAY  GENERATE
HEIGHTENED INFLATION PRESSURES] [are weighted mainly toward
conditions that may generate economic weakness] in the foreseeable  future .
