Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) May 10, 2001
Class II – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent D evelopments
(1) The 50-basis-point reduction in the target federal funds rate at the
March 20 meeting was less than some investors had expected, but the accompanying
statement contributed to expectations that an intermeeting ease would follow.1  Those
expectations gradually diminished over subsequent weeks as incoming data and
statements by several Federal Reserve officials evidently were read by investors as
suggesting less weakness in the economy going forward.  Thus, the 50-basis-point
reduction in the federal funds ra te on Apr il 18 caught investors by surprise .  Short-
term interest rates declined in response, as market participants marked down the
expected path of the federal funds rate over the next year or so.  More recently,
surprisingly weak employment data added to the amount of near-term easing built
into asset prices.  Futures rates currently indicate that market participants expect the
federal funds rate to be cut another 50 basis points at the May meeting to 4 percent
and to decline to about 3¾ percent by fall–-about ½ percentage point lower than was
anticipated before the March meeting (chart 1).  On balance over the intermeeting
period, short-term  interest rates fell ½ to  1 percentage point.
(2) Despite the sharp decline in short-term interest rates, longer-term yields
rose on balance over the intermeeting period.  Most of the increase occurred before
the intermeeting policy move, as investors became more confident tha t output growth
will pick up; the growing likelihood of substantial federal tax cuts also may have added
pressure on long-term yields.  Although  yields on longer-term nominal Treasury
securities increased nearly ½ percentage point, those on comparable inflation-indexed
securities drifted lower.2  The implied run-up in inflation compensation left that
measure above the levels observed before its sharp decline in late  2000 associated with
emerging weakness in the economy.  The improved  sentiment about the economic
outlook and the surprise intermeeting policy easing may have contributed to a
narrowing of risk premiums, especially on lower-grade corporate debt securities, and
to a rise in stock prices.  Equity markets were also bolstered by first-quarter earnings
reports, which generally came in above sharply reduced expectations, although
analysts continued to lower forecasts for earnings in subsequent quarters.  Over the
intermeeting  period, the Wilshire 5000 index  gained more than 7½ percent, leaving it
about 5 percent below its year-end level.
(3) Equity prices and long-term yields rose in other industrial countries as
well, likely reflecting in part the importance of the United States for the global
economy and the perceived improvement in prospects for globally important
industries, including those in the high-technology area.  The increase in equ ity prices
was particularly large in Japan–about 15 percent–reflecting in part a favorable market
reaction to the Bank of Japan’s announcement of policy changes the day before the
March FOMC meeting, which included a return to a zero interest rate target, and the
formation of the new Koizumi-led government in late April.  Short-term yields abroad
generally declined, although by less than in the United States.  The European Central
Bank ended its “wait and see” policy recently with a 25-basis-point cut in its policy
rates.  The reduction came amid increasing indications of economic weakness in the
euro area and despite some signs of increased inflationary pressure.  Policy rates also
were cut by 25 basis points in Canada and Switzerland and by 50 basis points in two
steps in the United Kingdom since the March FOMC meeting.  The dollar appreciated
against a basket of major currencies early in the intermeeting period , but it later
retraced that movement, particularly after the FO MC’s surprise interest rate cut in
mid-April, and finished the intermeeting period about unchanged (chart 2).
over the
intermeeting period         U.S. authorities did not intervene.
(4) The dollar was also essentially unchanged on balance against a basket of
currencies of our other important trading  partners.  Argentine financial markets were
roiled by growing uncertainties about the country’s financial situation and speculation
that its exchange rate peg might be modified, as well as by an open dispute between
the Argent ine government and central bank over  the use of reserve requirements.
Market pressures spilled over to Brazil, where the real fell almost 5 percent against the
dollar.  Risk spreads on dollar-denominated Argentine and Brazilian debt moved up
sharply.  In contrast, the Mexican peso appreciated about 4 percent against the dollar,
as monetary authorities held to their tight policy stance, and spreads on Mexican debt
narrowed.  The Turk ish lira regained some of its previously lost ground, and Turkish
financial markets calmed, as the country’s financial problems appeared  to have been
brought under better control partly in response to the prospect of additional funding
from the IM F and World Bank.  The Indonesian rupiah and the Philipp ine peso both
declined sharp ly against the dollar in reaction to financial problems and domestic
political turmoil.
(5) The debt of nonfederal sectors in the United States is estimated to have
advanced at a round an 8 percent rate on average over March and April, about equal to
its robust pace of the second half of 2000 and early 2001 (see chart 2).  However,
growth of business debt fell back in recent months, likely reflecting a  reduction in
inventory and capital investment and in merger and acquisition activity.  Firms
continued to  borrow heavily in the corporate bond market, but they reduced their
reliance on short-term financing markets.  Commercial paper outstanding ran off
further in March and April, albeit at a much slower pace than earlier in the year, and
business loans at commercial banks also declined very recently, possibly damped by
the further tightening of credit conditions indicated in the most recent Senior Loan
Officer Opinion survey.  Household borrowing also has showed some signs of
slowing in recent months.  Growth in consumer credit declined moderately in March
and is estimated to have slowed further in April, as outlays on durable goods appear
to have fallen back from the surprisingly strong pace early in the year.  Mortgage debt
growth, by contrast, seems to have largely sustained its rapid pace, reflecting strength
in the residential housing sector and substantial refinancing activity.  State and local
government borrowing picked up further in M arch and April, as lower interest rates
fueled advance refunding of existing debt.  The federal government, in contrast, paid
down a considerable amount of debt in April, which pulled down the growth of total
domestic nonfinancial debt that month.
(6) Spurred by the drop in its opportunity cost, M2 expanded at an average
pace of 12½ percent over M arch and April, with particular strength in liqu id deposits
and retail money funds.  M2 growth was boosted by several special factors, including
extensive mortgage refinancing activity and, in April, households' accumulation of
liquid balances to make nonwithheld tax payments, which increased by more than
allowed for by seasonal factors.  In addition, portfo lio flows into safe, liqu id assets
amid volati le movements in equity prices likely added to M2 growth in recent months .
However, weekly data suggest that M2 growth has slowed some of late, perhaps
reflecting an unwinding of tax-related balances and the resumption of more normal
portfo lio flows into equities.  M3 a lso expanded  at a rap id pace in recent months .
Growth of institution-only money funds remained very brisk, in part because rates on
those funds do not decline as quickly as short-term market rates.  Managed liabilities
included in M3 also increased in April, apparently to help finance a pickup in bank
credit growth and a shift in bank fund ing from foreign to U.S. sources.
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Money and Credit Aggregates
Policy Alternatives
(7) The staff forecast for this meeting embodies a weaker outlook for
aggregate demand than in the March Greenbook, reflecting in part incoming
information suggesting lower-than-expected trajectories for investment and
consumption spending.  With pro jected spending on capital equipment softer than in
the last forecast and estimates of multifactor productivity growth over recent years
revised down, the staff has trimmed its estimate of the growth of structural
productivity somewhat, which further damps prospective aggregate demand.  The
staff has assumed that the Federal Reserve will respond to this more negative outlook
by easing policy  50 basis points a t this meeting.  Thereafter, the federal funds rate is
held unchanged at  a level one percentage point below  that of the last Greenbook.
Earnings disappointments are expected to trigger some near-term declines in stock
prices, but long-term interest rates and the dollar are expected to hold near current
levels given this policy path.  The impetus provided by the cumulative policy easings
and the support to investment and real income from continuing efficiency gains
engendered by new technologies contribute to a strengthening of the growth of
spending over the forecast period.  In addition, fiscal stimulus spurs consumption
demand beginning later this year.  By the end of the projection period, economic
growth rises back to a rate close to that of its potential.  With slack emerging in labor
and product markets and energy prices declining, core PCE inflation slips back under
(8) In considering the appropriate stance of policy , it may be useful to
compare the real federal funds rate with estimates of the current level of the
equilibrium real federal funds  rate.  The equilibrium rate is defined here to be the rate
that, if maintained, eventually would return output to potential once the effects of any
transitory disturbances have dissipated.  Thus, the equilibrium rea l federal funds rate
reflects the longer-term forces shaping the outlook for the real econom y and so
provides one benchmark for judging the implications of alternative policy stances.  To
be sure, the appropriate stance of policy relative to that equilibrium rate in a given
instance will depend on policymakers’ objectives, the current levels of output and
inflation, and an assessment of the transitory factors that may influence the paths of
inflation and output over the next few years.
(9) The chart on the next page shows a range of estimates of the equilibrium
real federal funds rate, as well as the actual real funds rate and its historical average.3
The range is constructed from severa l indiv idual estimates of the equi librium rea l rate.
Two are derived from the FRB/US model; two others are calculated from the
relationship between the real funds rate and the output gap  using a statistical filter to
separate permanent changes in that relationsh ip from temporary deviations.  In both
of these approaches, one estimate is based on h istorical data while the other augments
these data with  the staff forecast through 2002.  A fifth  estimate, which  begins in
estimates imply some decline in the equilibrium rate over recent quarters, likely owing
in part to the longer-term effects on demand of an increase in the equity premium,
which reduces wealth, and of a slowing in the growth of potential output, which holds
down the expansion of  permanent real income and earnings.  The FOMC’s current
target for the nominal funds rate implies a real federal funds rate of about 2¾
percent–around the lower end of the range.  The chart also shows the real funds rates
implied by the three policy alternatives discussed below.4
(10) If the Committee, like the staff, anticipates a prolonged period of weak
aggregate demand, it might choose the 50 basis point reduction in the target federal
funds rate assumed in the staff forecast.  While such a reduction would leave the real
funds rate noticeably below the range of the estimates of its equilibrium value, an
accommodative policy stance may be seen as needed for a time to counter temporary
restraints on aggregate demand.  In particular the Committee may be concerned about
household spending in an  environment of a weaken ing job market and about business
investment outlays in view of the drags from the previous slowdown in final demand
and the over-accumulation of capital in som e sectors.  In these circumstances, growth
would remain slugg ish for a time even after further policy easing, lessening pressures
on resources and likely rolling back the recent upticks in inflation and inflation
expectations.  Indeed, the Committee may view the resource gap likely to open up
under this scenario as sizable enough to imply a margin in which spending could snap
back faster than expected without producing a deterioration in the inflation
environment.  Market participants already expect a substan tial reversal of policy in
and increasing the size of the anticipated tightening if evidence of such a snap-back
emerged.  As long as the Committee reinforced such sentiment with its words and
actions, the resulting increase in real interest rates would work to stabilize the
economy and constrain inflation.
(11) Investors are expecting a 50 basis point move at this meeting, along with
a statement ind icating that the balance of risks remains weighted  toward economic
weakness, to be followed by an additional 25 basis point move by fall.  Validating
market expectations for this meeting would leave interest rates, equity prices, and the
foreign exchange value of the dollar largely unchanged.  The Committee  may find this
outcome especially attractive if it believes that the balance of risks is sufficiently tilted
toward weakness to make the added  policy easing bu ilt into asset prices a reasonable
(12) The Com mittee might choose a more modest 25 basis point reduction
in the federal funds rate at this meeting if it views aggregate demand going forward as
likely to be noticeably less weak than in the staff forecast, perhaps because it sees the
large cumulative easing of policy since the start of the year as providing more support
for demand than in that forecast.  Among financial indicators, the rapid growth of
money and the steepness of the yield curve may suggest that considerable stimulus is
already in place.  In these circumstances, with the real funds rate at the low end of the
range of estimates of its equilibrium level, and with equity markets having risen
appreciably over the intermeeting period, the Committee may believe that a more
forceful policy action at this meeting would create unacceptable odds of a policy
overshoot, with potentially adverse consequences for inflation.  Concerns in this
regard might be accentuated by the recent firmer tone of the inflation data and the
increases in survey and market measures of expected inflation.  Thus, even if the
Committee suspects that additional easing m ight well be appropriate at som e point, it
might choose a smaller policy step at this meeting to allow time for more evidence to
accumulate on whether the economy will be soft enough to contain inflation pressures
and warrant additional  easing .
(13) Market participants would be surprised by a 25 basis point easing.  Even
if such a policy move is accompanied by a statement that the balance of risks remains
weighted toward economic weakness, short-term interest rates would rise as investors
marked up their expectations for the path of the federal funds rate over coming
months.  Higher interest rates, together with a sense that monetary policy is less
focused on fostering a return to robust economic growth, wou ld lead to a fall in stock
prices.  If the drop in equity prices is quite substantial, longer-term interest rates also
might decline, reflecting the weaker outlook for the economy.  These effects in
financial markets would be attenuated if, in light of the statement accompanying the
policy announcement, the Federal Reserve is seen more as stretching out the timing of
its policy moves than as reducing the total amount of easing that will be forthcoming.
(14) If the Committee believes that the outlook for aggregate demand is
probably weaker than in the staff forecast, or that the risks around that forecast are
skewed substantially to the downside, it might choose a 75 basis point reduction in
the target federal funds rate.  Such weakness could owe, for example, to a more
protracted falloff in high-tech investment as businesses reconsider the profitability of
these capital projects, which in turn would damp structural productivity growth and
be reflected in a more pronounced decline in the equilibrium real funds rate.  Even if
the Committee agrees with the staff forecast of output and employment, it still may
view their projected paths as unacceptably weak, justifying a larger cut in the federal
funds rate than is assumed in that forecast.  For example, the Committee may think
that the unemployment rate does not need to rise as much or as qu ickly as in the staff
forecast to keep inflation in check.
(15) A 75 basis point easing accompanied by a statement that the risks remain
weighted toward economic weakness would lower the expected near-term path of
policy, reducing other shorter-term interest rates and easing financial conditions more
generally.  The larger-than-expected policy move would presumably bo lster
expectations of economic growth and corporate earnings, boosting stock prices.
Effects on longer-term nominal interest rates are less clear.  Such rates would tend to
be pulled down by the change in near-term policy expectations and the associated
decline in real interest rates, but that tendency could be more than  offset by a rise in
inflation premiums if market participants read the larger-than-expected policy move as
increasing the odds of a significant pickup in inflation .
(16) Although market participants expect the Committee to retain its view
that the balance of risks is weighted toward economic weakness, the Committee might
believe that the level of rates selected at this meeting is sufficiently low to balance the
risks of economic weakness with those of increased inflation pressures.  If, for
example, rates are cut by 50 or 75 basis points, the Committee might view the
resulting real federal funds rate of 2¼ or 2 percent as low enough to make the
reduced risks of economic weakness comparable to the increased risks of higher
inflation.  Most investors would probably read a shift by the Committee to a
statement of balanced risks as indicating that the current cycle of policy easing had
ended.  As a result, a combination of a 50 basis point policy move and a sh ift to
balanced risks would cause interest rates to back up and stock prices to decline, as
investors take out the additional easing that had been expected in the near term.  By
contrast, a 75 basis point reduction in the target federal funds rate accompanied by a
statement of balanced risks would tend to  lower interest rates a little, since it would
move up the timing  of policy easing that is already expected, and boost stock prices
slightly.  However, market participants might view a move to balanced risks as
suggesting that the Committee could be less likely to react quickly to future signs of
economic weakness, in which case stock prices might slip, causing long-term rates to
fall a bi t further.
(17) Under the  staff forecast, a significant further tightening of credit
conditions is not anticipated in coming quarters, although with the economy soft and
profits not rebounding, lenders are likely to remain cautious.  The expansion of
domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to slow to about a 5 percent pace from
April to December.  Expected federal surpluses result in further substantial paydowns
of Treasury debt in coming months before the need to finance the projected tax
rebate requires the Treasury to temporarily become a net borrower.  Nonfederal debt
growth is projected to moderate some, but it remains considerably faster than the
expansion in  nominal spending.  Although mortgage growth is expected to remain
brisk, household debt growth should slow as weaker consumption spending damps
the expansion of consumer credit.  Business borrowing also is anticipated to soften, as
a widening of the gap between internally generated funds and capital expenditures in
the second half of the year is more than offset by a reduction in equity retirements.
(18) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 is projected to expand at a 5½
percent pace from A pril to December , well below i ts average rate in recent months .
The deceleration owes in part to the projected slowdown in the growth of nominal
spending and the waning effects of policy easings on opportunity costs.  In addition,
some of the special factors that have boosted M2 growth of late–including mortgage
refinancing and tax-season effects, and perhaps some safe haven  flows out of equity
markets–are  expected to unwind over coming m onths.  M3 growth is projected to
decline to a 7 percent pace over the April-to-December period, reflecting the
moderation in M2 expansion and smaller increases in institutional money funds as
their rates ad just to lower  market interest rates.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(19) Presented below for the mem bers' consideration is draft wording for
(1) the directive and (2) the “balance-of-risks” sentence to be included in the press
release issued after the  meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stab ility and promote sustainable growth in
output.  To further its long-run  objectives, the Committee in the immediate
future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with MAINTAINING/
INCREASING/reducing the federal funds rate AT/to an average of around
___4½ percent.
(2) “Balance-of-Risks” Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the
Committee believes that the risks [ARE BALANCED WITH RESPECT TO
PROSPECTS FOR BOTH GOALS] [ARE WEIGHTED MAINLY
TOWARD CONDITIONS THAT MAY  GENERATE HEIGHTENED
INFLATIO N PRESSURES] [are CONTINUE TO BE weighted main ly
toward conditions that may generate economic weakness] in the foreseeable
M2                                  M3                         M2       M3      Debt
                        ---------------------------         ---------------------------         ---------------------------
                          Ease     Ease     Ease              Ease     Ease     Ease
                          75 bp    50 bp    25 bp             75 bp    50 bp    25 bp               Greenbook Forecast* 
                        ---------------------------         ---------------------------         ---------------------------
Monthly Growth Rates
      Jan-2001              12.4     12.4     12.4              16.0     16.0     16.0              12.4     16.0      4.0
      Feb-2001              10.8     10.8     10.8               9.8      9.8      9.8              10.8      9.8      6.4
      Mar-2001              14.5     14.5     14.5              10.4     10.4     10.4              14.5     10.4      7.2
      Apr-2001              10.2     10.2     10.2              17.4     17.4     17.4              10.2     17.4      4.2
      May-2001               2.9      2.7      2.5               6.9      6.8      6.7               2.7      6.8      3.8
      Jun-2001               6.6      6.0      5.4               7.5      7.2      6.9               6.0      7.2      5.7
      Jul-2001               6.3      5.5      4.7               7.3      6.9      6.5               5.5      6.9      4.7
      Aug-2001               6.6      5.8      5.1               7.4      7.0      6.7               5.8      7.0      6.1
      Sep-2001               6.6      6.0      5.4               7.3      7.1      6.8               6.0      7.1      6.5
      Oct-2001               6.2      5.8      5.3               7.1      6.9      6.7               5.8      6.9      4.0
      Nov-2001               6.4      6.0      5.6               7.2      7.0      6.8               6.0      7.0      3.8
      Dec-2001               5.9      5.5      5.2               6.8      6.6      6.4               5.5      6.6      4.4
Quarterly Averages
        2000 Q4              6.4      6.4      6.4               7.1      7.1      7.1               6.4      7.1      4.6
        2001 Q1             10.8     10.8     10.8              12.4     12.4     12.4              10.8     12.4      5.5
        2001 Q2              9.3      9.2      9.0              11.7     11.6     11.5               9.2     11.6      5.2
        2001 Q3              6.1      5.4      4.8               7.4      7.0      6.7               5.4      7.1      5.3
        2001 Q4              6.4      5.9      5.4               7.2      7.0      6.8               5.9      7.0      4.8
Growth Rate
       From       To
      Dec-2000 Dec-2001      8.2      7.9      7.5               9.7      9.5      9.3               7.9      9.5      5.2
      Dec-2000 Apr-2001     12.2     12.2     12.2              13.6     13.6     13.6              12.2     13.6      5.5
      Apr-2001 Dec-2001      6.0      5.5      5.0               7.3      7.1      6.8               5.5      7.1      4.9
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
