Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
AUGUST 8, 2002
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) August 8, 2002
Class II - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Developments in financial markets since the June 25-26 FOMC meeting
have been importantly shaped by movements in equity prices. Further revelations of
corporate malfeasance, concerns among investors that more earnings restatements
may be in store before the deadline for certifying financial statements, and negative
guidance by a number of firms about second-half earnings contributed to steep
declines in equity prices (Chart 1). At one point, the Wilshire 5000 index was off
about 20 percent from its level at the time of the last FOMC meeting. Although
equity prices have since rebounded on net from their late-July low, the recovery
appears to have been hampered by a stream of disappointing data casting doubt on
the strength of the economic recovery. On balance, most broad equity indexes
declined about 7-1/2 percent over the intermeeting period. Investors withdrew a
sizable sum from domestic equity mutual funds in July, apparently redirecting much of
that into money market mutual funds and government bond funds. As judged by the
extremely high levels of implied volatility derived from options prices, the near-term
course for share prices remains quite uncertain.
(2) Doubts about the quality of corporate balance sheets and the prospects
for earnings growth pushed up corporate yield spreads, particularly for lower-tier
issuers. The spread of the Merrill Lynch Master II high-yield index relative to
comparable-maturity Treasury yields rose more than 150 basis points, on balance,
over the intermeeting period, with nearly all industries in the index registering an
increase. In addition, investors appear to be discriminating across individual firms to
a greater degree, widening the distribution of risk spreads across issuers. Concerns
about credit risk extended to several large financial intermediaries that were seen as
especially vulnerable to the financial and potential level fallout from recent high-
Selected Equity Indexes
Chart 1
Financial Market Indicators
ndex(8/31/00 = 100) Implied Volatility of the 
S&P 100 (VIX)
Index(8/31/00 =100)
Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun
Spreads of Selected Private Long-Term Yields
Basis Points
- -
.. j,,S. Ten-year AA
Ten-year Swap ... ' -...".. "
Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun
Distribution of Risk Spreads on High-Yield Debt
Density
- - 0
- - - - January 2, 2002
--------- June 25, 2002
August 7, 2002
I I I I I I I I I I I I
High-Yield Debt Spreads
Basis Points Basis Points
Telecom Sector
rI'- JA
*.^.. "Master II
Other Sectors.. .... ... "
I I I I I I I l I l I
Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul
Subordinated Debt Spreads
Basis Points
Percent
55
profile defaults, reflected in increased yield spreads on subordinated debt and rates on
credit default swaps. However, this greater wariness reportedly has not raised the
short-term funding costs of these institutions.
(3) Given the drag expected from lower equity prices and wider risk spreads,
along with the weaker tone of recent macroeconomic data, market participants
marked down the anticipated path of monetary policy substantially over the
intermeeting period (Chart 2).¹² Rates on federal funds and eurodollar futures
contracts suggest that market participants now place about one-in-three odds on a 25
basis point policy easing at the upcoming meeting and fully price in a policy move of
that size by year-end. The shift in policy expectations and the heightened preference
among investors for safe assets caused Treasury yields to plummet, with the two-year
yield falling about 80 basis points. Yields on Treasury inflation-indexed securities also
declined considerably, leaving inflation compensation at the ten-year maturity up a
touch. Although investors sought the safety of Treasury securities, they did not
demonstrate an unusually strong preference for the most liquid, on-the-run Treasury
issues (see box on "Market Functioning and Liquidity" on page 3).
Chart 2
Financial Market Indicators
Expected Federal Funds Rates Estimated from
Financial Futures* Percent
Aug Nov Feb May Aug Nov Feb May Aug
Treasury Yield Curve* Percent
June 25, 2002 .-------------
.- " August 8, 2002
I I I I I I I
"Smoothed yield curve estimated from off-the-run Treasury coupon
securities. Yields shown are those on notional par Treasury securities
with semi-annual coupons.
Selected Treasury Yields*
Percent
Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun
Change in Treasury Yield Curve Since
June 25, 2002
C_
Basis points
-1
Long-Run Inflation Expectations
Percent
Michigan Survey
Philadelphia Fed Survey
; . . TIIS Inflation
'Compensation* .;
* . , *
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Exchange Rates
[Daily Other Impor
Index(8/31/00 = 100)
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I i I I
"The inflation rate that equalizes the price of the January 2012 TIIS and
the value of a portfolio of nominal securities with the same payments.
Market Functioning and Liquidity
Despite the remarkable volatility of asset prices and heightened concerns
about credit risk, most financial markets continued to function effectively over the
intermeeting period. Market participants were skittish at times, particularly
following rumors of liquidity strains at several prominent financial firms, but those
episodes proved to be short-lived. Investors were also wary of potential problems
at several large banks entangled in recent high-profile bankruptcies, but this did not
appear to translate into increases in perceived counterparty credit risk or an
impairment in market making for those firms.
Markets overall continued to function reasonably well, with reports citing
only limited deterioration in the liquidity of the Treasury market and a more
substantial drying up in some segments of the corporate bond market. In the
Treasury market, bid-asked spreads widened modestly, but, unlike episodes of more
severe market stress, dealers continued to make markets in off-the-run as well as
on-the-run Treasury securities, and a substantial volume of securities changed
hands. In corporate bond markets, bid-asked spreads reportedly increased to
several times their typical levels for many issues, while trading in some lower-tier
issues dried up altogether. Gross corporate bond issuance has been exceptionally
weak for several weeks. In equity markets, trading volumes were very high.
Although the market had to absorb a considerable volume of transactions,
including sizable outflows from equity mutual funds, there was no indication of
unusual difficulties in executing, clearing, or settling trades.
(4) The trade-weighted value of the dollar against major foreign currencies
rose 1-1/4 percent, on balance, over the intermeeting period. European stock prices
dropped more than those in the United States amid a similar combination of some
disappointing indicators of economic activity and concerns about earnings and
corporate accounting. Stock prices in Japan declined less than in other major
economies, as data seemed to show a mild pickup in Japanese economic activity.
Across major foreign economies, investors appeared to shift funds into less risky
instruments and write down expectations for policy interest rates. Against this
backdrop, yields on ten-year government securities declined, but less than those on
Treasuries. Over the intermeeting period, U.S. monetary authorities did not intervene
in the foreign exchange market for their own accounts.
(5) Financial market conditions in Latin America worsened further during
the intermeeting period. In Brazil, the real declined nearly 4 percent, on net, against
the dollar, and sovereign bond yield spreads over Treasuries moved up about
about the policies of the leading candidates in the October presidential election, but
the successful negotiation of an extension and enlargement of Brazil's IMF program
prompted some rebound in the currency and narrowing of spreads. Pressures
stemming in part from the continued economic disarray in Argentina led to a sharp
depreciation of the Uruguayan peso and the imposition of a bank holiday in Uruguay.
Banks have re-opened this week after the U.S. Treasury extended bridge loan
financing of $1.5 billion ahead of disbursements from official international lending
institutions expected later this week. The Colombian peso also depreciated
significantly during the period, falling more than more than 9 percent against the
dollar. In contrast, the Mexican peso firmed slightly, although Mexican debt spreads
widened about 40 basis points. In the emerging Asian economies, changes in
currency values and debt spreads were not generally large, although equity prices
posted sizable declines.
(6) Borrowing by domestic nonfinancial businesses has been quite weak
over the past two months (Chart 3). Net issuance of corporate bonds turned negative
in July, and business loans at banks continued to run off. By contrast, commercial
paper outstanding turned up in July-its first monthly advance since December. The
sluggishness of total business borrowing likely reflected the modest financing gap as
well as drawdowns of liquid assets by many firms as conditions in credit markets
Chart 3
Debt and Money Growth
Growth of Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt
Growth of Household Debt
Percent
* Seasonally adjusted.
MBA Residential Mortgage Indexes
Growth of M2
Li~l~iL.ii
2000
e Estimated.
Growth of Federal Debt
Percent
M2 Opportunity Cost* -
(right scale)
.* M2 Velocity
.'* (left scale)
* Two-quarter moving average.
deteriorated. According to the August Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, a
significant net fraction of banks experienced weaker demand for C&I loans over the
past three months, with many institutions pointing to a lessened need on the part of
their customers to finance capital spending and mergers and acquisitions. In that
survey, banks on net also reported that they continued to tighten standards and terms
for business loans. In contrast to business debt, household debt is estimated to have
expanded at a brisk pace in the second quarter. Home mortgage debt continued to
grow robustly, boosted by the strength of the housing market and refinancing activity,
while consumer credit rose at a moderate rate. Borrowing by the federal government
surged in the second quarter when tax receipts proved to be quite weak. The statutory
ceiling on the public debt was increased $450 billion on June 28, allowing the Treasury
to borrow in volume in July.
(7) After expanding at a 7-1/2 percent pace in June, M2 is estimated to have
accelerated to a 12-1/4 percent annual rate in July, more than twice that anticipated in
the June Bluebook. The unexpected strength in M2 growth evidently owed in part to
the sizable outflows from equity mutual funds into retail money market funds and,
perhaps, liquid deposits. In addition, M2 growth has likely benefitted from a
resumption of heavy mortgage refinancings spurred by the decline in long-term
interest rates. Although total currency growth was moderate by recent standards,
shipments to Latin America appear to have remained strong in July and early August,
with those to Uruguay picking up in response to the financial turmoil in that country.
Policy Alternatives
(8) The staff has read economic data over the intermeeting period as
implying that the economy's near-term momentum has flagged and sees the
substantial decline in share values and further tightening of credit markets as weighing
on spending going forward. In light of the annual revisions to the national income
and product accounts, the staff views the longer-term prospects for potential output
growth as somewhat lower than had been anticipated.³ As a result, real GDP growth
has been marked about 1 percentage point over the second half of this year and 1/2
percentage point in 2003 relative to the June Greenbook. The downward revision to
the growth of projected aggregate demand exceeded that to the growth of aggregate
supply, implying that the staff now sees a wider output gap over the projection period,
despite an assumption in this Greenbook that the Committee will put off the
tightening that had been built into the last forecast and instead maintain the current
level of the federal funds rate through the end of next year. Corporate bond yields
edge down over the next six quarters as abating fears of additional revelations of
corporate wrongdoing and some improvement in credit quality lead to a narrowing of
risk spreads. Share prices are seen as climbing moderately to provide investors a fairly
typical equity return. The projected slack in the economy offsets the price pressure
from an assumed depreciation of the dollar and a diminished benefit from the
passthrough of lower energy prices to core inflation, so that core PCE inflation runs
(9) The economic outcomes forecasted by the staff may well be less
appealing to the Committee than those presented seven weeks ago. However, the
Committee might still view the projected near-term weakness as unlikely to be
ameliorated by policy action at this meeting and the prospect for output growth next
Some Implications of Recent Data Revisions for Monetary Policy Rules and r*
In the recent annual revisions to the national income and product accounts, the
Bureau of Economic Analysis trimmed 0.4 percentage point from real GDP growth on
average from 1999 to 2001 and made the swing in the level of real GDP during the
economic recession a bit more pronounced. The resulting downwardly revised path of
output per hour led the staff to lower its assessment of structural productivity growth
over that period by a like amount. As can be seen in the output gap plotted in the upper
left panel of Chart 4, the level of output surpassed that of its potential by a bit more in the
latter stage of the economic expansion than previously estimated and the subsequent
drop-off during the recession is now seen as steeper. The BEA also marked down core
PCE inflation in 2000 but raised it thereafter (upper right panel).
The output gap and inflation are two arguments of the Taylor rule. The lower
panel plots the interest-rate recommendations from a modified Taylor rule that uses the
staff's measure of the output gap, inflation as proxied by the four-quarter change in the
core PCE price index, an assumed equilibrium real funds rate of 2-1/2 percent, and an
inflation goal of 1-1/2 percent. The dotted and dashed lines, respectively, depict the
rule's recommendations based on pre-revision and post-revision data. In general, the
policy paths do not differ markedly, in part because changes to data for 2000 had
offsetting implications for interest rates. Because the BEA revisions paint a somewhat
worse inflation picture in recent quarters, the rule prescribes a bit tighter policy than had
been the case with the pre-revision data.
The Taylor rule recommendation that policy should have been tighter over the
past few quarters importantly depends on the assumption that the natural real federal
funds rate is constant. Staff estimates of the equilibrium real federal funds rate derived
from small and large econometric models, in contrast, have trended lower and have been
at or below 2-1/2 percent since 2000 (Chart 5). The estimate derived from the indexed
debt market has also moved lower over that period, but from a much higher level.
The revisions both to the historical data and the Greenbook assessment of near-
term economic trends had notable consequences for some of these estimates. Those
based only on historical data have declined over the intermeeting period in part because
the actual real rate is seen in retrospect to have been lower over the past 1-1/2 years (as
inflation has been higher). The measures of the equilibrium real rate based on historical
data augmented by the staff projection have declined a bit further, reflecting the weaker
assessment of aggregate demand embodied in the staff forecast. By contrast, the estimate
of the equilibrium real federal funds rate based on indexed Treasury yields is unchanged.
Chart 5
Actual Real Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Estimated Equilibrium Real Rates
Percent
- 4
- -1
- Current Rate - 0
* 25 b.p. Easing
Equilibrium Real Funds Rate Estimates
Percent
FRB/US Model
- Two-sided:
* Also employs the staff projection for the current and next quarters.
** Also employs the staff projection for the current quarter.
year to run only a bit in excess of that of aggregate supply as desirable. In the staff
outlook, the removal of the expectation of policy tightening in coming quarters has
already fostered lower long-term rates that help to offset some of the consequences
for spending of recent bad news. If the Committee believes that this configuration of
financial market conditions is likely to be supportive of sustainable economic
expansion, it might decide to leave the funds rate unchanged and to retain the
current statement of balanced risks. The Committee may also favor this policy if it
suspects that the staff forecast of aggregate demand is somewhat pessimistic. In that
regard, the recent strength in auto purchases and soaring mortgage applications may
suggest that household spending will once again outpace expectations, buoyed by a
real federal funds rate that is close to zero and still noticeably below estimates of its
equilibrium rate. Moreover, as noted in the discussion of alternative simulations in
the Greenbook, some measures of the equity premium are now high by historical
standards, perhaps raising the odds that equity prices could rebound substantially
more than in the baseline and bolster aggregate demand.
(10) Market participants would tend to infer from the announcement of an
unchanged policy and retention of balanced risks that the FOMC is confident that the
expansion is on a sustainable track. Because market participants place some odds on
easing at this meeting, they would likely raise the path expected for the funds rate
going forward, and short-term yields would edge up. Bond yields would probably tick
higher, and, unless this set of actions and the wording of the associated
announcement were to give investors more confidence about the durability of the
expansion, equity prices would soften. However, greater disappointment by
investors-and a more sizable negative reaction in equity markets-cannot be ruled out,
in which case bond yields might decline in response.
(11) The Committee could find the staffs assessment of underlying economic
trends to be plausible but also be concerned that market skittishness, increased
caution in domestic credit markets, and worsening prospects for many emerging
financial markets raise the odds of especially adverse economic outcomes. If the
Committee does not see these risks as palpable enough to justify policy ease at this
time, it may wish to convey to market participants its intent to follow developments
especially carefully and its willingness to ease in response to a further dimming in the
outlook. In this case, it could choose to keep the federal funds rate unchanged
and shift the assessment of the balance of risks toward economic weakness,
while crafting the announcement accordingly. In these circumstances, money market
rates would likely decline some, as most market participants would see the likelihood
of a near-term ease as having grown. While bond yields might edge off, equity prices
could firm to the degree this decision were seen to confirm a vigilant posture against
the potential for a downturn.
(12) In the current Greenbook, the staff has both raised the path expected
for the unemployment rate this year and next and lowered its assessment of the degree
of labor market slack consistent with unchanged inflation. While policy action at this
meeting is unlikely to leave much of an imprint on economic activity over the balance
of this year, the Committee might desire to promote faster economic growth next year
than in the Greenbook forecast in order to make more distinct progress in reducing
resource slack over time-especially if it believed that inflation would likely remain in a
zone near price stability. In that case, the Committee might choose to reduce the
federal funds rate 25 basis points. Indeed, as discussed in the box below, the
simulation exercise of the FRB/US model dubbed "perfect foresight" policy indicates
that lowering the funds rate to a bit below 1-1/2 percent would minimize deviations
of the unemployment rate from its natural rate and inflation from an
assumed goal that was as low as 1 percent over the extended Greenbook period. That
result, of course, depends on a long list of assumptions-including that the staff's
assessment of near-term weakness in demand is correct and that the structure of
FRB/US is a complete and certain representation of the economy. Alternatively, the
Committee might believe that heightened economic uncertainty may restrain
household and business spending more than is factored into the Greenbook forecast
so as to warrant a quarter-point reduction in the funds rate at this time. Moreover,
A "Perfect Foresight" Policy
We updated the "perfect foresight" experiment using an extension of the
Greenbook forecast through 2007. In this exercise, the FRB/US model is solved
to find a path for the funds rate that minimizes an equally weighted discounted sum
of squared deviations of the unemployment rate from its natural rate and core PCE
inflation from a long-run goal, subject to a penalty on changing the funds rate. The
Greenbook extension was designed to capture several key features of the staff
outlook. In particular, potential output is assumed to grow at a rate of
3-1/4 percent after 2003, and the unemployment rate consistent with stable
inflation remains at 5 percent. Economic growth abroad is expected to settle at a
3-3/4 percent rate after 2003, and the dollar is assumed to depreciate nearly
3 percent per year, the combined effect of which holds the ratio of the current
account deficit to nominal GDP at around 5 percent. The federal budget balance is
assumed to improve gradually, with the unified deficit averaging 3/4 percent of
nominal GDP from 2004 to 2007.
The solid line in Chart 6 plots the path for the funds rate assumed in the
Greenbook out to 2003, while the dotted line depicts the path generated by the
perfect foresight exercise in which the inflation goal is assumed to be 1 percent.
The nominal funds rate averages about 1/4 percentage point lower over the next
six quarters in the perfect foresight simulation than in the Greenbook baseline. If
the inflation goal were assumed to be 1-1/2 percent (as in the dashed line), the
current funds rate could be cut in half, at least for the next few quarters, to work
down perceived unused resources while holding inflation around its current level.
Chart 6
"Perfect Foresight" Strategy for Monetary Policy
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percen
-- -- Baseline
......... erfect Foresight (1 percent inflation goal)
S -- - Perfect Foresight (1-1/2 percent inflation goal) -
Real Federal Funds Rate 1
Percent Percent
- Baseline - 6
----......... Perfect Foresight (1 percent inflation goal)
- - -- Perfect Foresight (1-1/2 percent inflation goal) 5
- , 2
Civilian Unemployment Rate
- - Baseline
..--...... Perfect Foresight (1 percent inflation goal)
- -- Perfect Foresight (1-1/2 percent inflation goal)
S........... ......
- - - - - --------------------------
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
- Baseline
--....... Perfect Foresight (1 percent inflation goal)
- - - - Perfect Foresight (1-1/2 percent inflation goal)
Percent
6.5
Percent
r-
-n 6.5
| I
the Committee may believe that any additional disinflation could put economic
activity and prices uncomfortably close to the point at which the zero nominal bound
on short-term interest rates would constrain future policy.
(13) Given prevailing market expectations, short-term rates would fall if the
Committee were to ease policy at this meeting, but the extent of the drop would
depend importantly on the characterization of the balance of risks and the wording of
the announcement. If market participants were convinced that the Federal Reserve
would ensure that the recovery was not faltering, equity prices would rise and risk
spreads fall, while Treasury bond rates would edge higher. However, there is some
chance that market participants might view the easing as implying that the Federal
Reserve sees much weaker demand and the economy slipping back into recession.
Such an interpretation could put downward pressure on equity prices and bond yields
and upward pressure on risk spreads.
(14) Under conditions of an unchanged federal funds rate and the economy
unfolding along the lines of the Greenbook forecast, business borrowing is projected
to recover from the very anemic pace of late as businesses have less room to deplete
their liquid assets and external financing needs edge higher. If, as assumed in the
forecast, market jitters recede and conditions in the corporate bond market improve,
credit demands are expected to be directed once again to the bond market. Given
their still-firm capital positions and earnings, bankers likely will continue to be
selective lenders, accommodating solid credits and avoiding marginal ones. In the
household sector, debt growth is expected to remain fairly brisk-outpacing growth in
income-led by mortgage debt as housing activity continues to be elevated and as
individuals tap accumulated home equity to finance spending. As in the business
sector, apart from the shakier borrowers, household spending should not be materially
constrained by financial conditions beyond the substantial loss of equity wealth.
Paced by the household component, nonfederal debt is projected to grow at a
Total debt of nonfinancial sectors is forecast to grow at a similar rate over the second
half, significantly faster than nominal GDP. As conditions in domestic financial
markets tend to stabilize in coming months and safe-haven demands for money
market mutual funds and liquid deposits ebb, growth in M2 is projected to moderate.
However, from time to time, M2 may be affected by currency demands from abroad,
especially if conditions deteriorate further in South America. Over the July-to-
December period, M2 is projected to grow at a 5 percent rate, bringing its growth
over the four quarters of this year to 6 percent.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Debt Aggregates
M2 M2 M3 Debt
Lower 25bp No change Greenbook Forecast*
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(15) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for
(1) the directive and (2) the "balance of risks" sentence to be included in the press
release issued after the meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output. To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining /INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate
at/TO an average of around 1-3/4 percent.
(2) "Balance of Risks" Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price
stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information
currently available, the Committee believes that the risks continue to be
balanced with respect to prospects for both goals [ARE WEIGHTED
MAINLY TOWARD CONDITIONS THAT MAY GENERATE
HEIGHTENED INFLATION PRESSURES] [ARE WEIGHTED
MAINLY TOWARD CONDITIONS THAT MAY GENERATE
ECONOMIC WEAKNESS] in the foreseeable future.
August 9, 2002
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Monthly
Aug 01
Sep 01
Oct 01
Nov 01
Dec 01
Jan 02
Feb 02
Mar 02
Apr 02
May 02
Jun 02
Jul 02
Short-term Long-term
-- P 1.67
p - preliminary data MFMA
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money Aggregates Class 
II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted August 
12, 2002
nontransactions components
Period M
1  M2 M3
In M2 In M3 only
Levels (Sbillions):
Monthly
p preliminary
e estimated
Changes in System Holdings of Securities ¹
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Strictly Confidential
Class II FOMC
August 8, 2002
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5
Agency total
Apr
May
Jun
May 29
Jun 5
Jun 12
Jun 19
Jun 26
Jul 3
Jul 10
Jul 17
Jul 24
Jul 31
Aug 7
Intermeeting Period
Jun 26-Aug 8
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
Ann a
acquired in exchange for maturing bills. Excludes maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing issues.
--- 13,401
--- 10,796
--- 4,125
--- 3,454
--- 5,383
--- 4,564
--- 5,730
--- 4,524
--- 542
--- 3,499
--- 4,659
--- 6,827
--- 8,227
--- 812
--- 2,772
--- 1,042
--. 3,046
--- 12
--- 52
--- 100
--- 510
--. 3,016
--- 421
--- 608
--- 367
--- 3,572
