Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
OCTOBER 31, 2002
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) October 31, 2002
Class II – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Market participants had expected the FOMC to keep both the intended
federal funds rate unchanged and the risk assessment tilted toward economic
weakness at the September 24th meeting.  But the inclusion of concerns about
“heightened geopolitical risks” in the announcement and the indication of two
dissenting votes favoring an easing of monetary policy led markets to expect a lower
trajectory for the policy rate.  A subsequent rally in equity prices tended to buoy
market interest rates and policy expectations.  In recent days, however, generally
weaker-than-anticipated economic data and press reports suggesting that the FOMC
was inclined to ease by year-end left the expected path of policy lower on net over the
period (chart 1).1  Current futures quotes indicate that market participants place
considerable weight on policy easing at the November meeting, with survey evidence
suggesting that some are looking for a 50 basis point move.  With rates on further-
ahead futures contracts declining 20 to 45 basis points over the intermeeting period,
market participants are apparently anticipating that the funds rate will trough at
around 1-1/4 percent by spring 2003.
(2) After extending their decline in the opening days of the period, share
prices rallied sharply in October on better-than-expected profits news at several major
corporations.  In recent days, though, economic data on the softer side of market
expectations have resulted in a partial retracing of those gains.  On net, broad stock
Chart 1
Financial Market Indicators
Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct
2002
S&P 500 Index
(Left Scale)
Ten-year Treasury
(Right Scale)
September 23, 2002
October 31, 2002
Expected Federal Funds Rates Estimated from
Financial Futures*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures rates with an
 allowance for term premia and other adjustments.
September 23, 2002
October 31, 2002
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off-the-run Treasury coupon
securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par Treasury securities
with semi-annual coupons.
Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct
2002
S&P 100 (VIX)
Stock Market Volatility
Basis points
Change in Treasury Yield Curve Since
September 23, 2002
Maturity in Years
Long-Run Inflation Expectations
Michigan Survey
Philadelphia Fed Survey
TIIS Inflation
Compensation*
*The inflation rate that equalizes the price of the January 2012 TIIS and
the value of a portfolio of nominal securities with the same payments.
price indexes increased about 6 percent over the period, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq
rose about 12 percent.  Equity prices were quite volatile over the period and, judging
from options on stock futures contracts, are expected to remain so.  As has been true
for a while, longer-term Treasury yields generally moved in tandem with equity prices.
On balance over the intermeeting period, intermediate- and longer-term yields
increased 5 to 30 basis points, with the swing in ten-year Treasury yields reportedly
magnified by the efforts of holders of mortgage securities to manage the duration of
their portfolios.  Reflecting the heightened expectation of policy ease, though, yields
on Treasuries with maturities of two years or less fell on net.
(3) In the investment-grade corporate debt market, yields on higher-quality
bonds increased about as much as those on Treasuries over the intermeeting period
(chart 2).  Risk spreads on lower-quality investment-grade debt climbed 15 basis
points, as auto manufacturers and their captive finance companies in that index
underperformed, and spreads on broad high-yield debt indexes rose about 30 basis
points, suggesting further deterioration in perceived creditworthiness.  These elevated
spreads may also reflect a lack of liquidity in corporate markets, as bid-asked spreads
reportedly remained wide throughout the intermeeting period.  (The box on the next
page examines market liquidity.)
(4) The dollar moved within narrow ranges against the major foreign
currencies during the intermeeting period, and its trade-weighted value edged lower.
Most foreign stock indexes and government bond yields followed the pattern seen in
U.S. markets, ending the period higher on net.  European ten-year benchmark bond
yields rose 20 to 25 basis points over the intermeeting period despite economic data
pointing to lackluster growth, especially in Germany.  Yields may have been
influenced by concerns over widening fiscal deficits in some key European
countries–including Germany and France–and the reopening of the debate over the
Chart 2
Financial Market Indicators
Jan Feb Mar May Jun Aug Sep
2002
Ten-year Corporate Yields less Ten-year Treasury
Ten-year AA
Ten-year BBB
Ten-year Swap
Spreads of Selected Private Long-Term Yields
Broad Index
Major
Currencies Index
Other Important
Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Exchange Rates
EMBI+ Index
Market Liquidity
Recent evidence on market perceptions of the health of major financial
institutions and the functioning of financial markets is mixed.   Credit default swap
spreads for major commercial and investment banks rose significantly during the
summer (chart 3).  Although they have since reversed some of those increases, they
remain elevated on balance.  Credit swap spreads for finance companies have shot
up as much as 500 basis points on net.
Increased perceptions of, and aversion toward, risk have probably been
associated with some withdrawal from market making, as reports suggest that
liquidity in many segments of the fixed-income markets has deteriorated since the
late summer.  In the Treasury market, premiums for on-the-run securities over their
off-the-run counterparts have risen since midyear, with the relatively larger increase
for the ten-year note probably related in part to its usefulness in hedging mortgage-
backed securities.  Information on bid-asked spreads and market depth is harder to
come by, but anecdotal evidence indicates that the Treasury market is functioning
well.  The deterioration in the corporate market has reportedly been more
pronounced, as market participants characterize dealing as much more difficult
than in the first half of the year.
fiscal provisions of the European Union’s Stability and Growth Pact.  In contrast,
Japanese stock prices extended their slump during the intermeeting period, with
banking shares shedding almost 9 percent.  On October 30, Japanese authorities
announced a draft version of their highly anticipated bank-reform package along with
new tax cuts, and the Bank of Japan stated that it would target a higher level of
liquidity and increase its purchases of government securities.  The announcement had
been delayed amid indications of political resistance, leading financial market
participants to scale back their expectations about the reforms.  In the event, those
market doubts appeared to be confirmed in that the announced steps were viewed as
insufficient to make much headway against Japan’s deep structural problems.
Chart 3
Market Liquidity and Credit Availability
Treasury Liquidity Premiums*
*Interpolated off-the-run yield minus the on-the-run yield, adjusted for time to next auction.
Commercial Banks*
Credit Default Swap Spreads for Selected Financial Intermediaries
Ford Motor Credit
GE Capital
Capital One
End of
June
Last
FOMC
Changes in basis points
to 10/30/02 from:
Credit Default Swap Spreads
for Selected Finance Companies*
*Five-year mid-market quotes from
 JPMorgan Chase.
.  The Desk did not intervene during the period for the
accounts of the System or Treasury.
(5) Against currencies of other important trading partners, the dollar was
about unchanged.  In Brazil, financial market pressures that had built up ahead of the
first round of voting on October 6 eased somewhat on perceptions that the Worker’s
Party candidate Lula (who clinched victory in the second round vote on October 27)
might be more sympathetic to business interests and more fiscally responsible than
previously thought.  Although the Brazilian real depreciated 1-1/2 percent against the
dollar over the period, Brazil’s EMBI+ spread over Treasuries narrowed about
major stock price index gained 9-1/2 percent.  The Mexican peso appreciated 2
percent against the dollar, while Mexico’s EMBI+ spread narrowed 60 basis points, to
about 385 basis points.  In emerging Asia, the rebound in technology share prices
helped Taiwan’s stock market gain 6 percent.  Korean stock prices also participated in
the mid-October technology-driven recovery, but still moved down for the period as a
(6) The weakness in borrowing of nonfinancial businesses that became
notable during the summer intensified in recent months.  Business loans, which had
leveled off in August, have been declining since then, and commercial paper
paydowns have continued (chart 4).  Corporate bonds outstanding, which had been
running off over the summer, have only stabilized in recent months.  The paucity of
borrowing appears mainly to reflect very limited needs to finance investment that
were met mainly by depleting stocks of liquid assets and tapping internally generated
funds.  Indeed, the majority of bank respondents to the October Senior Loan Officer
survey reported that C&I loan demand had declined further over the previous three
Chart 4
      Debt and Money Growth
Consumer Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of Household Debt
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
e Estimated.
Commercial paper*
C&I loans*
Bonds
Growth of Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt
Billions of dollars
Monthly rate
* Seasonally adjusted.
Purchase (left scale)*
Refinancing
(right scale)*
MBA Residential Mortgage Indexes
Weekly, s.a.
*  Four-week moving average.
Note.  March 16, 1990 = 100 for n.s.a. series.
Growth of Federal Debt
Growth of M2
e Estimated.
M2 Opportunity Cost*
(right scale)
M2 Velocity
(left scale)
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
Ratio scale Percentage points
* Two-quarter moving average.
e Estimated.
months, the chief reason being reduced spending on plant and equipment.  Business
lending standards and terms reportedly tightened again, on net, but by a somewhat
smaller proportion of respondents than in recent surveys.2  Households, by contrast,
continued to borrow heavily in mortgage markets and to take on additional consumer
debt through September.
(7) With the effects of past policy easings on money demand largely played
out and spending apparently softening, M2 growth has slowed to an estimated average
decelerated even more were it not for the boost to deposit growth provided by
increased prepayments of mortgages.  Currency growth slowed appreciably, reflecting
significantly weaker foreign demand and some moderation in domestic demand as
well.  Based on this morning’s GDP release, M2 velocity fell about 6 percent in the
third quarter even though measures of opportunity costs were little changed.  The
decline in velocity seemed largely to reflect strong flows into M2 prompted by the
volatility of financial markets and by heavy mortgage refinancing.
Policy Alternatives
(8) Over the intermeeting period, incoming data provided further
disappointments on production and employment and, on the whole, seemed to
suggest some flagging in the growth of consumption when compared with the
September Greenbook.  Accordingly, the staff has revised down its forecast for real
output growth over the next few quarters, but not to the point where continued
economic expansion seems to be in serious doubt.  Real GDP growth, after running
at a projected rate of only 1 percent in the current quarter, is expected to strengthen
gradually over most of the forecast period, although it remains below that of potential
growth until the second half of next year.  As a result, the civilian unemployment rate
is expected to move up to 6-1/4 percent early next year before edging lower after
mid-2003.  With economic slack persisting, core inflation is projected to drift lower,
bringing the annual rise in core PCE prices down to about 1-1/4 percent in 2003 and
the modest tightening built in toward the end of the forecast period in the September
Greenbook.  An unchanged funds rate is assumed to hold yields on long-term
Treasury securities near current levels, while rates on corporate issues should in time
decline somewhat as a gradual strengthening of the economic expansion results in
some unwinding of credit concerns.  Equity prices rise moderately over the forecast
period to keep risk-adjusted returns in line with those on fixed-income securities.  The
foreign exchange value of the dollar is assumed to decline a little, albeit from a current
level that is slightly higher than projected in the last Greenbook.
(9) Should the Committee believe that the business climate is still likely to
improve gradually at the current stance of policy, as conveyed by its announcement
after the September meeting, it might choose to leave the federal funds rate
unchanged at this meeting.  Such an outcome may be seen as broadly consistent with
the Greenbook forecast, in which output growth slowly builds momentum.  The
Committee may be particularly drawn to this policy approach if it views the current
degree of slack in resource use to be less pronounced than does the staff and hence
sees less scope for further disinflation than is embodied in the staff forecast.  In
addition, while estimates of the equilibrium real short-term interest rate have moved
lower over the past year–and some have been revised down ex post–the actual real
rate has been below the lower bound of the range of estimates since mid-2001.  Even
with the narrowing in that gap projected for the current quarter, the Committee may
be of the view that sufficient monetary stimulus is already in the pipeline given the
lags in the transmission of policy (chart 5).3  Indeed, the Committee may believe that
the Greenbook forecast, which is somewhat below the consensus outlook, is overly
pessimistic regarding prospects for aggregate demand.  As noted in the box on page 8,
while the staff projection for the next two years shows lower inflation and a higher
unemployment rate than in the prior few Greenbooks, the recent realizations of those
variables have moved the other way.  In the current quarter, higher energy prices have
boosted inflation and gains in estimates of household employment have been
associated with a lower unemployment rate than was thought likely a couple of
months ago.  The Committee might be inclined to keep policy on hold if it put more
weight on those outcomes than on forecast revisions.
Chart 5
Actual Real Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Estimated Equilibrium Real Rates
Actual Real Funds Rate
TIIS-Based EstimateHistorical Average: 2.72
  (1966Q1-2002Q3)
Current Rate
25 b.p. Easing
50 b.p. Easing
Equilibrium Real Funds Rate Estimates (Percent)
September Bluebook
September Bluebook
September Bluebook
September Bluebook
September Bluebook
September Bluebook
September Bluebook
Statistical Filter
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data*
Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data*
FRB/US Model***
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data**
Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data**
Treasury Inflation-Indexed Securities
* Also employs the staff projection for the current and next quarters.
** Also employs the staff projection for the current quarter.
***FRB/US estimates for both the current and the last Bluebook reflect a methodological change, which,
   when applied to the last Bluebook, implies a difference of no more than 8 basis points to any entry in the
   table.
Revisions to the Outlook Since the August Meeting
Economic forecasts by the staff and most market participants have turned
gloomier since mid-August when the Committee moved its assessment of the
balance of risks to one tilted toward economic weakness.  Some of that forecast
revision owes to changes in the assessment of aggregate demand and other
fundamental forces and some to changes in market rates and prices.  To get some
sense of the relative contribution of the former, a simulation was run using the
FRB/US model in which the August Greenbook was revised to incorporate the
current assumption of a flat federal funds rate (as opposed to the higher August
Greenbook path).  The dotted lines in chart 6 depict this adjusted August
simulation, while the solid lines depict the most recent Greenbook.
In the staff’s current assessment, real GDP growth is likely to take longer to
return to its potential than was the case in August, implying that the unemployment
rate runs higher.  With a larger cumulative buildup of resource slack, disinflation is
more pronounced.  However, near-term developments have led the staff to mark
the unemployment rate down and inflation up for this year.
Mechanical policy rules relying on current and lagged observations of
macroeconomic data, such as the Taylor rule, would take those near-term revisions
as reasons to raise the policy rate.  By contrast, mechanical policy rules relying on
current and projected variables, such as the policymaker perfect foresight path that
is discussed below, would put more emphasis on the revisions to the forecast and
call for easier policy than was the case in August.
(10) Market prices appear to embody significant odds that the Committee will
ease policy at this meeting.  Accordingly, a decision to leave policy unchanged,
presumably accompanied by the assessment expected in the markets that the risks
remain tilted toward economic weakness, is likely to have a noticeable effect on asset
prices.  Interest rates could move up, particularly at the short end of the yield curve,
and equity prices would probably fall.  The balance-of-risks statement, the wording of
the rest of the announcement, and the vote tally will influence the odds investors
place on policy easing going forward and thus affect the response of financial markets.
Chart 6
Economic Outlook in August and October
Real GDP Growth
(Four-quarter percent change)
Percent
October 2002 Greenbook
August 2002 Greenbook but with flat funds rate
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Civilian Unemployment Rate
(11)   The Committee instead might ease policy 25 basis points if, in view
of signs of slowing aggregate demand growth, it now sees the likely degree of
economic slack several quarters ahead with an unchanged stance of policy as
unacceptable, especially given subdued readings on inflation expectations and the
prospects for further disinflation.  The incoming data suggest that spending by both
households and businesses has been weaker than expected by the staff, and the
Committee might be concerned that economic growth could turn out slower than in
the Greenbook outlook.  Also, whether financial conditions will prove to be as
supportive of growth as the staff expects is open to question:  Credit spreads and
liquidity conditions in segments of the corporate bond market have deteriorated, and
banks have continued to firm terms and standards on business loans, albeit in fewer
numbers than earlier in the year.  With some large financial intermediaries themselves
encountering market resistance, their ability to make markets and intermediate credit
flows could be crimped to a greater degree than anticipated by the staff, potentially
contributing to some diminution in market liquidity and credit availability.  In these
circumstances, the Committee may believe the time has come to bolster spending by
easing policy.  Presumably, the Committee would see a relatively small policy
adjustment of 25 basis points as not likely to put the risks back into balance,
particularly in view of the apparent weakening in the economic outlook since the last
(12) The Committee might view the signs of softening growth that have
become apparent over the past six weeks as especially troubling in association with
historically low inflation and nominal interest rates as well as the significant downside
risks already envisioned by the Committee since August.  In these circumstances, the
Committee might wish to move aggressively to shore up aggregate demand through a
need to reverse course anytime soon.  Indeed, the policymaker perfect foresight
simulations that employ a judgmental extension of the Greenbook assumptions and
are depicted in chart 7 entail a substantial near-term easing of monetary policy, even
with an inflation target as low as 1 percent.  Moreover, while those simulations by
definition assume no uncertainty in forecasting economic relationships, the
Committee might be concerned that weaker spending propensities or more favorable
inflation-output tradeoffs could well result in still lower inflation rates.  The possibility
of significant further disinflation might be viewed as unduly heightening the risk that
the ability to lower real interest rates could be constrained by the zero bound to
nominal rates.  Although the Committee might be reluctant to claim that a 25-basis-
point easing would balance the risks to the economy and inflation, a move of 50 basis
points might more plausibly do so.
(13) A 25-basis-point reduction in the target federal funds rate, coupled with
a statement that the risks remained weighted toward economic weakness, likely would
provide a small boost to financial markets, lowering yields and raising stock prices,
although the magnitude of these influences could be affected considerably by the
content of the Committee’s statement.  If the statement emphasized a need to combat
weakness in aggregate demand as the primary rationale for the policy action, the effect
on equity prices could be muted and that on longer-term interest rates accentuated,
but if the statement suggested that the principal motivation was to provide greater
assurance of a satisfactory expansion, gains in equity prices and declines in corporate
bond yields could be more noticeable while the net effects on Treasury bond yields
might be smaller.  A 50-basis-point cut in the funds rate target, even if accompanied
by a statement that the risks to the outlook were seen as balanced, likely would
prompt sizable drops in yields across the maturity and credit spectrums, although the
fall in long-term Treasury yields could be limited if equity markets rally strongly.
Chart 7
Policymaker Perfect Foresight Strategy for Monetary Policy
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Greenbook
1 percent inflation goal
1-1/2 percent inflation goal
Real Federal Funds Rate
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Civilian Unemployment Rate
The perfect foresight simulations extend the key assumptions of the staff outlook (other than the path for monetary policy) through 2008:
      ●      potential output grows at about 3-1/2 percent per year
      ●      the relative price of oil stabilizes at its 2005 level
      ●      the exchange value of dollar measured in real terms falls at a 3 percent clip
      ●      modest growth in federal expenditures allows an improvement in the federal budget balance
(14) Under the Greenbook forecast, the growth rate of nonfederal debt edges
down over the next couple of quarters.  Household debt growth is projected to
moderate as spending on motor vehicles slows and as mortgage refinancing activity
turns down from its current stratospheric levels.  Business borrowing strengthens
slightly but remains comparatively weak in coming months as inventory and fixed
investment turns up only gradually.  With economic growth increasing only tentatively
and investment projects seen as entailing considerable risks, the availability and terms
of credit facing businesses are expected to change little in the near term, although they
should ease somewhat later in the projection period as it becomes more evident to
market participants that the expansion is gaining traction.  Federal borrowing is likely
to be reduced somewhat in the current quarter by the Treasury’s unexpectedly high
cash balance at the end of the third quarter but is expected to rebound in the first
quarter as the effects of deficits again fully show through.  On balance, domestic
nonfinancial sector debt is projected to expand at around a 6 percent pace in the
fourth and first quarters, slightly slower than over the first three quarters of 2002.
M2 growth is also expected to moderate in coming months from its pace over the past
several quarters, owing to projected reductions in mortgage refinancing, the ebbing
influence of past reductions in short-term interest rates and opportunity costs on
money demand, and a more attractive equity market.  Over the four quarters of 2002,
M2 is projected to expand 7 percent, while its velocity declines 2-3/4 percent.
Monthly Growth Rates
Quarterly Growth Rates
(Q4/Q4) Growth Rates
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
No change* 25 bp ease 50 bp ease
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(15) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for
(1) the directive and (2) the “balance of risks” sentence to be included in the press
release issued after the meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote
sustainable growth in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the
Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with maintaining /INCREASING/REDUCING the federal
funds rate at/TO an average of around ___1-3/4 percent.
(2) “Balance of Risks” Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available,
the Committee believes that the risks [continue to be weighted mainly
towards conditions that may generate economic weakness]  [ARE
BALANCED WITH RESPECT TO PROSPECTS FOR BOTH
GOALS] [ARE WEIGHTED MAINLY TOWARD CONDITIONS
THAT MAY  GENERATE HEIGHTENED INFLATION
PRESSURES] in the foreseeable future.
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
Exhibit 10
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
p - preliminary data
Oct 
Nov 
Dec 
    
Jan 
Feb  
Mar  
Apr  
May  
Jun  
Jul  
Aug  
Sep
Aug  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Nov
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Exhibit 1
Money Aggregates
Seasonally adjusted
nontransactions components
Annual growth rates(%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
  1999            
  2000            
  2001
Quarterly(average)
  2001-Q4         
  2002-Q1         
       Q2         
       Q3
Monthly
  2001-Oct.       
       Nov.       
       Dec.        
                   
  2002-Jan.        
       Feb.        
       Mar.        
       Apr.        
       May         
       June        
       July        
       Aug.        
       Sep.        
       Oct. e
Levels ($billions):
Monthly
  2002-May         
       June        
       July        
       Aug.        
       Sep.
Weekly
  2002-Sep.  2     
             9     
            16     
            23     
            30     
                   
       Oct.  7     
            14p    
            21p
Period
In M3 onlyIn M2
p    preliminary       
 e    estimated
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 Strictly Confidential
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted) Class II FOMC
October 31, 2002
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5 
Agency total
Oct 23 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- -3,764 --- -3,764
Oct 30 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 4,339 --- 4,339
Intermeeting Period
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
