Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STPICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
MAY 2, 2002
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) May 2, 2002
Class II – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Market participants had largely anticipated the Committee’s decision to
leave the intended federal funds rate at 1-3/4 percent and to shift its assessment of
the risks to the economy to neutral at the March meeting.  Nonetheless, the
accompanying press release was read as more tentative about the pace of economic
recovery than had been expected in financial markets, and short- and intermediate-
dated Treasury coupon yields fell 5 to 11 basis points over the balance of the day.  In
the weeks that followed, that interpretation of the FOMC statement was reinforced by
mixed incoming data regarding the strength of final demand, by announcements of
weaker-than-expected corporate earnings prospects, and by escalating tensions in the
Middle East that fed concerns that higher oil prices could restrain spending.  In
addition, comments by several Federal Reserve officials were viewed as signaling that
monetary policy would remain on hold for longer than had been thought.  As a result,
market participants have significantly trimmed back their expectations for policy
action to the point that they now seem confident that the Committee will leave its
target federal funds rate unchanged and retain a neutral balance-of-risks statement at
this meeting.  Looking further ahead, expected federal funds rates implied by
eurodollar futures contracts have fallen more than 75 basis points since the March
meeting, but they price in about 75 basis points of tightening by the end of this year
and a target federal funds rate close to 4-1/2 percent by the end of 2003 (Chart 1).1
The lower trajectory of policy tightening now foreseen by investors has been reflected
in yields on nominal Treasury coupon securities, which have fallen about 20 to 35
basis points since the March meeting.  Real interest rates have apparently fallen a
comparable amount–at least judging by the behavior of yields on Treasury indexed
securities and by the stability of survey measures of inflation expectations.
(2) Investors appear to have been especially sensitive to earnings
announcements, which mostly met or exceeded analysts’ forecasts for the first quarter
but often included downbeat “guidance” by firms regarding current and future
revenue, particularly in the telecom and tech sectors.  The Nasdaq has been hit hard,
dropping 12-1/4 percent since the March meeting, and broader equity indexes have
declined as much as 7 percent.  While investors have become more skeptical about the
strength of the economic expansion, they apparently have little doubt that one is
under way:  Investment-grade corporate bond spreads have only edged higher over
the intermeeting period, and that widening has seemed to owe primarily to concerns
about the transparency of the balance sheets of a few highly rated firms; risk spreads
on commercial paper and speculative-grade bonds have eased a bit (Chart 2).  The
exception has once again been the telecom sector, where spreads have widened across
the credit-quality spectrum.
(3) Reassessment of the strength of the economic outlook and the likely
path of policy tightening has not been confined to U.S. markets, although shifts in
views abroad apparently have been more muted.  Benchmark ten-year bond yields in
most industrial economies have decreased over the intermeeting period but by smaller
amounts than in the United States.  Share prices have fared somewhat better abroad,
falling only slightly in Japan and about 3 to 5 percent in Europe and Canada.  Against
this backdrop, the major-currencies index of the foreign exchange value of the dollar
has declined 2-1/4 percent over the intermeeting period, with the dollar weakening
against a wide range of currencies.  The 2-1/4 percent depreciation of the dollar
against the euro may have been damped a bit by growing concerns about labor unrest
in Germany and Italy and political developments in France.  The dollar has fallen
further signs of economic strength by raising its policy rate 25 basis points;
nonetheless, futures markets suggest that Canadian policy is expected to tighten less
than was thought in mid-March.  Although Japan’s sovereign debt has been
downgraded again, the yen seems to have been supported by recent data on trade and
economic activity, more optimistic assessments of economic prospects, and the
absence of anticipated large capital outflows after the turn of the fiscal year.2
(4) The foreign exchange value of the dollar has risen slightly since the
March meeting vis-à-vis an index of the currencies of our other important trading
partners.  Argentina has made no significant headway in addressing its fiscal and other
structural problems, and the peso has depreciated 25 percent against the dollar.  In
Venezuela, despite considerable economic strains and an abortive coup, the bolivar
has appreciated almost 8 percent against the dollar, apparently benefitting from rising
oil prices.  The Mexican peso has fallen nearly 4 percent against the dollar following
an easing in Mexican monetary policy.  Argentine and Venezuelan debt spreads have
moved in a wide range, but on balance have edged lower over the intermeeting period.
In Brazil, concerns about the erosion of the government’s popular support have
widened debt spreads 180 basis points.  On net, spreads on most other emerging
market debt have changed little since the March meeting.
(5) Borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors is estimated to have slowed
slightly in recent months, but credit appears to have remained available to all but the
riskiest borrowers–albeit at terms that have stayed fairly tight.  In the nonfinancial
business sector, heavy net bond issuance has more than made up for runoffs of both
commercial paper and bank loans in the past two months (Chart 3).  This shift to
longer-term financing has usually been by choice, except in the telecommunications
sector, where several firms were pushed out of the commercial paper market.
According to the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, banks have tightened
standards and terms on business loans further over the past three months, but the net
percentage of domestic banks tightening credit conditions has fallen noticeably.
Household debt is estimated to have risen 8 percent at an annual rate in the first
quarter, the same pace as in the fourth quarter of 2001.  Growth in consumer credit
slowed to a 4 percent rate in the wake of a surge in auto finance late last year, but
mortgage debt growth picked up to a robust 9-1/2 percent pace.  Mortgage
refinancing activity has moderated in recent months, but the strong housing market
has propelled loan applications to purchase homes to new highs.  Treasury debt held
by the public stepped up in April on a seasonally adjusted basis but, smoothing
through the past few months, has grown slowly.  (See the box on page 5 on Treasury
debt management developments.)
Treasury Debt Management Developments
In early April, the Treasury took unusual steps to avoid breaching its
statutory borrowing limit of $5.95 trillion, disinvesting as much as $18.7 billion of
non-marketable securities from the Government Securities Fund–the so called
G-fund of the Federal Employees’ Thrift Savings Plan–in exchange for obligations
that do not count against the debt ceiling.  Investors had expected the Treasury to
take such measures, and the divestitures elicited no measurable reaction in financial
markets.  Even though smaller than anticipated, the inflow of individual non-
withheld tax receipts in mid-April was sufficient to allow the Treasury to retire
enough marketable debt to reinvest the G-fund in non-marketable debt.
As a result of the weak tax inflows, the Treasury indicated in its May
quarterly refunding statement that it would not be paying down debt on net over
the second quarter.  Market participants were apparently caught by surprise–the
Treasury had been projecting a sizable net paydown just three months ago–and
Treasury yields rose a few basis points following the announcement.  Given its
funding needs, the Treasury suspended buy-backs in the second quarter, moved to
auction new five-year notes each quarter, and added one more ten-year indexed
security to its auction cycle.
Following the release of its refunding statement, the Treasury warned that, if
the debt ceiling is not raised by mid-May, it will again have to use stopgap measures
to manage its debt.  Projections of federal receipts and expenditures by both
Treasury and Board staff indicate that the standard measures relied upon to create
room under the debt ceiling would be adequate to meet the government’s financing
needs only until the second half of June.
(6) M2 contracted in March and April, pulling down growth over the first
four months of the year to a 1-1/4 percent rate from last year’s 10-1/2 percent pace.
The slowing in M2 growth owed in part to the turnaround in the opportunity costs of
holding M2 assets as yields on its components fell in lagged response to the earlier
easing of monetary policy.  Among M2 components, retail money market funds have
run off as investors have apparently shifted funds into stock and bond mutual funds.
In recent months, lower individual non-withheld federal tax payments and the slowing
in mortgage refinancing activity appear also to have contributed importantly to the
weakness in M2.3  With nominal income expanding rapidly in the first quarter, M2
velocity rose at a 1-1/4 percent annual rate, in sharp contrast to the declines registered
throughout 2001.
Policy Alternatives
(7) The data received over the intermeeting period led the staff to make
modest changes to the contour of its projection of final demand in the near term and
to mark up its estimated growth rate of structural labor productivity.  The latter
revision stretches back several years, implying that the current level of the output gap
is now seen to be noticeably wider than in the March Greenbook.  In light of this
greater degree of resource slack and the associated lessened pressures on inflation, the
staff assumes that the Committee will maintain the current stance of policy through
the third quarter, and then raise the target federal funds rate to 2 percent in the fourth
quarter and to 3-3/4 percent by the end of 2003, 1/4 percentage point lower than in
the last projection.  Investors currently anticipate more tightening over this period
than built into the Greenbook, but, in the staff projection, their growing realization
that less tightening will be forthcoming is expected to limit increases in longer-term
Treasury yields and mortgage rates through 2003 even as short-term rates move
higher.  Corporate bond yields are projected to edge lower as investors become more
confident in the vigor of the expansion and more receptive to taking on risk.  Stock
prices are projected to rise enough to provide a risk-adjusted return comparable to
that from corporate bonds, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar is assumed to
remain near its current level.  These financial conditions, along with the boost to
spending that results from the more favorable outlook for structural productivity, are
expected to support sufficient expansion in real GDP to close most, but not all, of the
output gap by the end of 2003.  Downward pressure on inflation from slack in labor
and product markets over the period is tempered, however, by rising non-energy
import prices, and core PCE inflation edges down from 1-1/2 percent in 2001 to
(8) If the Committee finds the staff forecast to be both likely and
acceptable, it might choose an unchanged target federal funds rate at this meeting,
as assumed by the staff.  While the current stance of policy is very accommodative
and cannot be sustained indefinitely, keeping the funds rate at this level for a couple
of quarters, as in the staff forecast, could be seen as consistent with maintaining
inflation at a relatively low level as output gradually moves toward its potential.
Indeed, as explained in the box on a “perfect foresight” policy on the next page, were
the fundamentals of the economy to evolve as in the staff forecast, a policy maker
attempting to limit the deviations of output from its potential and inflation from a
target of about 1-1/4 percent over the next several years would hold the funds rate
near its current level until fall.  But policy makers do not have the benefit of perfect
foresight:  The expansion of aggregate demand in the staff forecast is underpinned by
a recovery in investment for which there are only tentative signs thus far in the data,
and a delay in tightening would permit the receipt of additional readings on the
prospects for capital spending.  The Committee may also see little cost to delaying a
firming of policy at this time given well-anchored inflation expectations and the
apparent lack of other pressures on inflation.  Even if the Committee perceived some
possibility that inflation at the end of 2003 could be higher than in the staff forecast, it
might not be uncomfortable with that outcome given the potential downside risks
associated with reduced monetary policy flexibility when inflation is at a low level.
A “Perfect Foresight” Policy
Model simulations in which the FRB/US model is solved to find a path for
the funds rate that minimizes squared deviations of output from its potential and
inflation from a long-run target have appeared several times in recent Bluebooks. 
Under this policy–labeled “perfect foresight”–the policy maker is assumed to
choose a path for the funds rate with complete knowledge of the various forces
shaping the outlook.
We updated this experiment based on an extension of the Greenbook
forecast through 2007, using the staff model with certain judgmental adjustments 
so as to capture key features of the staff outlook.  In particular, potential output is
expected to grow at a 3-1/2 percent rate after 2003, essentially extending the
performance anticipated toward the end of the Greenbook forecast, and the
unemployment rate consistent with stable inflation is close to 5-1/4 percent.  As for
the foreign sector, growth in activity abroad is expected to strengthen to a 3-3/4
percent rate by 2004, and, to hold the current account roughly flat relative to
nominal GDP, the dollar is assumed to depreciate 3 percent per year.  The fiscal
authorities are assumed to produce a small improvement in the budget balance over
time, with the unified deficit falling from about 3/4 percent of nominal GDP in
2003 to 1/4 percent, on average, over the next four years.
The perfect foresight policy path for the funds rate was chosen to minimize
an equally weighted discounted sum over the entire forecast period of squared
deviations of output from its estimated potential and inflation from an assumed
long-run target of about 1-1/4 percent, with a small penalty for changing the funds
rate.  A penalty on interest rate changes was included because, in the FRB/US
model, monetary policy has a contemporaneous–albeit small–effect on spending. 
As a result, an unconstrained policy maker with perfect foresight might move policy
dramatically to smooth current-quarter fluctuations in income.  Such precise control
over very near-term outcomes does not seem credible given the real-world
uncertainty surrounding the monetary policy transmission mechanism.  The penalty
limits this tendency to oversteer the economy, with its value selected so that the
policy prescriptions would replicate, on average, the funds rate volatility witnessed
over the past ten years.
A “Perfect Foresight” Policy (continued)
The solid line in the upper left panel of Chart 4 shows the path for the
federal funds rate assumed in the Greenbook out to 2003 and judgmentally
extended to move inflation ultimately to around 1-1/4 percent.  The dotted line
plots the federal funds rate that would be chosen by a policy maker with perfect
foresight beginning this quarter.  This exercise delivers a policy path quite similar to
that assumed in the Greenbook.  In particular, some delay in the near term appears
consistent with bringing inflation to around 1-1/4 percent while remaining sensitive
to output fluctuations.  As evident in the upper right panel, the return of the real
funds rate to its equilibrium level of around 3 percent is gradual and extends
beyond the Greenbook horizon.
(9) If the Committee chooses to leave policy unchanged at this meeting, the
selection of the balance-of-risks statement would be particularly important in shaping
market participants’ expectations about the likely future path for policy as well as the
reaction to the announcement in financial markets.4  If, as in the Greenbook, the
Committee sees inflation pressures as likely to remain muted and expects output to
grow only somewhat faster than potential supply, then it might well choose to indicate
that risks to the outlook are balanced over the “foreseeable future.”  In an
environment of heightened uncertainty, in particular, the Committee may view the
horizon at which the foreseeable future ends to be shorter than the date at which the
Greenbook assumes tightening begins.  Even if the Committee is fairly certain its next
action will be to tighten, such a statement could still be appropriate if the odds on
some disappointment on economic performance in the near term roughly balance
Market participants’ expectations for policy and for the balance-of-risks
statement appear to be fairly closely linked.  The Money Market Services survey
indicates that as expectations for policy tightening at the May meeting waned over
the intermeeting period, the fraction of respondents expecting a shift in the balance-
of-risks statement toward heightened inflation risks fell considerably (chart). 
Nonetheless, most market participants expect that the target federal funds rate will
have moved higher and the balance-of-risks statement will have shifted toward
heightened inflation pressures by the August meeting.  However, market
participants do not necessarily expect a shift in the balance-of-risks statement to
come in advance of the first policy move.  For example, eleven of the sixteen
respondents expecting a tightening action to come at the August meeting expect the
Committee to take that action after maintaining a neutral balance-of-risks statement
at the June meeting (table).  Similarly, of the five respondents expecting tighter
policy at the June meeting, all but one expect the balance-of-risks statement selected
at the May meeting to be neutral.  Of course, some respondents may think that
policy will be tightened following a meeting at which the Committee chooses a
neutral balance-of-risks statement because the Committee will be surprised by the
strength of aggregate demand.  Nonetheless, market participants also appear to see a
neutral balance-of-risks statement as providing considerable flexibility with regard to
subsequent policy decisions. For example, a few of the respondents expect that the
balance-of-risks statement will remain neutral even after the first tightening move.
Expectations of Changes in Policy and the Expectations of Policy and the Balance
Balance of Risks at the May FOMC Meeting* Risks at Upcoming FOMC Meetings
Number of
Respondents
June Balance-of-Risks
Statement
August Policy
Decision
Neutral Inflation
Pressures
* Percentage of respondents to the Money Market Source. Money Market Services.
Services survey on the dates shown expecting an 
increase in the target federal funds rate or a shift in the 
balance-of-risks statement toward heightened inflation
the possibility that inflation may ultimately pick up.  An unchanged target federal
funds rate, along with a statement indicating that the risks to the outlook are balanced,
would match investors’ expectations, and so would likely have little effect on financial
(10) The Committee might see it as less likely than does the staff that final
sales will pick up in time to support output growth once the impetus from inventories
has run its course or, at least, that the risks are skewed in the direction of
disappointing economic growth.  For example, the Committee may be concerned that
the latest reports and commentary on corporate earnings, as well as the recent data on
durable goods orders and shipments, suggest that recovery in the technology and
telecommunications sectors could be weaker or delayed longer than in the staff
forecast.5  In addition, the combination of lower stock prices and rising
unemployment could be seen as weighing more on consumer sentiment and spending
than assumed by the staff.  Indeed, the recent sharp slowing in money growth,
although partly explicable in terms of interest rates and other identifiable factors,
might be viewed as suggesting some weakness in households’ income and spending
plans.  While the staff has revised up its assessment of past and prospective
productivity growth, the Committee may put some weight on the possibility that the
growth of potential supply has been even higher for, perhaps, a longer time, implying
that economic slack is more sizable than assumed by the staff.  In such a
circumstance, there would be some risk of an unacceptable updrift of unemployment
that may produce a decline in inflation, perhaps inclining the Committee to return to a
statement that the risks are weighted toward economic weakness.  Such an
announcement would surprise market participants, because they generally expect the
balance-of-risks statement to shift toward heightened inflation pressures before too
long.  Absent a surprisingly weak employment report tomorrow, the quick reversal of
the adoption of a statement of balanced risks at the March FOMC meeting would
probably confuse market participants and might be read as signaling a considerable
deterioration in the Committee’s confidence in economic expansion.  In that case,
expectations for policy tightening would be pushed back, interest rates could fall
substantially, and stock prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar could
(11) In contrast, if the Committee believes that aggregate demand will be
stronger than in the staff forecast and that, if policy were to remain unchanged,
economic slack will erode fairly soon, then the risks would seem to be weighted
toward increased inflation pressures.  This more immediate emergence of pressure
on resources might eventuate, for example, if economic growth abroad picks up more
quickly than projected by the staff.6  The Committee might also opt for such a
statement if it were concerned about other sources of risks to the inflation outlook,
including a widespread jump in health insurance costs, a substantial pass-through of
the recent increases in oil prices to prices and wages more generally, and a
continuation of the recent weakness in the foreign exchange value of the dollar. While
a statement that the risks are weighted toward heightened inflation pressures is
consistent with market participants’ expectations for the direction of policy, in light of
the perceived tone of recent statements by Federal Reserve officials, such a selection
likely would lead investors to move up the timing of their anticipated tightening of
policy.  As a result, interest rates would rise, especially at shorter maturities, stock
prices would fall, and the dollar might appreciate.
(12) If the Committee views aggregate demand going forward as likely to be
more robust than in the staff forecast, then it might choose a 25 basis point increase
in the target federal funds rate at this meeting.  With the current real federal funds rate
well below its likely equilibrium value, the Committee may believe that the time has
come to start the process of moving back toward a more neutral stance in order to
reduce the possibility of having to make very rapid adjustments later or risk having
inflation pressures mount.7  Indeed, the Committee might view a 25 basis point rate
hike as merely taking back a portion of the easing undertaken to support the economy
in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks, and such a rate increase might be seen as
justified since the economic fallout from the attacks has proven to be considerably
smaller than had been feared.  A 25 basis point move would probably be unlikely to
balance the risks to the outlook on this view, and so the balance-of-risks statement
would presumably point to risks weighted toward increased inflation pressures.
(13) The choice of a 25 basis point tightening move accompanied by a
statement that the balance of risks is weighted toward increased inflation pressures
would catch market participants off guard.  Moreover, there is some evidence that
market expectations are particularly sensitive to policy moves that mark a change in
the direction of policy.8  As a result, the tightening could have substantial effects on
asset prices, as market participants move up the timing and perhaps increase the
cumulative size of expected policy actions.  Interest rates would likely rise, especially
so on shorter-term instruments, equity markets sell off, and the dollar appreciate on
foreign exchange markets.
(14) Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to expand at a 5-3/4
percent annual rate over the final three quarters of 2002, somewhat faster than in the
first quarter.  Federal debt growth is expected to rise sharply this quarter on a
seasonally adjusted basis, reflecting weak tax receipts and stronger spending, but then
fall back in the third and fourth quarters.  Nonfederal debt growth is expected to dip
this quarter but then pick up to a 6 percent pace over the second half of this year.
With the deterioration in business credit quality beginning to reverse as the economy
improves, business debt growth is projected to pick up over the course of the year,
reflecting increases in investment spending that outstrip gains in internally generated
funds.  While household bankruptcy rates and losses on consumer loans are expected
to remain at elevated levels in the near term, household credit providers generally
remain financially sound, and access to credit should not significantly constrain
household spending.  Nonetheless, household debt growth, which was supported in
the first quarter by robust spending on new homes, is expected to moderate over the
remainder of the year as growth in spending slows.
(15) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 is projected to expand at a 6-1/4
percent pace from April through December, considerably faster than earlier in the
year.  In part, the pickup reflects the reversal of tax-related effects that have put
downward pressure on M2 in March and April but are expected to provide a boost in
May.  Other special factors that have weighed on money growth this year–including
the effects of very strong mortgage refinancing and the increased attractiveness of
bond and stock mutual funds–should also have less of a damping effect on money
growth over the balance of the year.  For 2002 as a whole, money growth is expected
to nearly match the 5-1/4 percent advance in nominal GDP, leaving its velocity about
Directive and Balance of Risks Language
(16) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for
(1) the directive and (2) the “balance of risks” sentence to be included in the press
release issued after the meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote
sustainable growth in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the
Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with maintaining /INCREASING/REDUCING the federal
funds rate at/TO an average of around ___1-3/4 percent.
(2) “Balance of Risks” Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available,
the Committee believes that the risks are balanced with respect to
prospects for both goals [ARE WEIGHTED MAINLY TOWARD
CONDITIONS THAT MAY  GENERATE HEIGHTENED
INFLATION PRESSURES] [ARE WEIGHTED MAINLY TOWARD
CONDITIONS THAT MAY GENERATE ECONOMIC
WEAKNESS] in the foreseeable future.
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 Strictly Confidential
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted) Class II FOMC
May 2, 2002
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5 
Agency total
Intermeeting Period
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
