Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
DECEMBER5, 2002
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BYTHE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) December 5, 2002
Class II – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Market participants had expected that the FOMC would cut its target for
the federal funds rate 25 basis points at the November meeting and retain a balance of
risks toward weakness, and then ease policy again early next year.  Consequently, they
were caught off guard by the immediate 50 basis point cut and the shift to an
assessment of balanced risks.  Treasury coupon yields initially fell following the
announcement but rebounded later that afternoon, as investors focused on the shift
to balance and lowered the odds on pronounced economic weakness, in part
reflecting the policy action.  Over most of the intermeeting period, incoming
economic data and earnings news further reassured market participants about the
outlook.  In recent days, however, markets absorbed more mixed economic reports
and downbeat information on prospects in the tech sector.  Still, interest-rate futures
suggest that investors continue to expect monetary policy tightening to commence
next year and, indeed, now anticipate a higher path for the federal funds rate after
midyear than they did before the last meeting (chart 1).  Options on those futures
indicate less near-term uncertainty about the path for rates and, in particular, little
likelihood of outcomes requiring very low funds rates next spring (see the box on
page 2).  Futures quotes and survey results suggest that market participants put slim
odds on a policy easing at the December meeting.1
Chart 1
Financial Market Indicators
November 5, 2002
December 5, 2002
Expected Federal Funds Rates Estimated from
Financial Futures*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures rates with an
 allowance for term premia and other adjustments.
November 5, 2002
December 5, 2002
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off-the-run Treasury coupon
securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par Treasury securities
with semi-annual coupons.
Long-Run Inflation Expectations
Michigan Survey
Philadelphia Fed Survey
TIIS Inflation
Compensation*
*The inflation rate that equalizes the price of the January 2012 TIIS and
the value of a portfolio of nominal securities with the same payments.
Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
2002
S&P 500 Index
(Left Scale)
Ten-year Treasury
(Right Scale)
S&P 500 and the Ten-year Treasury
Monthly
E/P ratio
Real 10-year Treasury yield*
* 10-year Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year expected
inflation.
+ Denotes the latest observation using daily prices and latest earnings
data from I/B/E/S.
Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov
2002
S&P 100 (VIX)
Stock Market Volatility
The FOMC’s decision to lowerthe target rate to1-1/4 percent at its November
meeting and theprevailing conditions of low inflationand sluggish globaleconomic
growthhavespurred discussion in thepressand in marketsabout the possibility that
U.S. monetarypolicy could be constrained by thezero bound onnominal interest
rates. Most recently, however, investors apparentlyhaveput lowodds onsuch an
outcome. Thedashed and solid lines in the left-hand panelbelow depict the
estimated probabilities embedded in the prices of optionson interest-rate futures that
the target fundsratewill moveto or below100 basis points and 50 basis points,
respectively, over thenext five months. Those probabilities rose in early October
amid thedowndraft in equitypricesand jumped again late that month following news
reports suggesting that theFOMCwaspreparing to easepolicyat its November
meeting. Since then,however, theprobability of a rateat or below50 basispointshas
fallen toquite low levelsas investors’ fearsabout downside risks for the economy
seemto have diminished. Such reduced concerns also seemto be evident in equity
index options. As noted in the bottomright panel, the probability that investors
attach to a significant drop in equitypriceshas fallen overthe past twomonths but
remains elevated.
Market-based Estimates 
of  the
Likelihood of  Approaching the Zero Bound
(2) Reflecting the upward shift in the expected path for the target federal
funds rate after the middle of next year, yields on two-year Treasury notes climbed
about 15 basis points over the intermeeting period.  Yields on ten-year nominal and
inflation-indexed Treasuries both were about unchanged on balance, suggesting that
long-term inflation expectations were stable.  The improved outlook for the economy
and earnings initially buoyed stock prices, but equity markets sold off over the past
few days in response to the mixed readings on the economy and signs of a less
buoyant path for earnings than previously expected.  On balance, broad stock price
indexes edged down ½ to 1 percent, while the Nasdaq was up about ½ percent,
implying that earnings-price ratios remained fairly high relative to real interest rates.
Expected stock market volatility implied by options prices was about unchanged on
net.  Spreads of yields on investment-grade issues over Treasuries declined 10 to 40
basis points, while those on speculative-grade bonds dropped more than 100 basis
points (chart 2).  Nonetheless, credit spreads stayed wide, probably reflecting concerns
that default rates could remain high and recovery rates low for some time.  Overall
market conditions generally improved in the weeks prior to the November FOMC
meeting and have improved somewhat further over the intermeeting period, helping
to keep year-end pressures subdued thus far (see the box on page 4).
(3) The dollar’s value against major foreign currencies strengthened about
signs of increasing economic weakness prompted the European Central Bank to lower
policy rates 50 basis points today, somewhat more than had been built into market
prices.  For the period as a whole, yields on long-term government debt in the Euro
area fell 10 to 15 basis points, stock price indexes declined a little, and the euro’s value
against the dollar was about unchanged.  Financial markets in Japan fluctuated mainly
in response to speculation about fiscal policy measures and banking sector reforms.
Chart 2
Financial Market Indicators
Ten-year AA
Ten-year BBB
Ten-year Swap
Spreads of Selected Private Long-Term Yields
Telecom Sector
Master II
Broad Index
Major
Currencies Index
Other Important
Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Exchange Rates
EMBI+ Index
Year-end Pressures and Credit Market Conditions
As shown in thebottom-left panel, term funding pressuresover year-end in the
commercialpapermarket havebeen rather muted todate. Thesharp contraction
over thepast year in paper outstanding and theexit of riskier credits fromthemarket
havereportedly damped year-end premiums. In the interbank market,many
institutionsare experiencing strong coredeposit growthand thusmay feel little
pressure to secure term funding over the turnof theyear. Moreover, futuresmarket
quotes suggest that market participants anticipate that the Systemwill againbe quite
generous in theprovisionof reservesat year-end,with the implied fundsrateexpected
at year-end at least 50 basis pointsbelow the target.
The recent improvement in credit market conditionsmore broadlyhas
probably also been a factor tending to damp year-end pressures by reducing concerns
that intermediationcould be impaired and that lower-rated borrowers might not be
able to obtain funding overthe turn. Spreads on credit default swapsof major
intermediaries (shownat theright) and on the subordinated debt of large banks have
continued to shrink overthe period. Anecdotal informationcollected by theDesk
suggests that liquidityconditions are about normalin theTreasurymarket and have
improved considerably in the investment-grade corporate bond market. Liquidity in
the junkbond market reportedly remainssub-par,but some market participantshave
noted an improved tone of late accompanying the sizable inflows to junk bond mutual
funds.
System or the Treasury.
The announcement of reforms in late November omitted some key details, but
market participants judged that the full plan will be inadequate to the task.  After the
announcement, bank stock prices staged a modest recovery but finished well down on
the period.  Broad indexes of Japanese share prices were off only slightly.  The Bank
of Japan indicated that it now would aim at the upper end of its target range for
reserve balances and began to implement its previously announced plan to purchase
equities from banks.  On net, the dollar gained about 2-1/2 percent versus the yen,
with a sizable move late in the period following comments by Japanese officials that
seemed to favor yen weakness.  Against an index of the currencies of our other
important trading partners, the dollar moved up a touch over the period.  Early in the
period, pro-market statements by associates of the Brazilian president-elect
contributed to a substantial narrowing of that country’s EMBI+ spread, but that move
was retraced partially as markets became jittery about the staffing of key economic
posts; although stocks rose about 6 percent, the real declined 5-1/2 percent against the
(4) With the U.S. corporate bond market more receptive, gross bond
issuance by nonfinancial firms in November recovered to the fastest pace since June.
In markets for shorter-term business credit, both commercial paper and bank loans
were about unchanged last month after sharp declines over most of the year.  The
sum of outstanding bonds, paper, and business loans appears to be increasing this
quarter after the first quarterly declines ever recorded for this series in the previous
two quarters.  Investor appetite for riskier corporate securities apparently has
increased, with both equity and junk bond mutual funds experiencing inflows in
November following outflows in several recent months.  In the household sector,
indexes of mortgage applications suggest that households have continued to take on
mortgage debt at a rapid clip.  Growth in consumer credit slowed further in October
from its modest third-quarter pace, likely held down by paydowns of consumer debt
with the proceeds of cash-out mortgage refinancing.
(5) M2 posted an 8-3/4 percent annual growth rate in November following
a 10-1/4 percent increase in October, with the advance again concentrated in liquid
deposits.  The demand for liquid assets continued to be lifted by the low level of their
opportunity costs and heavy mortgage refinancing.  Over the four quarters of 2002,
M2 is estimated to have expanded about 7 percent after rising 10-1/4 percent in 2001.
Growth in M2 has again outstripped that of nominal GDP, which is expected to
expand 4-1/4 percent, but by less than in 2001.  Domestic nonfinancial sector debt
likely will rise 6-3/4 percent in 2002, a bit faster than in 2001, but its nonfederal
component is expected to decelerate about a percentage point to 6-1/2 percent.  The
appendix contains a more detailed discussion of developments in money and credit
over the year.
Policy Alternatives
(6) The FOMC’s decision to ease monetary policy at the November
meeting, some improvement in financial market conditions on balance, and an
assessment that fiscal policy could be somewhat more expansionary have led the staff
to boost its projection of economic activity over the next two years.  The assumed
funds rate target is now 50 basis points lower than in the previous projection and
remains at that level until mid-2004, when the FOMC begins tightening.  Treasury
bond and mortgage rates are roughly flat over the forecast period, while investment-
grade corporate yields move down considerably as risk premiums fall further in an
environment of strengthening growth.  Equity prices rise at about the same pace as in
the last Greenbook, but from an upwardly revised base.  The exchange value of the
dollar, as before, is seen as edging down in this forecast.  Real GDP growth, projected
at 3-1/4 percent next year and 4-1/4 percent in 2004, is up a little more than 1/4
percentage point from the last Greenbook.  The forecast for unemployment has been
revised down correspondingly, with the rate now seen as declining from a high of 6
percent in the first three quarters of next year to just below 5-1/2 percent by the end
of the forecast period, still above the staff’s estimate of the NAIRU.  As a
consequence of the lessened slack in resource use, prices are predicted to decelerate a
shade less than in the previous projection, with core PCE inflation expected to drift
down to a 1-1/4 percent rate in 2004.
(7) Should the Committee share the staff’s assessment of the underlying
forces shaping the economy and be of the view that the monetary stimulus in the
pipeline is adequate to support satisfactory economic growth with low inflation, it may
want to stand pat at this meeting on both the funds rate target and the risk
assessment.  Standard relationships suggest that, given the lags in the effects of
monetary policy, last year’s easings are still supporting growth in aggregate demand,
and November’s action, which moved the real federal funds rate more distinctly into
negative territory, created a larger gap below the band of estimated equilibrium real
rates (chart 3).  In view of the stimulus that is already in place, the Committee may
wish to await the arrival of more information, possibly including the economic
implications of any military conflict, before adjusting its policy stance.  The
Committee may believe that, given the current stance of policy, the low odds but high
costs of marked further disinflation (or even outright deflation) and the economic
weakness that presumably would attend such a development roughly balance the
arguably higher odds but lower costs of increased inflation and an unsustainable pace
of growth.  Thus, the Committee may believe that retaining the current degree of
policy accommodation would be consistent with an assessment of balanced risks.
(8) If the Committee sees a need for additional insurance against excessive
disinflation and economic weakness, it may want to implement a further 25 basis
point reduction in its funds rate target at this meeting while maintaining an
assessment of balanced risks.  The available evidence suggests only a small increase in
real GDP this quarter, and the recovery in GDP growth from the current “soft spot”
is still largely a forecast, so that a much weaker outcome cannot be ruled out.  Some
combination of anemic real growth and a more favorable inflation-output tradeoff
could cause the inflation rate over the next couple of years to run noticeably below the
staff projection, potentially constraining the Committee’s ability to lower real interest
rates if the need were to arise.  Even abstracting from uncertainties, the Committee
might concur with the Greenbook’s revised projections for output and resource use
under the policy assumption of that forecast but still regard them to be unacceptably
weak and to warrant further stimulus, as in the policymaker perfect foresight
simulations portrayed in chart 4.  Should the further policy easing eventually prove to
have been unnecessary, the likely persistence of some economic slack for at least the
Chart 3
Actual Real Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Estimated Equilibrium Real Rates
Actual Real Funds Rate
TIIS-Based EstimateHistorical Average: 2.72
  (1966Q1-2002Q3)
Current Rate
25 b.p. Easing
Equilibrium Real Funds Rate Estimates (Percent)
November Bluebook
November Bluebook
November Bluebook
November Bluebook
November Bluebook
November Bluebook
November Bluebook
Statistical Filter
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data*
Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data*
FRB/US Model
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data**
Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data**
Treasury Inflation-Indexed Securities
* Also employs the staff projection for the current and next quarters.
** Also employs the staff projection for the current quarter.
Chart 4
Policymaker Perfect Foresight Strategy for Monetary Policy
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Greenbook
1 percent inflation goal
1-1/2 percent inflation goal
Real Federal Funds Rate
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Civilian Unemployment Rate
The perfect foresight simulations extend the key assumptions of the staff outlook (other than the path for monetary policy) through 2008:
      ●      potential output grows at about 3-1/2 percent per year
      ●      the relative price of oil stabilizes at its end of 2004 level
      ●      the exchange value of dollar measured in real terms falls at a 3 percent clip
      ●      federal budget deficit relative to GDP declines gradually
next several quarters suggests that the move could probably be reversed before any
damage was done to the Committee’s longer-run inflation objectives.
(9) Given that market participants see little chance of a shift in either the
funds rate target or the assessment of risks at this meeting, a choice that matches this
expectation should not have any appreciable effect on market prices.  An easing of 25
basis points, however, would surprise investors, and the resulting fall in short-term
interest rates could carry over in part to bond yields.  Stock prices could rise as
prospective earnings are discounted at lower interest rates and, perhaps, as investors
revise up their outlook for earnings.  The value of the dollar might move lower in line
with the reduction in fixed-income yields.  However, if equity markets rally strongly,
these effects on bond yields and the dollar could well be reversed.
(10) Under the Greenbook forecast and its assumption of an unchanged
policy stance though mid-2004, the projected growth of M2 from November through
March, at 7 percent, would be a bit slower than in recent months.  An ebbing of
mortgage refinancing and renewed attractiveness of investment in the stock market
should damp the expansion of liquid accounts.  Reduced home mortgage growth is
projected to cause a falloff in overall borrowing by households in coming months.
Consumer credit growth should remain moderate, as the effects of a slowdown in
spending on durables are roughly offset by smaller paydowns of consumer loans from
cash-out mortgage refinancing.  For businesses, the staff anticipates a small upturn in
borrowing, reflecting a wider gap between capital spending and internal funds and
some revival of merger activity.  Corporate bond issuance, in particular, is likely to
show some vigor, as investors’ risk aversion diminishes further, while bank loans and
commercial paper stay about flat.  Nonfederal debt is projected to expand at a 6
percent rate in the first quarter, down a little from this year’s pace.  With federal debt
growth likely to remain near this year’s rate, overall domestic nonfinancial sector debt
growth is projected to edge down 1/2 percentage point from this year’s pace to 6-1/4
percent in the first quarter.
M2 Growth Under Alternative Policy Actions
No change*           Ease 25 bp
Monthly Growth Rates
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(11) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for (1)
the directive and (2) the balance-of-risks sentence.
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote
sustainable growth in output.  To further its long-run objectives,
the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve
markets consistent with MAINTAINING/INCREASING/
reducing the federal funds rate AT/to an average of around
___1-1/4 percent.
(2) Balance-of-Risks Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price
stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information
currently available, the Committee believes that the risks [ARE
WEIGHTED MAINLY TOWARDS CONDITIONS THAT
MAY GENERATE ECONOMIC WEAKNESS]  [are balanced
with respect to prospects for both goals] [ARE WEIGHTED
MAINLY TOWARD CONDITIONS THAT MAY
GENERATE HEIGHTENED INFLATION PRESSURES] in
the foreseeable future.
Appendix
Review of Debt and Money Growth in 2002
Declines in long-term interest rates, which brought yields to forty-year lows,
importantly shaped private credit flows this year.  In the business sector, low interest rates on
corporate bonds helped sustain a brisk pace of gross bond issuance through mid-year,
although the proceeds were largely used to refinance existing debt.  Subsequently, mixed
readings on the strength of the economic expansion, reports of deficiencies in corporate
governance, a worsening of corporate credit quality, and heightened geopolitical risks pushed
risk spreads sharply higher and brought issuance to a virtual halt.  For the year as a whole,
overall business borrowing was quite weak, mainly owing to sagging capital expenditures, an
evaporation of merger and acquisition activity, and an increased reliance on liquid assets that
had been built up previously.
Household borrowing, by contrast, remained robust in 2002.  Credit flows in the
residential mortgage market picked up from an already brisk pace as borrowers took
advantage of low mortgage interest rates, and as strong motor vehicle sales boosted the
expansion of consumer credit.  Against the backdrop of weak tax receipts and increased
outlays, the federal government tapped markets in heavy volume for the first time in several
years.  Meanwhile, greater safe-haven demand for liquid assets that likely reflected investors’
disenchantment with the stock market supported the broad monetary aggregates this year,
although their expansion slowed, owing to the waning effects of the substantial monetary
policy easing of 2001.
Domestic Nonfinancial Sector Debt
The aggregate debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors expanded 6¾ percent in 2002, a
bit faster than in 2001.  Spurred by weak tax receipts and an acceleration in spending, federal
debt grew 7½ percent this year after contracting slightly in 2001.  The growth of nonfederal
debt, by contrast, slowed to a 6½ percent pace in 2002 from 7½ percent last year, owing for
the most part to a sharp slowdown in business borrowing.
Anemic business borrowing this year was largely attributable to weak demand for
credit, reflecting depressed capital expenditures and modest increases in internal funds, as
well as the tendency of some firms to draw on liquid assets—which began the year at high
levels—rather than to seek external financing.  Over the first half of the year, gross issuance
of corporate bonds by nonfinancial corporations moderated somewhat from the rapid clip
set in 2001, but still remained brisk.  Firms used the proceeds to refinance higher-cost
long-term debt at more attractive interest rates and to strengthen their balance sheets by
paying down short-term obligations such as bank loans and commercial paper.  Issuance of
bonds by higher-rated speculative-grade firms outside the beleaguered telecom and energy
sectors also held up reasonably well in the first half.
Both investment-grade and high-yield corporate bond issuance, however, slowed
dramatically in the second half of 2002, as investors’ demand for corporate debt weakened
because of concerns about the reliability of financial statements and the quality of corporate
governance, deteriorating credit worthiness, and historically low recovery rates on defaulted
bonds in some sectors.  Worries about the possibility of additional earnings restatements
diminished after the SEC’s August 14 deadline for certification of financial statements passed
without any significant new revelations of corporate chicanery.  However, with a weaker tone
of economic data and heightened geopolitical risks early in the fall, spreads of lower-tier
investment-grade and high-yield issues over Treasuries climbed to their highest levels in
more than a decade, evidently reflecting both greater expected losses and some pullback
from risk-taking.  Trading conditions in the corporate bond market also deteriorated
somewhat during this period, with debt issued by auto manufacturers and their finance
subsidiaries especially hard hit at times.  As the fall progressed, however, more upbeat news
about the economy sparked a rally in equity prices and renewed investors’ appetite for
corporate debt, pushing risk spreads sharply lower and leading to a rebound in bond
issuance.
In the commercial paper market, companies perceived as having questionable
accounting practices experienced significant investor resistance and most discontinued their
programs, while others shifted to alternative forms of finance in an effort to strengthen their
balance sheets.  In addition, commercial banks reported that they tightened standards and
terms on commercial paper backup lines of credit, citing heightened concerns about possible
deterioration in the credit quality of issuers and a higher probability of lines being drawn
upon because of potential strains in the commercial paper market.  All told, nonfinancial
commercial paper outstanding declined 39 percent in 2002, after dropping almost a third the
previous year.
The runoff of business loans at commercial banks that started early last year
intensified in 2002.  Large banks reported a further weakening of demand for C&I loans
over the course of the year, mainly owing to reduced outlays on capital equipment and
inventories and moribund merger activity.  These institutions attributed the striking decline
in C&I loans not only to the reduced funding needs of creditworthy borrowers that found
bond financing or a runoff of liquid assets more attractive, but also to a reduction in the pool
of creditworthy borrowers that stemmed from a deterioration in asset quality and a
tightening of banks’ lending policies over the course of the year.  A significant net percentage
of banks pointed to the possibility of further revelations of accounting problems as a reason
for tightening their lending policies during the first half of the year.  However, the
proportions of banks that tightened lending standards and terms on C&I loans declined
noticeably in 2002.
After having surged late in 2001, growth in commercial mortgage debt dropped
sharply during the first quarter of 2002, as nonresidential construction spending fell.  Despite
the continued contraction in outlays on nonresidential structures, commercial mortgage debt
expanded briskly over the remainder of 2002, reflecting in part substitution for other
corporate debt and supporting a robust issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities. 
Although vacancy rates moved somewhat higher, delinquency rates on commercial
mortgages remained at historically low levels, and banks firmed standards on commercial real
estate loans in 2002, on net.
Expansion of overall household debt picked up in 2002 to the fastest pace since 1989. 
With mortgage rates at very low levels by historical standards, new purchases of homes and
mortgage refinancing activity were elevated throughout the year, spurring a rapid 11½
percent advance in home mortgage debt.  Reportedly, a significant number of households
that refinanced home mortgages took the opportunity to extract equity to repay other debt as
well as to finance home improvements and other expenditures.  Still, consumer credit
expanded at a 4¼ percent pace in 2002, supported in part by the automakers’ cut-rate
financing incentives and generous rebates.  Hefty growth of overall household debt offset
declines in the cost of debt, on net, to keep the household debt-service burden near its mid-
1980s peak over the year.
Despite the elevated debt-service burden, household balance sheets stayed in
relatively good repair.  Although the rate of personal bankruptcy fillings has risen, on net,
this year and delinquency rates remain high for subprime borrowers, broad measures of
delinquencies on home mortgages and consumer loans have edged down.  The ratio of
household assets to disposable income fell this year, as steep losses in equity markets
outweighed solid gains in house prices and disposable income rose.  Households continued
net purchases of equity mutual funds through the spring, despite the falling and volatile stock
market.  Further net declines in equity prices since then, however, led to enormous
withdrawals from equity mutual funds, which evidently were partly redirected toward
government bond funds.
State and local government debt accelerated this year from the already brisk pace of
2001.  Strong issuance of long-term municipal debt for new capital projects and advance
refunding was bolstered by an appreciable decline in yields on both revenue and general
obligation bonds.  Fiscal difficulties in many states meant that short-term issuance also was
well maintained.  Credit quality in the municipal sector worsened somewhat in the second
half of 2002, with the ratio of long-term municipal bond yields to Treasury yields rising
significantly late in the year, reflecting deteriorating fiscal positions and the heavy pace of
municipal issuance.
After it resumed net borrowing in the second half of 2001, the Treasury continued to
tap markets in volume this year.  Federal debt grew at an 8½ percent pace in the first half of
the year, fueled by a significant weakening of tax receipts owing to reduced tax rates and
sluggish income growth, the paucity of taxable capital gains, as well as increased outlays for
defense and homeland security.  In the spring, the Treasury had to resort to emergency
accounting devices to create financing room within the existing $5.95 trillion statutory debt
limit, which the Congress raised to $6.4 trillion on June 27.  Federal borrowing remained at a
brisk 6½ percent pace over the second half of 2002.
Depository Credit
The expansion of depository credit moderated in 2002.  Credit at thrift institutions
decelerated somewhat from last year’s pace, though the slowdown can be attributed for the
most part to a large thrift institution’s conversion to a bank charter.  The growth of bank
credit picked up significantly from the anemic pace in 2001, driven by a robust acquisition of
securities, especially mortgage-backed securities, as well as a surge in home equity and
residential real estate loans.  Business loans at commercial banks, by contrast, continued to
run off.  The pricing of new business loans indicated that banks remain particularly
concerned about lower-quality borrowers, consistent with the selectivity observed in the
bond and syndicated loan markets.  In lending to households, moderate net percentages of
domestic banks also tightened credit conditions for credit card and other consumer loans in
2002.  The proportion of domestic banks that tightened credit standards on residential
mortgage loans rose late in the year to the highest share in the past decade, but nonetheless
remained quite low.
Commercial banks registered strong profit gains this year, reflecting robust fee
income from mortgage and credit card lending, more stringent cost controls, as well as the
relatively less expensive funding offered by inflows of core deposits.  Loss provisioning and
nonperforming loans increased overall, although banks generally remained very well
capitalized.
Monetary Aggregates
M2 grew 7 percent this year, considerably below the 10¼ percent rate of increase in
2001.  The growth of M2 dropped in the first half of 2002, owing to a sharp slowdown in its
liquid components, as the opportunity cost of holding M2 leveled out, because deposit rates
caught up with the earlier fall in market interest rates.  M2 accelerated significantly in the
second half, as households, apparently in response to falling and volatile equity prices,
moved large sums from domestic equity mutual funds.  M2 growth was also supported by
another wave of mortgage refinancing activity, as mortgage interest rates fell to new lows. 
With the expansion of M2 continuing to outrun that of nominal income, M2 velocity
declined for the fifth year in a row.
Chart A-1
      Debt and Money Growth
Growth of Nonfederal Debt
p Preliminary.
Growth of Total Nonfinancial Debt
p Preliminary.
Commercial paper*
C&I loans*
Bonds
Growth of Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt
Billions of dollars
Monthly rate
* Seasonally adjusted.
e Estimated.
Consumer Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of Household Debt
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
e Estimated.
Growth of Federal Debt
e Estimated.
Note. Treasury debt held by the public, month end.
Growth of M2
e Estimated.
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
p - preliminary data
Dec 
    
Jan 
Feb 
Mar 
Apr  
May  
Jun  
Jul  
Aug  
Sep  
Oct  
Nov
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Dec
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
December 9, 2002
Exhibit 1
Money Aggregates
Seasonally adjusted
nontransactions components
Annual growth rates(%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
  1999            
  2000            
  2001
Quarterly(average)
  2001-Q4         
  2002-Q1         
       Q2         
       Q3
Monthly
  2001-Nov.       
       Dec.       
                   
  2002-Jan.        
       Feb.        
       Mar.        
       Apr.        
       May         
       June        
       July        
       Aug.        
       Sep.        
       Oct.        
       Nov. e
Levels ($billions):
Monthly
  2002-June        
       July        
       Aug.        
       Sep.        
       Oct.
Weekly
  2002-Oct.  7     
            14     
            21     
            28     
                   
       Nov.  4     
            11     
            18p    
            25p
Period
In M3 onlyIn M2
p    preliminary       
 e    estimated
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 Strictly Confidential
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted) Class II FOMC
December 5, 2002
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5 
Agency total
Oct 23 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- -3,764 --- -3,764
Oct 30 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 4,339 --- 4,339
Nov 6 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- -2,085 --- -2,085
Intermeeting Period
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
