Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STUCTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
JANUARY 24,2002
MONETARY POLCY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) January 24, 2002
Class II – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The Committee’s actions at its December meeting to reduce the federal
funds rate another 25 basis points and to retain an assessment that the balance of risks
was weighted toward economic weakness had been widely anticipated, but investors
apparently read the announcem ent as indicating that the FOMC’s outlook for
economic conditions was softer than had  been thought.  Although economic data
releases over the intermeeting period generally led market participants to mark up
their expectation  for near-term economic activity, the anticipated growth of aggregate
demand going forward was evidently revised down in light of speeches by several
Committee members and firms’ downbeat guidance on future revenues and capital
spending.  On net, federal funds futures quotes for the next few months are little
changed from their levels at the time of the December meeting and are consistent
with only slight odds of a 25 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate at this
meeting.  Expectations for policy tightening later this year and next, however, were
trimmed 25 to 35 basis points, with the funds rate now moving a little above 4 percent
by fall 2003 (charts). 1  Yields on nominal Treasury coupon securities were unchanged
to down 15 basis points over the intermeeting period.2  Rates on inflation-indexed
Treasury securities fell as much as those on their nominal counterparts, suggesting
little change in inflation expectations, although a survey measure of households’
longer-term inflation expectations dropped considerably.  In private markets, risk
spreads on corporate bonds were little changed.  Broad equity price indexes edged
lower, on net, but, with earnings marked down too, still seem to incorporate
expectations of rapid growth in profits.
(2) The trade-weighted index of the do llar’s exchange value against other
major currencies rose 2½ percent over the intermeeting period, reaching its highest
level since the mid-1980s, as market attention focused on signs that the U.S. economy
would lead the rebound from the global slowdown.  The dollar appreciated
progress on structural reforms continued to disappoint market participants.  Heavy
injections of liquidity by the Bank of Japan, as well as comments from Japanese
officials indicating little resistance to the weakening of the yen, also may have weighed
on that currency.  The dollar touched a record high against the Canad ian dollar late in
the intermeeting period and, on net, increased about 1½ percent.  Against the euro,
the dollar appreciated about 1 percent.  Successful introduction of euro coins and
interest rates in the major industrialized countries generally edged higher on net, but
changes in stock prices were mixed.
and U.S. monetary
authorities did not intervene.
(3) The exchange value of the do llar against the currencies of our other
important trading partners increased about 1¼ percent during the intermeeting
period, with  much  of that  rise stem ming from depreciation  of the A rgent ine peso.
Under intense domestic economic and political pressure, Argentine authorities
abandoned support for one-to-one peso-dollar convertibility in favor of a dual
exchange rate system with a new fixed (but devalued) rate for certain transactions and
a floating rate for all o thers.  As measured by the  floating rate, the peso  initially
depreciated sharply and has since fluctuated in a wide range amid daily intervention
purchases of pesos by the Argentine central bank.  Following the default on some
official debt, prices of Argentina’s bonds, which already had reached  distressed levels
before the December FOMC meeting , sank further.  To date, spillovers to other Latin
American financial markets have appeared quite limited.  Against the U.S. dollar, the
Brazilian real depreciated about 2½ percent during the intermeeting period, and the
Mexican peso gained nearly ¾ percent.  EMBI+ bond spreads narrowed for both
countries.  The Korean won and the Taiwan dollar depreciated somewhat against the
U.S. dollar, but these declines appeared to be related more to  the weakness of the yen
than spillover from Argentina.  Share prices in most of emerging Asia moved higher
on net during the period.
(4) Debt of the nonfederal sectors expanded at an estimated 7¼ percent
annual rate in December, a bit slower than its average pace over the preceding two
months.  Net debt financing by businesses moderated in December, and, based on
preliminary data for January, has remained light.  Some of the proceeds from bond
sales have been used to pay off loans at banks, wh ich continued  to contract into  early
January.  Credit problems in the business sector remained concentrated among the
weakest firms, and markets continued to  be receptive to other corporate offerings,
while banks, according to the most recent senior loan officer survey, have tightened
their standards and terms on business loans somewhat further.  Household borrowing
is showing signs of some slowing .  The recent rise in mortgage rates has damped
mortgage refinancing activity, auto sales have dropped back, and banks have firmed
terms and standards on consumer loans somewhat further as household credit quality
evidently has deteriorated further, mostly among marginal borrowers.  With federal
debt up only slightly, total nonfinancial debt grew at an estimated 6¼ percent annual
rate from September to December.
(5) M2 grew at a 9 percent annual rate in December, a bit less than in
November, and has moderated considerably further in the early weeks of January
(Chart 3).3  M2 growth last month, as has been the case for a while, was supported by
the substantial decline in opportunity costs associated with policy easings and lagged
effects of mortgage refinancing activity.  This aggregate may also have been lifted by
some investor preference for stab le-value assets, evidenced by outflows from equity
mutual funds in December.  The currency component of the aggregate was quite
brisk, lifted by a pickup in demand for U.S. currency abroad.  (See box, “Foreign
Demand for U.S. Currency,” on page 5.)  With nominal GDP apparently about flat in
the fourth quarter, M2 velocity is estimated to have fallen at an annual rate of 9
percent.  Over the four quarters of 2001, it declined 7½ percent, the largest four-
quarter change in  the forty-year  span of the official U.S. monetary  data.
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Sep 2001 Oct 2001 Nov 20012 Dec 20013
Money and Credit Aggregates
Policy Alternatives
(6) The staff has read the incoming data as indicating stronger-than-
expected economic performance in the quarters surrounding year-end, consistent w ith
a recovery starting early this year.  Even so, the level of real GDP at the end of the
forecast period is little changed, as growth after this quarter has been lowered a touch
on the assessment that Congress and the Administration will be unable to strike a deal
on substantial fiscal stimulus, in contrast to the package assumed in recent
Greenbooks.  The stance o f monetary policy is assumed to remain unchanged until
late this year, and then, as the economic expansion becomes more assured, to firm
enough to bring the federal funds rate to 3 percent by late next year.  Bond yields,
however, are projected to remain around recent trading ranges rather than moving
higher as the upturn takes hold, reflecting a slower pace of monetary policy tightening
than now incorporated into financial markets; equity prices trend higher with nominal
income beginning at about midyear; and the foreign exchange value of the dollar
essentially moves sideways.  Against this financial backdrop, output growth climbs
above that of its potential after midyear, lifted by a resumption of expansion in
business investment.  The unemployment rate, after plateauing at 6 percent this year,
begins to edge lower.  The slack in resource use helps bring about a notable decline in
the rate of inflation in core consumer prices, measured on either a CPI or PCE basis,
over the next two years.
(7) At the end of the Greenbook forecast period in the fourth quarter of
appears poised to drift lower.  But with the lingering effects of the capital overhang
dissipating, fiscal policy providing stimulus on net, and the real federal funds rate
remaining on the low side of staff estimates of its equilibrium value, aggregate demand
is expanding at a faster pace than potential output.  To exam ine longer-term strategies
for monetary policy as these dynamic imbalances play out, three scenarios were
created with the aid of the FRB/US m odel.  In the baseline, the Greenbook forecast is
extended through 2006 by making several judgmental adjustments to the model that
preserve the central features of the staff outlook.  In particular, trend multifactor
productivity is assumed to climb steadily at a little over 1 percent per year, which,
combined with a modest pickup in capital deepening from its current pace, implies
potential GDP is expanding at a 3½ percent rate by mid-decade.  The effective natural
rate of unemployment remains close to 5¼ percent–the staff’s current long-run
estimate.  The unified federal budget is projected to return to surplus after 2003, but
growing outlays and scheduled tax cuts restrain the rise in federal saving relative to
GDP.  In the baseline, the demand for U.S. exports is bolstered by a 3 percent annual
depreciation of the dollar, as well as the gradual recovery of the world economy, so as
to cap the current account defici t as a percent of GDP at a li ttle over 5 percent.
(8) The baseline strategy is designed to hold core PCE inflation at
unemployment rate only modestly above its natural rate and the growth in aggregate
demand above trend, policy makers m ight choose to  raise the nominal funds rate to
the solid line in Chart 4.  As a result, the economy edges toward its potential and the
inflation rate remains near its long-run goal of 1 percent.  Two alternative simulations
apply a standard Taylor rule to examine how sensitive these paths are to the Federal
Reserve’s objectives for inflation.
(9) In the price stability  case (the dotted line), policy tightens sufficiently to
point the economy toward an inflation rate of ½ percent as measured by core PCE
prices, or about zero after taking account of the bias in this measure of inflation.  To
achieve this result, policy firms more quickly than in the baseline and then keeps the
funds rate on a slight incline through mid-2005.  As in the baseline, the
unemployment rate moves up to around 6 percent but, unlike the base case, it holds
there through 2003 before dropping slowly.  Even this aggressive pursuit of price
stability does not produce a funds rate profile as steeply sloped as currently embedded
in market pr ices, supporting the view that market participants  are building in
considerably  stronger aggregate  demand than in the staff forecast.
(10) In the inflation cushion case (the dashed line), policy is steered to
achieve a long-run inflation goal of 1½ percent, which requires the funds rate to drop
below 1¼ percent this year.  By 2004, however, the unemployment rate crosses below
its natural rate and policy firms, with the nominal funds rate gradually moving above
its baseline path.  Ironically, the policy designed to keep the funds rate the furthest
above its zero nominal bound in the long run requires moving the nominal rate
closest to zero in the short run.
(11) With regard to policy choice at this meeting, the Committee might elect
to leave the federal funds rate target unchanged at 1¾ percent if it were reasonably
confident that the more positive tone to incoming data s ignals imminent econom ic
recovery.  Last year’s implementation of monetary and fiscal stimulus should provide
substantial support to spending going forward.  Indeed, judging by the gap of the
actual real funds rate below staff estimates of its equilibrium value, the stance of
monetary policy is already qu ite stimulative (Chart 5 and tab le).  The resurgence in
consumer confidence and the recovery in stock prices over recent months suggest that
household outlays will continue to trend  higher.  With that underlying support to sales
and with technolog ical change providing an incentive to buy new cap ital equ ipment, a
recovery of business investment may be seen  as only a matter of time.  Under these
conditions, the Committee may prefer to stand pat until incoming information sheds
additional light on the possible need for a policy adjustment.  As the forces restraining
aggregate demand abate, at some point the Committee will need to move the funds
rate up  from its current low  level to  prevent excessive stimulus from taking  hold.
Additional easing now would raise the amplitude of that ultimate policy adjustment,
and put a greater premium on getting the timing of that policy reversal about right,
especially if aggregate demand turns out to be stronger than anticipated.  Given the
uncertainties of forecasting, such fine tuning may run the risk of accentuating the
variab ility of aggregate dem and and asset  prices .
(12) If the Committee perceived substantial remaining downside risks to the
economic outlook, it instead might select a 25 basis point reduction in the federal
funds rate target to 1½ percent.  While some recent indicators of capital spending
have been encouraging, a sustained revival may be viewed as far from assured.  If
investors in stock and corporate bond markets came to question the long-term
outlook for h igh-tech industries and the associated trends for economy-wide profit
streams and productivity, the resulting downward adjustment in asset prices wou ld set
back the recovery of investment and consumption.  Moreover, should the news on
the labor market remain bad for a while longer, consumer attitudes may turn out to be
more fragile than they have seemed of late.  While easing policy another notch would
not appreciably reduce the risks of such adverse outcomes, it would at least put the
economy on a slightly stronger footing should any of them eventuate.  With an
intensification of inflation unlikely to pose a threat in the next couple of years, the
potential costs of such a policy action might be seen as small when compared with the
cumulative shortfall of resource utilization in the staff forecast.  Indeed, limiting
disinflation at this point might be welcomed for strategic reasons:  The risks
associated with operating policy at very low nominal interest rates might incline the
Committee toward slightly higher inflation than in the Greenbook forecast–as in the
“inflation cushion” strategy described above–in order to be able to put in place low
real interest rates if need be in the future.
(13) With market participants  apparently be lieving that this easing cycle is
drawing to  a close, they are beg inning to focus on when the Committee will change its
assessment of the balance of risks.  A majority of them apparently believe that the
Committee will choose to retain its assessment that the risks are tilted toward
weakness at this meeting, presumably because policy makers’ views of the economy
are thought to evolve gradually in most circumstances.  If that, in fact, describes the
Committee’s view, it would retain its statement that the balance of risks is weighted
toward economic weakness for either policy alternative discussed above.  However, if
the Committee’s outlook has shifted to the point that it now views the recovery as
sufficiently assured–either with an unchanged funds rate or after an additional
¼ percentage point ease at this meeting– it might opt for balanced risks.
(14) Given that financial markets place small odds on a reduction in the
funds rate target at this meeting, the choice of no change, even with risks weighted
toward economic weakness, would induce a slight increase in money market rates and
a smaller rise in bond yields.  Any tendency for rates to rise presumably would be
amplified by a  shift to a neutral balance-of-risks statement as market participants
move up the anticipated po licy tightening and boost its trajectory.  Another ¼
percentage point reduction in the federal funds rate, along with a statement that the
risks were weighted to the downside, would come as a surprise to market participants,
perhaps prompting a sense that the economic outlook was a little weaker than
previously perceived.  As a result, some immediate reduction in long-term as well as
short-term interest rates likely would occur.  The adoption of balanced risks would go
a long way toward short-circuiting any downward revision to expectations about
spending, perhaps even to the point where longer-term yields would rise.
(15) Under the assumption of an unchanged policy stance through mid-year,
as in the staff forecast, M2 growth from December to June would step down to a 5½
percent annual rate.  The slowing in M 2 mainly reflects the waning effects of last
year’s easings.  In addition, the staff expects outflows of currency to Europe and
Argentina as well as the effects of mortgage refinancings to diminish in coming
months relative to December.  Nonetheless, the associated quarterly average rate of
expansion of M2 would still be well in excess of the 3¾ percent pace of projected
nominal GDP growth, implying a further decline in velocity averaging 2¼ percent
over the first half of the year.
(16) Overall debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to grow at a
a 5¼ percent rise in nonfederal debt.  In view of the attractive level of longer-term
rates, corporations are expected to continue to tap the bond markets in volume, but
with external financing needs picking up as the inventory runoff draws closer to an
end, short-term business credit is projected to begin expanding over the spring.  In
the household sector, borrowing probably will remain concentrated in mortgage
markets.  Consumer credit could level out, particularly as auto sales tail off.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(17) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for
(1) the directive and (2) the “balance of risks” sentence to be included in the press
release issued after the  meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stab ility and promote sustainable growth in
output.  To further its long-run  objectives, the Committee in the immediate
future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with MAINTAINING/
INCREASING/reducing the federal funds rate AT/to an average of around
___1-3/4 percent.
(2) “Balance o f Risks” Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the
Committee believes that the risks [ARE BALANCED WITH RESPECT TO
PROSPECTS FOR BOTH GOALS] [ARE WEIGHTED MAINLY
TOWARD CONDITIONS THAT MAY GENERATE HEIGHTENED
INFLATION PRESSURES] [continue to be weighted m ainly toward
conditions that may generate economic weakness] in the foreseeable future.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
M2                           M2       M3       Debt
                                               -------------------------          -------------------------------
                                                 No Change  25 bp Ease                  Greenbook Forecast*     
                                               -------------------------          -------------------------------
                                                                                                                            
               Monthly Growth Rates                                                                         
                  Nov-2001                           9.4       9.4                    9.4      13.4       6.7
                  Dec-2001                           8.9       8.9                    8.9       9.6       6.5
                  Jan-2002                           3.1       3.1                    3.1      -2.2       3.5
                  Feb-2002                           6.9       7.3                    6.9       4.2       4.3
                  Mar-2002                           3.8       4.6                    3.8       2.8       5.5
                  Apr-2002                           7.1       7.9                    7.1       5.8       3.7
                  May-2002                           5.2       5.9                    5.2       5.4       3.3
                  Jun-2002                           6.7       7.2                    6.7       7.0       4.7
                                                                                                                            
               Quarterly Averages                                                                                   
                   2001 Q1                           9.7       9.7                    9.7      12.9       4.7
                   2001 Q2                           9.3       9.3                    9.3      13.5       5.9
                   2001 Q3                          11.3      11.3                   11.3      10.7       5.8
                   2001 Q4                           9.3       9.3                    9.3      12.4       6.6
                   2002 Q1                           6.0       6.2                    6.0       4.1       4.9
                   2002 Q2                           5.9       6.6                    5.9       5.0       4.2             
                                                                                                                            
               Growth Rate                                                                                                  
                   From        To                                                                                   
                   Dec-2000    Dec-2001             10.4      10.4                   10.4      12.9       6.0
                   Dec-2001    Jun-2002              5.5       6.1                    5.5       3.9       4.2
                                                                                                                            
                   2000 Q4     Dec-2001             10.2      10.2                   10.2      12.9       6.0
                                                                                                                            
                   1999 Q4     2000 Q4               6.1       6.1                    6.1       9.4       5.3
                   2000 Q4     2001 Q4              10.3      10.3                   10.3      12.9       5.9
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 Strictly Confidential
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted) Class II FOMC
January 24, 2002
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5 
Agency total
Intermeeting Period
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
