Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
SEPTEMBER 19,2002
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) September 19, 2002
Class II – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Investors’ view of the economic outlook seemed to be colored by the
FOMC’s announcement following the August meeting of no change in the target
funds rate and a shift in the assessment of the balance of risks toward economic
weakness.  Over the remainder of that day, near-term interest rate futures edged
higher as those expecting imminent ease were disappointed, but rates several months
ahead dropped as much as 20 basis points and broad equity indexes were off about
weaker economic prospects.  Spirits were lifted briefly by the uneventful passing of
the August 14 deadline for the recertification of corporate financial statements; equity
markets rallied for several days, pulling Treasury yields up in tow.  Since then,
however, the softer tone to incoming data on production and employment,
heightened tensions over Iraq, and a gloomier assessment of the path for business
profits seem again to have left investors marking down their outlook for the economy.
On balance over the intermeeting period, the expected path of the federal funds rate
embedded in futures rates rose slightly at near maturities, largely reflecting the absence
of an easing at the August meeting and statements by Federal Reserve officials that
appeared to convey lower odds on near-term policy action (Chart 1).1  Current quotes
suggest that investors see only a small likelihood of policy easing at this meeting, and
Chart 1
Financial Market Indicators
August 12, 2002
September 19, 2002
Expected Federal Funds Rates Estimated from
Financial Futures*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures rates with an
 allowance for term premia and other adjustments.
Ten-year TIIS
Selected Treasury Yields*
*Nominal Treasury yields are based on a smoothed yield curve estimated
from off-the-run securities.
September 19, 2002
August 12, 2002
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off-the-run Treasury coupon
securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par Treasury securities
with semi-annual coupons.
Basis points
Change in Treasury Yield Curve Since
August 12, 2002
Maturity in Years
Long-Run Inflation Expectations
Michigan Survey
Philadelphia Fed Survey
TIIS Inflation
Compensation*
*The inflation rate that equalizes the price of the January 2012 TIIS and
the value of a portfolio of nominal securities with the same payments.
Wilshire 5000
Selected Equity Indexes
recent surveys of market participants have indicated that most anticipate the
Committee will retain a balance of risks toward economic weakness.  Futures rates
suggest that investors think it likely that the Federal Reserve will respond to weaker
economic outcomes with additional easing at some point in the next few months.
Moreover, the futures curve beyond midyear 2003 dropped 15 to 45 basis points and
now points to a more gradual expected tightening of policy than previously
(2) In keeping with the revisions to policy expectations, short-term Treasury
yields were about unchanged to up slightly while intermediate- and long-term Treasury
yields shed 35 to 40 basis points.  The decline in longer-term Treasury yields
reportedly was amplified by hedging demands from mortgage-backed securities
investors.  Those investors apparently purchased longer-term Treasuries to offset the
shortening in the duration of their portfolios stemming from the jump in prepayments
on mortgage-backed securities that accompanied the surge in mortgage refinancings.2
At the ten-year maturity, yields on Treasury indexed securities fell a bit less than those
on their nominal counterparts–perhaps because indexed securities did not experience
increased hedging demands to the same degree–but also probably suggestive of a
slight decline in inflation compensation and a downward revision to economic
prospects.  The absence of any major new accounting scandals was a palliative for the
corporate bond market.  Issuers returned to the market after mid-August, though
gross issuance was still light, and anecdotal reports suggest that market liquidity has
Credit Market Conditions
On net, it appears that credit market conditions improved marginally over the
intermeeting period.  The dimunition of event risk following the passing of both the
August 14 recertification date and September 11 without major incident seemed to
contribute to an improved climate in capital markets.  Anecdotal reports suggest that
bid-asked spreads and market depth for investment-grade credits have returned close to
normal.  Transaction volumes in corporate securities reported by primary dealers moved
higher over the period (Chart 3), and the drop in long-term interest rates prompted a
pickup in bond issuance.  In the high-yield bond market, spreads remain at very high
levels and issuance has been anemic.  By some measures, however, risk spreads for
speculative-grade bonds narrowed a little over the intermeeting period and, very recently,
liquidity in this market segment reportedly has improved somewhat.  These recent
stirrings in the speculative-grade sector may have been occasioned by the sizable net
inflows to high-yield bond funds recorded in late August and early September.
Market pressures on major broker-dealers may be a factor hindering further
improvement in capital market conditions.  Credit default swap spreads for broker-dealers
increased substantially this summer and, although narrowing a touch in recent weeks,
remain quite wide.  Major banks have also been under some market pressure recently. 
The well-publicized troubles of JP Morgan Chase and Citigroup led to a widening in their
subordinated debt spreads in recent months, and subordinated debt spreads gapped wider
for a number of other major banking institutions after mid-year as well.  Late in the
period, JP Morgan Chase’s risk spread ticked higher after the firm was downgraded by one
of the two major ratings agencies.  However, spreads for most other banks narrowed over
the intermeeting period.  In the syndicated loan market, market participants have noted a
pickup in new deals in early September and a growing forward calendar.  The sense of
continued availability of business credit from banks seemed to apply to smaller firms as
well.  The most recent survey by the National Federation of Independent Businesses
suggested a marginal improvement in credit availability for such firms.
largely returned to normal, at least for higher-tier credits.  Yields on highly rated issues
kept pace with declining Treasury yields, but risk spreads for speculative-grade bonds
were unchanged to a bit narrower (Chart 2).  (More detail on credit market conditions
is provided in the following box.)  Major equity price indexes finished the period
down about 6-1/4 to 8-1/2 percent, on balance, moving the forward earnings-price
Chart 2
Financial Market Indicators
Monthly
E/P ratio
Real 10-year Treasury yield*
* 10-year Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year expected
inflation.
     + Denotes the latest observation using daily prices and latest earnings
data from I/B/E/S.
Implied Volatility of the S&P 100 (VIX)
Ten-year AA
Ten-year BBB
Ten-year Swap
Spreads of Selected Private Long-Term Yields
Telecom Sector
Master II
Other Sectors
High-Yield Debt Spreads
Broad Index
Major
Currencies Index
Other Important
Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Exchange Rates
EMBI + Index
Chart 3
Credit Market Conditions
*Index with time-varying weights based on book value of long-term debt in the
 contemporaneous quarter (2002:Q1 values used from 2002:Q2 - 2002:Q3).
 Note: Last observation is September 18, 2002.
Aug 12
Broker/Dealer Credit Swap Index*
Index*
Citicorp
JP Morgan
*Weighted-average of subordinated debt spreads of 16 banks with weights
 based on book value of all debt issues for the firm in the Merrill Lynch
 U.S. Bond Index and spreads over comparable-maturity Treasury yields.
 Note: Last observation is September 18, 2002.
Aug 12
Subordinated Debt Spreads
Transactions in Corporate Securities:
Greater than one-year maturity* $ Billions
 Weekly
*Total transaction volume in corporate securities reported by primary dealers.
Aug 7
NFIB Survey: Credit More Difficult
to Obtain than 3 Months Ago (Net)* Percent
 Monthly
*Of borrowers who sought credit within the past three months, the proportion that
 reported more difficulty in obtaining credit less the proportion that
 reported ease in obtaining credit. Not seasonally adjusted.
+
Aug.
ratio for the S&P 500 further above measures of long-term risk-free real interest rates.
Judging by option-implied volatility on stock index futures, investors remain quite
uncertain about the path of equity prices.
(3) On balance, the trade-weighted value of the dollar against other major
currencies appreciated slightly over the intermeeting period as concerns emerged
about other industrial countries, particularly Germany and Japan, regarding the
momentum of economic recovery that were even more pronounced than in the
United States.  The dollar generally moved in narrow ranges against individual
currencies, ending the period about unchanged against most, but it appreciated almost
were left unchanged, and most foreign long-term government bond yields declined
unconventional means to spur the economy and aid banks, including by stepping up
purchases of government bonds.  Yesterday, the Bank of Japan surprised market
participants by announcing that it would explore ways to purchase equities from
banks.  Japanese stocks rallied after the announcement, but JGB yields rose about
stock prices extended prior declines, on balance, in often volatile trading; share prices
in Germany sank 15 percent, pulled down by the poor performance of the insurance
and technology sectors.
.   The Desk did not intervene during the
(4) The dollar’s value against the currencies of other important trading
partners rose 1-1/2 percent over the intermeeting period.  Brazilian financial markets
were buoyed by final IMF approval of a financial support package, but concerns
remain about the potential victory of an opposition candidate in next month’s
Brazilian presidential election.  The Brazilian real declined nearly 9 percent on balance
against the dollar, but Brazil’s EMBI+ spread narrowed almost 240 basis points–to a
still-high level.  The Mexican peso depreciated about 2-1/4 percent against the dollar,
and Mexico’s sovereign yield spread widened a bit.  In emerging Asia, equity prices in
Taiwan, Singapore, and Malaysia fell 3 to 7 percent amid questions about prospects
for continued expansion of the technology sector.  Stock prices posted small gains in
Korea, where domestic demand continued to show strength, and the Korean won
appreciated slightly versus the dollar.
(5) Borrowing by businesses appears to have remained weak (Chart 4), as
external financing needs apparently are very low this quarter.  In recent weeks, the
improved tone in the corporate bond market has prompted a modest step-up in gross
bond issuance, but the proceeds appear to have been used primarily to pay down
short-term debt and maturing or called bonds.  As a result, commercial paper
outstanding has continued to fall, although the pace of the runoff has slowed, and
bank business loans have been basically flat since the end of July.  In the household
sector, consumer credit growth has been supported by the recent round of incentives
offered by the major auto makers.  Mortgage debt continued to expand briskly as low
rates have propelled both home buying and mortgage refinancing.
(6) M2 growth remained elevated last month with much of the strength
concentrated in its liquid components.  In part, the advance in M2 likely reflects the
impact of the recent surge in refinancing activity and the accompanying boost to
liquid deposits associated with the temporary placement of prepayments on mortgage-
backed securities in escrow deposits at banks.  In addition, demands for M2 assets
probably have been boosted by investors seeking a safe haven from the volatility in
equity markets.  Net outflows from equity mutual funds continued last month, albeit
at a much slower pace than in July, and apparently halted in early September.  With
Chart 4
      Debt and Money Growth
Consumer Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of Household Debt
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
e Estimated.
Commercial paper*
C&I loans*
Bonds
Growth of Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt
Billions of dollars
Monthly rate
* Seasonally adjusted.
Purchase (left scale)*
Refinancing
(right scale)*
MBA Residential Mortgage Indexes
Weekly, s.a.
*  Four-week moving average.
Note.  March 16, 1990 = 100 for n.s.a. series.
Growth of Federal Debt
e Estimated.
Note. Treasury debt held by the public, month end.
Growth of M2
e Estimated.
M2 Velocity
(left scale)
M2 Opportunity Cost*
(right scale)
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
Ratio Scale Percentage Points
* Two-quarter moving average.
e Estimated.
current estimates suggesting that M2 growth in the third quarter will be in the
neighborhood of 10 percent, the velocity of M2 is almost certain to register a
substantial decline this quarter, even though its opportunity cost changed little.
Policy Alternatives
(7) The staff has read incoming data over the intermeeting period as
suggesting stronger final demand in the current quarter than projected at the time of
the August FOMC meeting but as providing little reason to change its longer-term
outlook.  In the Greenbook, economic growth is anticipated to rise a bit above that of
potential by the middle of next year and by more in 2004, leading to a gradual ebbing
of the slack in resource use.  In this environment, the staff has retained the
assumption of an unchanged stance of monetary policy through 2003, followed by
some unwinding of monetary ease in 2004.  As the economy picks up steam and the
onset of policy tightening approaches, Treasury yields edge higher, and corporate risk
spreads narrow.  Share prices rise in line with risk-adjusted returns on bonds, and the
dollar is assumed to depreciate at around a 1 percent annual rate in real terms over the
forecast period.  The unemployment rate moves up to just above 6 percent by early
next year and then gradually returns to 5-3/4 percent by the end of 2004, noticeably
above the staff’s 5 percent estimate of the natural rate throughout the forecast period.
The effect of this ongoing slack on domestic inflation is expected to be partly offset
by accelerating import prices as the dollar depreciates and by lagged impetus from this
year’s runup in energy prices.  On net, core PCE price inflation is projected to edge
lower to a 1-1/4 percent pace in 2004.
(8) If the Committee is still of the view that the current stance of policy is
likely to be sufficient to foster an improving business climate over time, it may want to
keep the intended funds rate unchanged.  The Greenbook projects that the current
setting of the funds rate would support economic expansion that gains strength over
the next year or so.  The sense that considerable monetary accommodation has been in
place for some time is reinforced by the sustained low level of the real federal funds
rate relative to estimates of its equilibrium (Chart 5).  Indeed, the Committee may read
the robust purchases of autos and other items by households and heavy mortgage
Chart 5
Actual Real Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Estimated Equilibrium Real Rates
Actual Real Funds Rate
TIIS-Based EstimateHistorical Average: 2.74
  (1966Q1-2002Q2)
Current Rate
25 b.p. Easing
50 b.p. Easing
Equilibrium Real Funds Rate Estimates (Percent)
August Bluebook
August Bluebook
August Bluebook
August Bluebook
August Bluebook
August Bluebook
August Bluebook
Statistical Filter
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data*
Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data*
FRB/US Model
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data**
Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data**
Treasury Inflation-Indexed Securities
* Also employs the staff projection for the current and next quarters.
** Also employs the staff projection for the current quarter.
activity as suggesting that aggregate demand will run stronger than in the staff forecast,
implying that excess capacity will be worked down more quickly than in the
Greenbook.  Even if the Committee accepts the Greenbook assessment of aggregate
demand as likely, it would interpret the attendant gradual decline in the unemployment
rate as implying less slack in labor markets than in the staff outlook should it also have
a less favorable assessment of the sustainable level of resource utilization.
(9) If the Committee views the downside risk of economic weakness to be
substantial at the current setting of the federal funds rate, especially when compared
with the seemingly low odds of a pickup in inflation, it probably would wish to retain
a balance-of-risks assessment tilted toward economic weakness.  The elevated
threat of terrorist attack and concerns about the potential for military action in Iraq
may seem to pose significant adverse risks.  Even absent such developments, the
Committee may consider a sustained expansion of aggregate demand as by no means
assured, particularly given continuing questions about businesses’ willingness to hire
and spend and the fragility of key emerging markets.  Market participants appear to
share such qualms in that equity prices are still quite volatile and lower on balance, and
corporate risk spreads remain wide.  At this juncture, with financial markets quite
skittish, the Committee may find it more difficult than usual to predict the market
response if policy action does not match prevailing expectations.  Futures market
quotes indicate that investors on average place just a small probability on a policy
easing at this meeting, although they appear to expect at least a quarter point cut in the
funds rate by early next year.  A policy decision of no change in the funds rate and a
balance of risks still pointing toward economic weakness therefore would probably
represent only a minor disappointment to market participants and induce just a slight
backup in interest rates at shorter maturities and perhaps a modest decline in stock
prices.  As always, the wording of the announcement will prove important in shaping
that market reaction.
(10) The Committee may wish to shift to a balanced assessment of risks if
it believes that the likelihood of a slide back into economic weakness, which seemed
more palpable when market stresses mounted in the runup to the August meeting, has
receded.  Two important hurdles–the August 14 deadline for certifying financial
statements and the first anniversary of September 11–passed uneventfully, perhaps
suggesting that the Committee’s assessment of the uncertainties surrounding its
forecast has narrowed.  In addition, the Committee may be concerned that a zero real
funds rate will soon pose the risk of imparting excessive stimulus if the forces currently
holding down the equilibrium real funds rate lift more quickly than is implicit in the
staff forecast, perhaps along the lines of the alternative simulation in the Greenbook.
With some measures of the equity premium at their highest levels since the early 1990s,
the Committee may see good odds that the stock market and, hence, aggregate demand
will rebound more than projected in the Greenbook, especially given the apparent
ebbing of investors’ concerns about corporate governance.  Announcement of a
Committee decision to shift back to balance in its risk assessment, with no change in
the funds rate, would likely induce market participants to reevaluate their expectations
for policy.  Short-term interest rates would rise as the probabilities of policy easings by
early next year were lowered.  Stock prices would likely fall somewhat initially, while
long-term interest rates would be subjected to the cross-currents of higher short-term
interest rates but chances of a weaker economy in the intermediate run.
(11) The Committee may desire to ease policy at this meeting to provide
more assurance that economic growth would move up to an acceptable pace.  In
particular, if the Committee shares the staff’s assessment that the unemployment rate
will decline only modestly by 2004, it might see little risk that additional policy ease will
“Policymaker Perfect Foresight” Strategies
The updated perfect foresight exercises have been renamed “policymaker
perfect foresight” strategies in this bluebook to clarify that, while policymakers are
assumed to know the structure of the economy and the shocks that will occur over
the projection period, private agents in these FRB/US simulations form
expectations using a small vector autoregression model.  The funds rate path is
chosen to minimize the sum of squares of the deviation of unemployment from its
natural rate of 5 percent, the deviation of core PCE inflation from a long-run goal,
and changes in the funds rate.  In the extension of the Greenbook baseline beyond
2004, potential output is projected to grow at about the same rate projected for 2004
in the Greenbook, foreign GDP growth strengthens modestly, the dollar depreciates
at a 3 percent real rate, and the federal budget balance gradually improves.
The dotted line in Chart 6 depicts the policy path for the funds rate with a
long-run inflation goal of 1 percent, while the dashed line shows a path for a 1-1/2
percent inflation goal.  The solid line depicts the Greenbook funds rate assumption
through 2004, which implies a tighter policy over the next year or so than either of
the FRB/US simulations.  As a result, the baseline projection delivers a faster
disinflation and a slower closing of the output gap than the policymaker perfect
foresight strategies.
revive inflation and a particular benefit in absorbing slack more quickly.  Judging by the
path of the funds rate in the “policymaker perfect foresight” simulations, a 25 or 50
basis point policy easing at this meeting could be consistent with stable or even
declining inflation given the staff’s assessment of longer-term trends and the
relationships embedded in the FRB/US model (see box and chart).  The Committee
may also favor policy easing at this time in light of the possibility that the lack of such a
policy adjustment could risk economic weakness and further disinflation.  Although
household spending and a swing in inventory investment have carried economic
activity along to date, the extent of the pickup in capital spending–and therefore
sustainable economic expansion–remains uncertain.  Indeed, declines in equity prices
Chart 6
Policymaker Perfect Foresight Strategy for Monetary Policy
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
Baseline
1 percent inflation goal
1-1/2 percent inflation goal
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
Baseline
1 percent inflation goal
1-1/2 percent inflation goal
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Percent Percent
Baseline
1 percent inflation goal
1-1/2 percent inflation goal
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
Baseline
1 percent inflation goal
1-1/2 percent inflation goal
over the intermeeting period and reductions in longer-term interest rates may well
indicate that market participants have become more doubtful on that score as well.
(12) Market participants place only small odds on a policy move at this
meeting, and domestic bond and stock markets would therefore likely rally if the
Committee chose to ease, particularly if the move were 50 basis points.  The extent of
the rally would also depend on whether market participants interpret the action as an
earlier-than-expected completion of the easing already built into market prices or as a
harbinger of further easings.  That assessment, of course, will depend importantly on
the Committee’s judgment on the balance of risks and the wording of its
(13) Under the Greenbook forecast, with a flat funds rate, total nonfinancial
debt and its nonfederal component are both projected to continue to grow at about a 6
percent pace over the next couple of quarters.  The composition of nonfederal
borrowing shifts somewhat, however, as business borrowing recovers while household
debt grows more slowly.  Business demands for external finance are projected to rise as
profit growth is subdued while inventory building resumes and fixed investment
gradually picks up.  Banks and financial markets are expected to remain selective in
making credit available to businesses without substantially constricting the overall
prospects for capital spending.  In the household sector, a moderation in auto sales
should contribute to some lessening in the growth of consumer credit.  Home
mortgage debt is expected to decelerate from its rapid recent growth rates, reflecting
moderation in housing activity and the completion of the current wave of mortgage
refinancings.  Nonetheless, growth in household debt is expected to continue to
outpace that of disposable personal income.  Reductions in mortgage refinancings
should also contribute to a diminution in M2 growth in coming months.  Over the
four quarters of this year, M2 is projected to grow 6-3/4 percent, considerably faster
than nominal GDP, owing largely to the lagged effects of last year’s decline in short-
term interest rates and opportunity costs, as well as mortgage refinancings.
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
No Change* 25 bp Ease 50 bp Ease
Monthly Growth Rates
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Directive and Balance of Risks Language
(14) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for (1)
the directive and (2) the “balance of risks” sentence to be included in the press release
issued after the meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining /INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around ___1-3/4 percent.
(2) “Balance of Risks”  Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available,
the Committee believes that the risks [CONTINUE  TO BE weighted
mainly towards conditions that may generate economic weakness]  [ARE
BALANCED WITH RESPECT TO PROSPECTS FOR BOTH
GOALS] [ARE WEIGHTED MAINLY TOWARD CONDITIONS
THAT MAY  GENERATE HEIGHTENED INFLATION
PRESSURES] in the foreseeable future.
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
September 23, 2002
Exhibit 1
Money Aggregates
Seasonally adjusted
nontransactions components
Annual growth rates(%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
  1999            
  2000            
  2001
Quarterly(average)
  2001-Q3         
       Q4         
  2002-Q1         
       Q2
Monthly
  2001-Aug.       
       Sep.       
       Oct.        
       Nov.        
       Dec.        
                   
  2002-Jan.        
       Feb.        
       Mar.        
       Apr.        
       May         
       June        
       July        
       Aug. p
Levels ($billions):
Monthly
  2002-Apr.        
       May         
       June        
       July        
       Aug. p
Weekly
  2002-Aug.  5     
            12     
            19     
            26     
                   
       Sep.  2p    
             9p
Period
In M3 onlyIn M2
p    preliminary
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
Exhibit 10 September 20, 2002
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
p - preliminary data
Sep 
Oct 
Nov 
Dec 
    
Jan  
Feb  
Mar  
Apr  
May  
Jun  
Jul  
Aug
Jul  
Jul  
Aug  
Aug  
Aug  
Aug  
Aug  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 Strictly Confidential
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted) Class II FOMC
September 19, 2002
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5 
Agency total
Intermeeting Period
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
