Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
MARCH 14, 2002
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) March 14, 2002
Class II – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Market participants had largely anticipated the Committee’s decision at
its January meeting to leave the target federal funds rate unchanged and to retain the
statement that the balance of risks was weighted toward economic weakness, but the
accompanying press release was apparently read as suggesting optimism about the
course of the economy go ing forward.  In response, most interest rates edged higher
that day.  Over the intermeeting period, da ta on spending and output have com e in
considerably above market expectations and a fiscal stimulus package has been
enacted, leading investors to see the economy as likely rebounding more rapidly than
had been thought, a view reinforced by the Chairman’s monetary pol icy testimony.
As a result, market participants seem confident that there will be no change in the
intended federal funds rate at this meeting, and a majority reportedly expect the
Committee to shift its risk assessment to balance.  Judging by fed funds futures rates,
market participants now place significant odds on policy tightening at the May
meeting and have boosted their anticipated path for policy going forward as much as
of about 300 basis points is expected by late next year.
(2)  Implied forward rates on Treasury securities at intermediate- and
longer-term maturities also have risen appreciably over the intermeeting period.1  In
Chart 1
Financial Market Indicators
March 14, 2002
January 29, 2002
Expected Federal Funds Rates Estimated from
Financial Futures*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures rates with an
 allowance for term premia and other adjustments.
Ten-Year TIPS
Selected Treasury Yields*
*Nominal Treasury yields are estimated from a smoothed yield curve based
 on off-the-run securities.
Basis points
Implied One-Year Forward Rates*
Years Ahead
*Change since day before January FOMC Meeting.
Long-Run Inflation Expectations
Michigan Survey
Philadelphia Fed Survey
TIIS Inflation Compensation*
*The inflation rate that would equalize the price of the ten-year TIIS and
 the value of a portfolio of nominal zero-coupon securities with the
 same payments.
High Yield*
(left scale)
Ten-year BBB
 (right scale)
Ten-year Swap
(right scale)
Spreads of Selected Private Long-Term Yields
over Ten-Year Treasury
*Source. Merrill Lynch. Master II index.
High-Yield Bond Spreads
Source. Merrill Lynch. Graphed above are the spreads of the Master II index
and the telecom index over the ten-year treasury yield estimated from a smoothed
yield curve based on off-the-run securities.
Basis pointsBasis points
High-yield
Composite
(right scale)
Telecom Sector
(left scale)
part, investors have probably built in higher rea l interest rates over the longer run in
light of incoming data on spending and  activity suggesting  more impetus to aggregate
demand, increases in equity wealth, and higher estimates of underlying productivity
growth.  In addition, inflation expectations may have moved up in response to the
more rapid  rebound in  economic activity now foreseen, as well as the recent runup in
oil prices, although the evidence is mixed.  A survey measure of household inflation
expectations has only edged up, but inflation compensation as measured by the spread
of nominal over indexed yields has risen substantially.2  On balance, nominal yields on
Treasury coupon securi ties have risen  35 to 55 basis  points since the January meeting .
Yields on high-grade corporate bonds have generally risen a bit less, and broad
measures of speculative-grade yields have actually fallen as the improved economic
outlook led investors to trim their assessment of credit risk.  The better outlook also
has boosted equity prices, with broad indexes up about 4-1/2 percent since the
January meeting (Chart 2).  The telecommunications and technology sectors have
performed less well, however, as concerns about accounting practices and lowered
earnings forecasts have weighed on the bond and equity prices of some firms in these
industries.  Accounting worries also contributed  to the effective exclusion of a few
more firms from the commercial paper market and widened risk spreads in that
(3) The major currencies index of the exchange value of the dollar has
declined 1-1/2 percent on balance since the January FOMC meeting.  The dollar came
under downward pressure in early March after the President’s decision to impose steel
Chart 2
Financial Market Indicators
Wilshire 5000
Selected Equity Indexes
Commercial Paper Quality Spread
(30-Day A2/P2 to A1/P1)
Domestic nonfinancial
commercial paper
outstanding
(left scale)
C&I loans
(right scale)
Business Loans and Commercial Paper
Broad Index
Major
Currencies Index
Other Important
Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Exchange Rates
tariffs, perhaps as that move raised  concerns about official policy toward the do llar.
With the exception of Japan, monetary policy in other industrial countries has
remained on hold, while interest rates on long-term government securities have
moved up about 20 to 30 basis points, and stock prices have moved higher.  The
dollar fell most sharply against the yen–about 3-1/2 percent–despite negative
economic news from Japan and a government “anti-deflation” package that proved
disappointing.  Japanese stock prices have rallied sharply, rising more than 10 percent
during the intermeeting period, buoyed perhaps by new restrictions on short sales of
stock as well as by strengthening in global equity markets.3
(4) The index of the exchange value of the dollar versus the currencies of
our other important trad ing partners  has changed  little over the intermeeting period.
In Argentina, the peso depreciated steeply when foreign exchange markets there
reopened on February 11 following an extended bank holiday; the peso has declined
almost 60 percent since Argentina abandoned its pegged exchange rate regime in early
January.  The Brazilian real and Mexican peso have appreciated somewhat against the
dollar , and stock pr ices in both countries have risen over the  intermeeting period.
Share prices in  tech-heavy emerging Asian  markets have posted even larger gains, in
part on continued expectations that the global electronics market will particu larly
benefit from a U.S. economic recovery.  Although the EMBI+ spread for Argentina
widened, those for other emerging markets have narrowed about 120 basis points on
average during the intermeeting period as the global economic outlook improved.
(5) Borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors appears to have picked up a
bit of late, reflecting stronger demand and, aside from a few specific problem spots,
no further reductions in credit availability.  Net borrowing by nonfinancial businesses
in the bond, commercial paper, and bank loan markets combined, which was
negligible in January, rose to about $13-1/2 billion in February, a slightly faster pace
than in the second half of last year (Chart 3).  Much of the increase owed to a rise in
net bond issuance, as businesses continued to substitute bonds for shorter-term
sources of funds.  Offerings by investment-grade firms have been particularly heavy.
By contrast, heightened concerns about accounting practices and the record default
rate on bonds may have made investors wary about high-yield securities, and net
issuance in that market in February was at the low end of its recent range.  In early
March, net bond issuance appears to have remained robust, with  the bulk again
coming from investment-grade firms.  Commercial and industrial loans at banks
posted a substantial gain in February after four months of sizable declines.  However,
some of this rise reflected draws on commercial paper backup lines by a few large
firms after concerns about their accounting practices forced them to pay down
commercial paper.  Household borrowing appears to have remained relatively robust
this year.  Consumer credit expanded  at a 9-1/4 percent pace in January, a bit faster
than in the fourth quarter, as auto sales–while well off the record pace posted last
fall–held up fairly well.  Although the pace of mortgage refinancing has fallen back
considerably, it remains elevated, and with housing activity still brisk, applications for
mortgage loans to purchase houses have stayed above their leve l in the fourth  quarter.
Growth in Treasury debt, which had been modest in December and January, picked
up noticeably in February.4
Chart 3
      Debt and Money Growth
Growth of Federal Debt
p Preliminary.
Note. Treasury Debt held by the public, end of month.
Commercial paper*
C&I loans*
Bonds
Growth of Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt
Billions of dollars
* Seasonally adjusted.
Monthly rate
e Staff estimate.
Purchase (left scale)*
Refinancing
(right scale)*
Mar. 01
MBA Residential Mortgage Indexes
Weekly, s.a.
*  4-week moving average.
Note.  March 16, 1990 = 100 for n.s.a. series.
Consumer Credit
   (Monthly)
Home
Mortgage
(Quarterly)
Growth of Household Debt
Growth of M2
p Preliminary.
Note. Data incorporate the effects of the annual seasonal
review process.
* Two-quarter moving average.* Two-quarter moving average.
M2 Velocity
(left scale)
M2 Opportunity Cost*
(right scale)
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
Ratio Scale
Percentage Points
(6) M2 growth rebounded to a 6-1/2 percent annual rate in February, after
running at just a 2-1/4 percent pace in January.  Nonetheless, money growth thus far
this year has slowed considerably from its robust pace over the last two months of
costs on holding M2 assets.  Retail money market mutual funds, which accounted for
much of the deceleration in M2, appear to have been depressed by a shift into bond
and equity funds as concerns about volatility in financial markets ebbed.  The slower
pace of mortgage refinancings a lso has contributed to the deceleration in M2.
Policy Alternatives
(7) Stronger-than-expected economic data and the passage of a fiscal
stimulus package have led the staff to mark up its forecast for spending and output
appreciably since the January meeting.  As in the prior forecast, the staff assumes that
the federal funds rate will be held at 1-3/4 percent through the firs t half of this year.
Thereafter, however, the funds rate rises sooner and more steeply, reaching 4 percent
by the end of 2003.  While the assumed tightening is less pronounced than that
currently built into market rates, longer-term Treasury yields and mortgage rates are
anticipated to remain close to current levels through 2003.  Corporate yields are
projected to edge lower as the improving economic outlook leads investors to mark
down their assessments of credit risk, and stock prices are projected to rise a bit faster
than nominal GDP.  These changes in domestic financial conditions, along with the
firming in underlying demand, are projected to be consistent with growth of output
above that of the staff’s upwardly revised estimate of potential GDP growth.  By late
persistent output gap contributes to a slight downtrend in core PCE inflation.  Total
PCE inflation, responding largely to higher oil prices, rises a bit over the forecast
(8) Unless the Committee’s sense of the outlook differs materially from that
embodied in the staff forecast, it might be inclined to keep the federal funds rate
unchanged  at this meeting.  In the staff forecast, holding the funds rate steady for a
little while longer is consistent with both unemployment and core inflation edging
lower.  Even if the Committee suspects that policy may have to be firmed sooner than
assumed in the staff forecast, the uncertainty regarding the strength of the rebound
may make it particularly advantageous to await further readings on the economy
before acting, especially given the lack of evident pressures on resources.  If so,
selection of the balance-of-risks statement to accompany an unchanged target funds
rate may be the primary focus of the Committee’s discussion at this meeting.  (A box
on the next page discusses the balance of risks in more detail.)  This bluebook will
consider the three possibilities for the balance-of-risk statement given an unchanged
funds rate and touch upon two policy choices bracketing an unchanged policy–easing
or tightening 1/4 percentage point.
(9) If the Committee remains mostly concerned about the possibility that
the recovery could falter, it might wish to hold the funds rate unchanged and
retain a balance of risks weighted toward economic weakness .  The recent spate
of stronger-than-expected economic news might stem importantly from a reversal of
the temporary depressing  effects of the terrorist attacks on aggregate demand , with
the pace of growth going forward quite possibly weaker.  In the staff forecast, the
abatement o f the inventory runoff accounts for a considerab le portion of the strength
in GDP growth over the next few quarters, implying  that growth of final demand is
noticeably below that of GDP.  The forecasted pickup in final demand over the
second half of 2002 and in 2003 depends importantly on continued solid growth in
consumer spending–which leaves the personal saving rate at a level that is quite low
by the standards of all but the past few years–and a turnaround in investment that is
far from assured.  Concerns about the strength of final demand, coupled with the
possibility that the economy might be able to operate at higher levels of labor
utilization without engendering inflation pressures than assumed in the sta ff forecast,
might be viewed as provid ing the Committee with ample scope to pursue a more
accommodative policy.  Indeed, such concerns may be sufficiently worrisome to
justify easing 1/4 percentage point at this meeting (presumably while retaining the
balance of risks tilted toward economic weakness).  In this view, failing to ease may
The Balance-of-Risks Statement
As noted in the main text, market participants are split on the balance of risks that the
Committee will announce at the conclusion of this meeting, with a majority expecting a shift
to a neutral risk assessment.  In principle, the Committee’s decision on the balance of risks
would seem to depend on three determinations.  First, it must weigh the implications for the
appropriate setting of the policy rate of likely deviations from its twin goals of maximum
employment and price stability.  Second, the Committee must assess the distribution of
outcomes around that forecast–that is, the skew of potential shocks.  And lastly, the
Committee would seem to need to form some assessment of the length of the time period over
which this balance should be weighed–that is, how far ahead does the “foreseeable future”
stretch.
All three judgments are inherently subjective and hard to disentangle, but, given the
brief history of announcing a risk assessment, investors will be particularly keen to interpret
whatever the Committee decides at the this meeting–combined with how policy actually
evolves over subsequent meetings–as a precedent regarding the time span covered by the
foreseeable future.  By design, the balance-of-risk statement was not supposed necessarily to
predict policy action at the next meeting, so it would seem that the horizon of the foreseeable
future extends past May.  Just how far past May the foreseeable future extends is an open
question, the answer to which depends on the Committee’s confidence in its ability to predict
events increasingly distant in time.  That, in turn, should be related to the Committee’s
assessment of the imbalances that exist at the start of the forecast period and the distribution
of potential shocks.  At a time when uncertainties about the outlook may be especially
elevated, the foreseeable future might be measured in quarters, not years.
ultimately induce inflation that is viewed as too low to provide an  adequate cushion to
set negative real federal funds rates if needed in the future to counteract the effects of
adverse demand shocks.
(10) By contrast, the Committee might be inclined to hold the funds rate
unchanged and adopt a neutral balance of risks at this meeting if it is more
confident that the growth of output will be around its potential and sees inflation as
contained.  The especially adverse outcomes for the economy that the Committee was
worried about at the prior few meetings may seem much less likely now.  Indeed, in
recent weeks, data surprises have nearly all run on the upside, supporting the view that
risks are no longer skewed toward economic weakness.  Unlike the outlook at the time
of the January meeting, the Greenbook forecast shows less overall slack in resource
utilization, little updrift in the unemployment rate, and less of a downtrend to
inflation.  To be sure, the real funds rate is unsustainably low, and if the nominal
funds rate were held at its current level for very long , inflation would  begin to
intensify.  But as discussed in the box on the balance of risks, heightened uncertainty
about the outlook could have the effect of making the horizon over which the
Committee defines the foreseeable future relatively limited.  And in that shorter run,
at least according to the staff forecast, inflation is likely to drift lower and output
growth will be a tad above  that of its potential.
(11) If the Committee reads the strength of recent economic indicators as
signaling that lasting economic growth above potential is a distinct likelihood, it might
wish to hold the funds rate unchanged and move the balance of risks toward
heightened inflation pressures.   With the economy seem ing to have regained its
footing, the Committee  might view a balance toward inflation as especially appropr iate
in light of the unsustainably low level of the real funds rate, the recent uptick in
measures of inflation expectations based on Treasury inflation-indexed securities, and
the possibility that sharp increases in oil prices could feed through to prices and wages
more generally.  Indeed, the surprising resilience exhibited by the economy of late
raises the possibility that spending may snap back more rapidly than in the
Greenbook.  If the Committee were especially concerned that, if it did not move
promptly to begin to restore the funds rate to more sustainable levels, inflation
pressures could build over  time to the po int that they would be difficult to contain, it
might even choose to implement a quarter-point increase in the target funds rate
along with a balance of risks weighted toward inflation pressures.  In particular, the
apparent turnaround of demand in the high-tech sector, favorable news on
productivity, accelerator effects stemming from the recent pickup in output growth,
and the business tax incentives included in the fiscal stimulus package might be
imparting an even more sizable impetus to investment spending  than in the staff
forecast.  Forces such as these help to explain why some measures of the equilibrium
real funds rate have been boosted as much as a half a percentage point over the
intermeeting period (Chart 4).  Such an increase in estimates of the equilibrium real
funds rate implies that just maintaining the sam e degree of po licy stimulus would
require increasing the nominal funds rate target.
(12) Market participants widely expect the funds rate to be held constant at
this meeting and increasingly are looking for the FOMC to characterize the risks to
the outlook as symmetric.  Retention of a ba lance of risks weighted toward  economic
weakness would surprise many, and  would probably pull in terest rates modest ly lower.
The outcome for equity prices and exchange rates is more difficult to gauge and no
doubt would be influenced by the wording of the announcement:  If investors see the
FOMC’s statement as evidencing its desire to see output return to potential more
quickly than they had previously anticipated, they might mark up their outlook for
profits, and stock prices could accordingly rise.  Any initial decline in the dollar might
be offset to some degree by the associated increased attractiveness of U.S. financial
assets.  But there is also a chance that investors could read the FOM C’s policy
statement as presaging a weaker economy than they had  anticipated.  This possibility
would be even more likely if the Committee caught market participants unawares by
easing 1/4 percentage point.  In either event, stock prices could fall and that decline,
in turn, would tend to reinforce the initial decline in interest rates.
(13) The selection of a neutral balance of risks would be in line with the
expectations of the majority of market participants, but some investors would still be
surprised by the decision.  The effects in financial markets in this case would likely be
Chart 4
Actual Real Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Estimated Equilibrium Real Rates
Actual Real Funds Rate
Historical Average: 2.78
  (1966Q1-2001Q4)
Current Rate
PercentEquilibrium Funds Rate Estimates
January Bluebook
January Bluebook
January Bluebook
January Bluebook
January Bluebook
Statistical Filter
-Based on historical data*
-Based on historical data and the staff forecast
FRB/US Model
-Based on historical data**
-Based on historical data and the staff forecast
Treasury Inflation-Indexed Securities
* Also employs the staff projection for the current and next quarters.
** Also employs the staff projection for the current quarter. Backward-looking moving averages, rather than 
centered moving averages, are used to estimate the persistent and transitory components of shocks to the model.
rather muted but might encompass a small increase in interest rates, a drop in stock
prices, and a small rise in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
(14) Market participants do not expect a m ove to a balance of risks toward
inflation pressures at this meeting, much less one accompanied by a quarter-point
increase in the target funds rate.  As a result, either choice would push interest rates
higher across the term structure while equities could come under heavy selling
pressure.  The ex tent of the market reaction cou ld be sizable and, of course, would
depend importantly on  the wording of the announcement and the associated market
perceptions about the future  course of policy .  In particular, the reaction in markets
could be attenuated if the wording of the announcement emphasized that the
Committee viewed itself as merely unwinding some of the insurance it had taken out
late last year at a time of unusual uncertainty, and that it intended to wait thereafter,
rather than embark on a path that would promptly realign the real interest rate to a
more normal level.
(15) M2 growth is projected to slow this year to a pace somewhat above that
of nominal GDP.  The waning stimulus from  past policy easings, considerably wider
opportunity costs later this year accompanying the assumed tightening of policy, and
more attractive returns on equities and other market instruments are key factors
contributing to the anticipated deceleration of M2.  Next year, the further assumed
tightening of policy and the associated widening of opportunity costs pu lls M2 growth
well below that of nomina l GDP, implying a significant increase in velocity.
(16) Total domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to advance at about a 5-1/2
percent pace over the first two quarters of this year.  Given the strength of readings
from recent economic indicators, the pace of business borrowing is projected to
increase over coming months, spurred by a pickup in investment spending and an
associated widening of the financing gap.  The improvement in the economy should,
over time, contribute to improved cred it quality in the business sector and narrower
risk spreads.  Borrowing by households is likely to slow somewhat in line with an
anticipated ebbing of the demand  for autos and new hom es.  Federal debt is projected
to advance at about a 3-1/2 percent rate over the first half of this year and at a -
somewhat faster rate in the latter half of the year.  Next year, federal debt growth
drops off sharply with the economic recovery returning the federal budget to surplus
by the second quarter of the year.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(17)    Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for
(1) the directive and (2) the “balance of risks” sentence to be included in the press
release issued after the  meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stab ility and promote sustainable growth in
output.  To further its long-run  objectives, the Committee in the immediate
future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining
/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO an average of
around ___1-3/4 percent.
(2) “Balance of Risks” Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the
Committee believes that the risks [ARE BALANCED WITH RESPECT TO
PROSPECTS FOR BOTH GOALS] [ARE WEIGHTED MAINLY
TOWARD CONDITIONS THAT MAY GENERATE HEIGHTENED
INFLATION PRESSURES] [continue to be weighted m ainly toward
conditions that may generate economic weakness] in the foreseeable future.
Strictly Confidentlal (FR)-
Money and Debt Aggregates Cas i FOMC
Seasonally adjusted March 18, 2002Ssonally *dlu tad
Money stock measure Domestic nonfinanclal debt
nontransactlons components
Period M1 M2 M3 other' tota
In M2 In M3 only government' ther 
tot
Annual arowth rates(%)s
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
Levels (Sbillions)s
Monthly
p preliminary
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 Strictly Confidential
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted) Class II FOMC
March 14, 2002
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5 
Agency total
Intermeeting Period
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
