Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 5/26/2009.
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) December 4, 2003
Class II – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The FOMC’s decision at its October meeting to leave the target federal
funds rate unchanged had been widely anticipated in markets.1  However, the
Committee’s retention of both an unchanged risk assessment and its indication that
policy could remain accommodative for a considerable period, which were apparently
seen as less certain outcomes, sparked a short-lived rally in Treasury markets.  Over
the balance of the intermeeting period, Treasury coupon rates rose on stronger-than-
expected economic releases, but those increases were partly offset by the market
response to several statements by policymakers reiterating that policy could remain
accommodative (chart 1).  On net, most Treasury coupon rates were up 10 to 25 basis
points.2  Yields on Treasury indexed notes increased about in line with those on
comparable nominal issues, leaving inflation compensation about unchanged
following its appreciable rise in earlier months.
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov.
2003
Ten-Year Treasury
Two-Year Treasury
Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov.
2003
Over Next Ten Years
Over Next Five Years
Inflation Compensation*
*Based on a comparison of an estimated TIIS yield curve to an estimated
nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
December 4, 2003
October 27, 2003
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premia and other adjustments.
October 27, 2003 
(Dotted Line)
December 4, 2003 
(Solid Bars)
Implied Distribution of the Federal Funds Rate
About Six Months Ahead*
*Based on the distribution of the three-month eurodollar rate five 
 months ahead (adjusted for a risk premium), as implied by options 
 on eurodollar futures contracts.
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov.
2003
Basis Points
Six Months Ahead
Twelve Months Ahead
Policy Uncertainty*
*Width of a 90 percent confidence interval computed from the term
structures for the expected federal funds rate and implied volatility.
Daily
FOMC
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov.
2003
Implied Volatility of Long-Term Treasury Bond
Prices*
*Derived from options on futures contracts.
(2) The expected path of the federal funds rate remained essentially flat
through the first quarter of 2004, likely held down by policymakers’ statements, but
steepened somewhat beyond that point on the gathering evidence of a more vigorous
economic expansion.  Judging from interest rate options data, investors’ sense of
uncertainty about the future course of policy rose over the period, especially at longer
horizons.  A recent Desk survey of primary dealers indicated that none anticipates a
change in policy at this meeting and only a few foresee any changes in the balance-of-
risks assessment.  However, about two-thirds of the dealers said that they expect the
reference to a "considerable period" will be removed or modified.  Reportedly, many
believe the considerable period phrase will be replaced with language that provides the
Committee with greater flexibility in adjusting policy going forward.
(3) The better economic news promoted a narrowing of risk spreads,
particularly for lower-tier instruments (chart 2).3  Market participants appeared
unconcerned about risk and liquidity over year-end, with spreads on money-market
instruments spanning the turn evidencing little of the usual end-of-year rise.  (See box
entitled “(Lack of) Year-End Pressures.”)  Equity markets advanced noticeably over
the intermeeting period, with some indexes touching new highs for the year and
implied volatility remaining very low.  The Wilshire 5000 rose about 4 percent and
indexes of stock prices for smaller and for high-tech firms recorded larger gains.
(4) The dollar dropped about 1¼ percent on net over the intermeeting
period against an index of major trading partners’ currencies (chart 3).  During the
Chart 2
Financial Market Indicators
Ten-Year AA
Ten-Year Swap
Higher-Tier Corporate Bond Spreads*
*AA spread measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield
 curve. Swap spread measured relative to the on-the-run Treasury
 security.
Basis Points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Master II (right scale)
Lower-Tier Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
S&P 500 EPS Revisions Index
Percent, monthly rate
Wilshire
Nasdaq
Stock Prices
Earnings-Price Ratio for S&P 500
and Ten-Year Treasury Yield
Monthly
Twelve-Month Forward E/P Ratio
Real Ten-Year Treasury Yield*
*End-of-month ten-year Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed ten-year 
 expected inflation.
+ Denotes latest daily observation, December 4, 2003 .
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov.
2003
Daily
FOMC
(Lack of) Year-end Pressures
To date in 2003, year-end pressures in money markets have been negligible.  In the
commercial paper market, the spread of yields on two-month A2/P2 paper over
those on comparable-maturity Treasury RPs was largely unchanged as the maturity
of that paper crossed year-end, a considerable departure from typical behavior in
recent years (left-hand panel of chart below).  Similarly, term federal funds spreads
point to muted year-end pressures in the interbank market (right-hand panel). 
Rates on federal funds futures contracts suggest that the expected deviation of the
effective federal funds rate from its target on December 31 is within historical
norms.
A number of factors may be contributing to the lack of year-end pressures in these
markets.  The recent absence of major adverse credit events in the commercial
paper market, the generally improving credit climate, and the continued
contraction in paper outstanding have reportedly attenuated perceptions of
rollover risk.  Further declines in the volatility of the federal funds rate this year to
a very low level may have helped convince market participants that conditions in
the federal funds market will remain tame around year-end.
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
(Daily Data)
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov.
0.0
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Indexes Index(12/31/02=100)
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov.
2003
Commodity Prices
$U.S./ounce $U.S./barrel
Gold (left scale)
Oil (right scale)
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov.
2003
Total Custody Holdings at FRB-NY
and Periods of Japanese Intervention $Billions
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov.
2003
Total Custody Holdings at FRB-NY
and Periods of Japanese Intervention $Billions
Dec. 3
*Total purchases of U.S. dollars in billions per episode
of intervention by Japanese monetary authorities. Cumulative total
purchases in 2003: $152.9 billion.
.  The Desk did not intervene during the period for the accounts of the
System or the Treasury.
first two weeks of the period, the dollar was boosted by better-than-expected U.S.
economic data.  After early November, however, the release of capital flow data
suggesting that private investors’ willingness to finance the U.S. current account
deficit may be diminishing, concerns about escalating trade frictions, developments in
Iraq, and terrorist attacks all weighed on the dollar.  Indications that economic activity
in Europe is firming helped push the dollar to a new low against the euro and to a loss
of more than 2½ percent over the period.  The dollar also weakened somewhat
against the pound but rose slightly versus the Canadian dollar.  Stock markets in
Europe and Canada continued to rally, with prices rising 4 to 7 percent.  The dollar
was about unchanged on balance against the yen as Japanese authorities made large
intervention purchases of dollars.4  With concerns resurfacing about the sustainability
of the Japanese recovery, stock prices in Japan fell back early in the period, but they
later recovered somewhat in part on news that the government is taking forceful
action to resolve a failing regional bank.  Sovereign bond yields in most major foreign
countries rose by modest amounts over the intermeeting period.  Central banks in the
United Kingdom and Australia tightened policy rates, pointing in both cases to the
possibility of increasing inflationary pressures owing to the greater economic strength
at home and abroad.
(5) The dollar edged up against an index of currencies of our other
important trading partners.  The dollar rose more noticeably against the Mexican peso
and the Brazilian real, as recent economic performance in those countries has been
soft.  Nevertheless, financial markets continued to register support for Brazil’s reform
program; its EMBI+ spread narrowed further during the intermeeting period to less
than 5 percentage points, the lowest level in more than five years.  Emerging market
economies in Asia continued to benefit from the global high-tech revival and a
bounceback from earlier effects of the SARS epidemic.  In most of these countries,
stock prices recorded modest gains.  In Korea, the won dropped about ¾ percent,
apparently reflecting concerns about the strength of domestic demand, worries about
rising financial strains, and reactions to reports that the Bank of Korea was
conducting intervention sales of won.
(6) Business borrowing has remained subdued in recent months, while
household debt growth appears to have slowed from its earlier rapid pace.  So far in
the fourth quarter, debt growth of nonfinancial businesses seems to have about
matched the 3 percent rate seen in the third quarter.  Although gross bond issuance
has remained brisk, the proceeds reportedly have been earmarked mostly to retire
maturing bonds and to pay down short-term debt, which continued to run off in
October and November.  Spurred by rising stock prices, gross equity issuance has
picked up, with the proceeds also directed, in part, to reducing existing debt.
Available data suggest that household debt growth has slowed in recent months from
the double-digit expansion over the first three quarters of the year.  A drop in
refinancing activity from the record high levels of the summer has acted to hold down
home mortgage growth, and a scaling back of auto incentive programs probably has
weighed on consumer credit.  With state and local debt growth also moderating some,
and federal debt continuing to advance at about its third quarter pace, expansion of
total domestic nonfinancial sector debt is expected to slow a percentage point to a
(7) The falloff in mortgage refinancing from its peak this summer also has
contributed to a contraction of M2 in each of the past three months.  Robust inflows
into stock mutual funds suggest that the declines in M2 may also reflect shifts of
household portfolio preferences toward equities.5  In contrast, a rebound in currency
growth from the surprisingly weak pace of late summer has provided a little support
to M2 growth.  The outflows from M2 accounts were accompanied by two months of
contraction in bank credit, although bank credit growth rebounded in November.
Appendix B analyzes growth of money and the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors
during 2003.
Policy Alternatives
(8) Stronger-than-expected incoming data have led the staff to mark up its
projection for the level of spending in the current quarter and over the forecast
horizon.  The staff forecast now assumes that policy tightening will begin in the first
quarter of 2005–a half-year earlier than in the October Greenbook–and will push the
funds rate up to 2 percent by the end of that year–50 basis points higher than in the
last round.  Longer-term corporate yields are projected to edge lower next year as
market expectations for policy converge toward the shallower trajectory assumed by
the staff and as the improvement in the economic outlook further narrows risk
spreads.  Over the forecast interval, equity prices are assumed to rise enough from
their current levels to yield risk-adjusted returns in line with those on fixed-income
instruments, while the dollar is assumed to move gradually lower in 2004 at the same
rate as in the last Greenbook.  Given these accommodative financial conditions,
output is projected to expand about 5¼ percent in 2004.  A shift toward fiscal
restraint in 2005, combined with the assumed monetary policy tightening, contributes
to a moderation of the advance in GDP to about 3¾ percent in that year.  Despite the
upward revisions to projected output, the output gap over the forecast interval is only
a touch narrower than in the last round, as the staff has also marked up the paths for
structural productivity and potential output.  With actual growth exceeding that of
potential next year, the civilian unemployment rate is projected to fall substantially by
the end of 2004 before leveling out at about its estimated natural rate in the second
half of 2005.  Lingering resource slack is seen as putting slight further downward
pressure on core PCE inflation, bringing it to a pace just above 1 percent in 2004 and
(9) If the Committee finds reasonably likely and acceptable the staff forecast
that output growth will run above that of potential for the next several quarters while
core PCE inflation stabilizes near 1 percent, it might choose an unchanged target
for the federal funds rate at this meeting.  The Committee might see the recent
strength in overall spending and the apparent waning of business caution evidenced
by the upturn in hiring and pickup in investment as signs that a more robust
expansion is now under way and that the threat of a significant decline in inflation has
receded.  Even if the Committee is somewhat concerned that growth could still falter,
it might see that risk as being balanced by the possibility that the expansion could
outpace expectations, particularly in view of recent data.  And, alternatively, even if
the Committee believes that the next policy move will probably be toward tightening
in view of recent strong growth and the relatively low real federal funds rate (chart 4),
it might also believe that the tightening process need not begin any time soon in light
of the current low level of inflation and substantial degree of resource slack.
(10) If, however, the Committee is especially concerned that economic
growth may not remain rapid enough to return output to its potential reasonably
promptly and that resource slack may contribute to a significant further decline in
inflation, then it might choose to cut the target for the federal funds rate by
a strengthening in economic activity, the Committee might see this surge in demand as
likely to be only temporary, perhaps along the lines of the “weaker household
spending” simulation in the Greenbook.  Evidence that might be taken as supporting
this view could include the apparent substantial deceleration in personal consumption
expenditures in the current quarter, the contraction in the broad monetary aggregates
and bank credit, continued tepid growth in business debt, and a moderation in
household borrowing.  In such circumstances, a quarter-point easing at this meeting
might be seen as desirable to foster a continuation of brisk growth in output and an
acceptably rapid closing of the output gap.  Furthermore, members may regard the
Chart 4
Actual Real Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Estimated Equilibrium Real Rates
Actual Real Funds Rate
TIIS-Based Estimate
Historical Average: 2.64
  (1966Q1-2003Q3)
Current Rate
25 b.p. Easing
Equilibrium Real Funds Rate Estimates (Percent)
October Bluebook
October Bluebook
October Bluebook
October Bluebook
October Bluebook
Statistical Filter
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data*
FRB/US Model
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data**
Treasury Inflation-Indexed Securities
* Also employs the staff projection for the current and next quarters.
** Also employs the staff projection for the current quarter.
prevailing rate of inflation as near the bottom of a range that they view as desirable
over the longer run and may wish to implement a policy stance that reduces downside
risks to growth while increasing the scope for inflation to move up somewhat over
Policy Announcement, Directive, and Assessment of Risks.
(11) If the Committee chooses to maintain its current policy stance, it may
want to adopt language in the rationale paragraph of its announcement generally
similar to that in the statement following the October meeting (see appendix A), with
appropriate revisions to reflect recent economic data.  The rationale paragraph could
again begin by noting that the accommodative stance of policy and vigorous growth in
productivity are providing ongoing support to economic activity.  In view of the
robust performance of the economy in the third quarter and the tenor of the available
indicators for the current quarter, the Committee might now wish to state that
“output is expanding briskly” rather than “spending is firming.”  Consistent with the
labor market report for October and weekly data on unemployment claims, the
Committee may now want to characterize labor market conditions as “improving
modestly,” rather than as “stabilizing,” particularly if, as the staff expects, employment
registers a further gain in November.  (The employment report for that month will be
released on December 5, the day after this Bluebook is finalized.)  The inflation
sentence could again note that price increases remain muted, and it could also indicate
that inflation is expected to remain low.  If the Committee instead elects to ease
policy, the rationale paragraph would presumably need to be augmented to note the
Committee’s desire to help ensure that the economic expansion remains on track and
to guard against a significant further decline in inflation.
(12) In the balance of risks paragraph, there would appear to be two
plausible settings for the assessment of the risks to the outlook for economic growth
and two for the risks to the attainment of price stability over the next few quarters.
Risks to growth might now be seen as balanced or weighted to the upside, and risks to
inflation might now be viewed as weighted to the downside or balanced.  Table 1
displays several possibilities for the overall assessment of risks given alternative
characterizations of the individual risks.
Table 1: Alternative Assessments of Balance of Risks
Risks to Inflation
Unwelcome Fall Balanced
Risks to
Balanced Low inflation predominant concern Balanced
to the
Low inflation predominant concern
Unsustainably rapid growth
predominant concern
(13) In characterizing the risks to the outlook for sustainable economic
growth, the Committee may view economic growth as likely to moderate from its
third-quarter pace but also likely to remain strong enough to return output to a level
close to potential over the next few quarters.  This outlook might argue for retention
of an assessment that “the upside and downside risks to the attainment of sustainable growth for
the next few quarters are roughly equal.”  Such a judgment would be consistent with an
interpretation of the term “sustainable economic growth” that allows for above-trend
expansion for a time as long as growth appears on track to return to around that of
potential once resource slack has been eliminated.  Under this interpretation, the
Committee might see the risk that economic growth could falter next year as roughly
balanced by the risk that economic growth could be quite robust and push the level of
output appreciably above potential.  If the Committee instead interprets sustainable
economic growth as simply denoting the growth rate of the economy’s potential to
produce, then, in view of recent economic data and the low real federal funds rate, it
might be appropriate to indicate that “the risks to growth are tilted to the upside”–unless the
Committee still remains to be convinced that spending growth will stay rapid enough
to support an acceptably robust expansion.
(14) In characterizing the risks to the outlook for inflation, even if the
Committee finds the staff forecast of brisk growth in output and employment
plausible, it might again conclude that “. . . the probability, though minor, of an unwelcome fall
in inflation exceeds that of a rise in inflation from its already low level.”  Such an assessment
would be supported by the expected persistence of an output gap for several more
quarters, a development that presumably would be accompanied by at least some
downward pressure on inflation, as in the staff forecast.  Also, the Committee might
be quite uncertain about the range of possible macroeconomic outcomes and attach
significant probability to those in which economic slack fails to diminish appreciably
next year, perhaps because of continued rapid growth of productivity that fails to
engender corresponding growth in aggregate demand and generates downward
pressures on prices as a result.  In contrast, the Committee may see the odds of such
outcomes for resource utilization as increasingly remote given the strength of
spending and output in recent months and tentative signs of improvement in the
labor market.  Moreover, the Committee might regard the recent depreciation of the
dollar and run-up in market-based measures of inflation compensation since the
summer as raising the odds somewhat that inflation pressures could emerge.  In these
circumstances, the Committee might now see the risks to the inflation outlook as balanced.
An intermediate position may be to modify the existing sentence to indicate that the
risks to inflation are still tilted, but less so than in recent months.
(15) With some combinations of assessments of growth and inflation risks,
the appropriate choice of the overall risk assessment seems obvious, but, with
others, it is less so.  The choice of the overall risk assessment is discussed in the next
three paragraphs.
(16)  As shown in upper left cell of Table 1, if the Committee remains especially
concerned about the possibility of an unwelcome disinflation and still views the risks
to sustainable growth as balanced, then its overall risk assessment would again
presumably point to undesirably low inflation as its predominant concern.  As noted
in the upper right cell, if the Committee views the risks to its outlooks for both inflation
and growth as balanced, it likely would also adopt a balanced overall assessment.
(17) As indicated in the bottom left cell, two possibilities for the overall risk
assessment seem most plausible for the case in which the Committee sees inflation
risks weighted toward an unwelcome decline and risks to sustainable economic
growth weighted to the upside.  If the Committee believes the costs of an unwelcome
decline in inflation would be large relative to those of unsustainably rapid growth, it
might cite undesirably low inflation as its predominant concern.  This combination
would be particularly appropriate if the Committee interprets “sustainable economic
growth” simply as the growth of potential but does not believe that above-trend
expansion over the next several quarters threatens to push the level of output beyond
potential and thus spur inflation.  Alternatively, the Committee might perceive the
overall risks to its dual objectives as roughly balanced if the risk of an unwelcome fall
in inflation–albeit still present–was less of a concern than at recent meetings, while
unsustainably rapid growth posed a risk of pushing output above potential.  Although
concluding that unsustainably rapid growth is the predominant concern is a logical
possibility in this cell, it seems unlikely that the Committee would make such a sharp
shift to the overall assessment even while maintaining that the risks to inflation were
still tilted to the downside.
(18) As shown in the bottom right cell, the Committee would seem to face two
choices for its overall risk assessment in the event that it judges that inflation risks are
balanced and that risks to sustainable growth are weighted to the upside.  If
sustainable growth is interpreted to mean expansion at the same rate as potential
output and the Committee believes that the level of output is unlikely to rise above
potential, then it might view overall risks as balanced.  However, if the Committee
sees some risk that above-trend expansion of economic activity could push the level
of output above potential before very long, it might choose to report that
unsustainably rapid growth is its predominant concern.
(19) The final issue relating to the policy announcement is whether to retain,
modify, or delete the sentence “In these circumstances, the Committee believes that policy
accommodation can be maintained for a considerable period.”  This sentence has been the focus
of much discussion in markets in recent weeks, and its treatment in the Committee’s
statement will influence investors’ assessments of the near-term policy outlook.  In
particular, investors are likely to respond sharply to any change in the sentence that
suggests tightening is becoming imminent.  The Committee might choose to leave the
sentence unchanged if it believes that economic growth will most likely moderate
considerably from the surge in the third quarter and that an appreciable output gap
and attendant risks of an unwelcome decline in inflation from its current low level
remain the dominant considerations, implying that the need to firm policy is still well
in the future.  Even if the Committee sees increasing odds that it will need to begin
tightening policy before too long and that it will thus soon want to modify or drop the
sentence, it might prefer to defer such changes at this meeting pending further
evidence on whether an acceptably vigorous economic recovery is likely to be
sustained.  Moreover, the Committee might find it desirable to make any changes to
that sentence in tandem with other adjustments in the statement that might be
implemented following the review of communications policy in January.
(20) The Committee might see a modification or elimination of the
considerable period sentence as warranted by any of several considerations.  It might
simply feel that the need for policy precommitment has diminished and that it is now
appropriate to loosen a potential constraint on policy.  Or, more specifically, it might
anticipate that tighter policy could be needed relatively soon and judge that dropping
or altering the sentence would be advisable in advance of any tightening move.  Or it
might feel that such a change would be especially congruent with a move to upside
risks on growth or to balanced risks on inflation.  One approach to modifying the
sentence slightly at this time, with the intention of dropping it eventually, would be to
declare that the Federal Reserve “. . . can be patient in adjusting the stance of monetary policy.”
Another would be to say that policy accommodation can be maintained “. . . for a
while.”  Still another would be to make continued accommodation contingent on
developments affecting the economic outlook or inflation prospects.  The Committee
could accompany such changes by noting that the real federal funds rate is below its
long-run equilibrium level.  Market participants would likely read any such
modification as the first step in an exit strategy from the Committee’s current highly
accommodative policy stance, and interest rates could back up as investors brought
forward somewhat the anticipated onset of policy tightening, but the increases might
be contained by an implication that tightening is probably still some time off and,
when it did occur, need not be aggressive.
(21)  Should the Committee wish to follow the same procedure as at the last
three meetings, it could vote on the directive and on language providing guidance to
the drafters of the announcement regarding the risk assessment.  Draft language with
a range of options is provided below.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote
sustainable growth in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the
Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal
funds rate at/TO an average of around ___ 1 percent.
(2) Risk Assessment
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available,
the Committee believes the risks to its outlook for sustainable economic
growth over the next several quarters [ARE WEIGHTED TOWARD
THE DOWNSIDE] [are balanced] [ARE WEIGHTED TOWARD
THE UPSIDE]; the risks to its outlook for inflation over the next
several quarters [are weighted toward the downside] [ARE
BALANCED] [ARE WEIGHTED TOWARD THE UPSIDE]; and,
taken together, the balance of risks to its objectives [are weighted toward
the downside] [ARE BALANCED] [ARE WEIGHTED TOWARD
THE UPSIDE] in the foreseeable future.
Market Reaction
(22) Market participants expect no change in the stance of monetary policy at
this meeting, and most do not foresee an alteration in the three-sentence assessment
of risks.  As noted above, the market’s reaction to the announcement of such a policy
choice would be shaped to an important extent by the Committee’s decision regarding
the “considerable period” sentence.  Judging from recent surveys, better-than-
expected economic news has led a majority of market participants to put significant
odds on a modification of this sentence.  Consequently, a statement encompassing no
change in policy, no change in the Committee’s overall risk assessment or its
components, and no change in the considerable-period sentence could well prompt
some drop in yields.  Market participants’ fixation on the last sentence of the
announcement suggests that, if it were kept unchanged, shorter-term yields might not
move much even if the Committee shifted its assessment of inflation risks to balance,
or if it noted risks of unsustainably rapid growth but continued to indicate that
undesirably low inflation remained its predominant concern.  By contrast, interest
rates could rise, perhaps substantially, in response to any statement that completely
eliminated the considerable period sentence, and such increases would probably be
amplified by any accompanying change in the individual or overall balance of risk
assessments that pointed to lessened concerns about disinflationary pressures or
increased concerns about excessively rapid economic growth.  As noted above, the
market reaction probably would be muted by a statement that modified the
considerable period language but retained the sense that tightening was not imminent
and implied that, when it did occur, might well be implemented relatively gradually.
(23) A decision to ease policy at this meeting would surprise investors, and
other short-term interest rates would follow the federal funds rate lower.  The
consequences for longer-maturity yields would depend in part on the market’s reading
of the risk assessment and the considerable period sentence.  If the balance of risks
and the considerable period sentence were left unchanged from those in the October
announcement, it seems likely that intermediate- and longer-term yields would fall as
market participants came to see the Federal Reserve as intent on keeping short-term
rates even lower for some time to counter a significant risk that the economic
expansion could falter next year.  Alternatively, longer-term yields could rise if the
announcement led investors to believe that the Federal Reserve wanted to see a higher
long-run level of inflation or was at least willing to tolerate some risk of more inflation
to foster a brisker return of output to its potential.
Monetary and Credit Aggregates
(24) The staff anticipates that M2 will expand a little in December and
accelerate somewhat further over coming months.  Refinancing effects should exert
less drag, and faster growth of nominal income will provide a lift to money growth.
Still, the velocity of M2 is expected to increase modestly as investors continue to favor
capital market instruments at the expense of M2 assets.  On balance, M2 is projected
to expand at a 5½ percent annual rate from November through June.
(25) Growth of total domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to
moderate next year but to a pace that still exceeds that of nominal income.  Much of
the deceleration in total debt reflects a slowing in the expansion of mortgage credit, as
mortgage rates are expected to remain close to current levels throughout next year.
Borrowing by state and local governments is also expected to slow some, largely
reflecting a decline in the pace of advance refundings.  Federal debt growth is
projected to pick up a bit next year but then to drop back substantially in 2005
following an anticipated turn toward fiscal restraint.  Borrowing in the business sector
is expected to strengthen over the forecast horizon, buoyed by an increase in capital
outlays and inventories and a corresponding increase in the business financing gap.
Ease 25 bp No Change Greenbook Forecast*
Monthly Growth Rates
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
