Content last modified 05/27/2010.
Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
AUGUST 5, 2004
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) August 5, 2004
Class I – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The decision at the June 30 FOMC meeting to increase the target federal
funds rate by 25 basis points to 1¼ percent was anticipated in financial markets.
Nonetheless, investors revised down their expectations for the path of policy upon
the release of the accompanying statement.  In particular, investors noted that the
Committee attributed some of the recent increase in inflation to transitory factors,
again characterized the risks to sustainable growth and price stability as balanced, and
reiterated its belief that policy accommodation could be removed at a pace that is
likely to be measured.1  Subsequently, the Chairman’s monetary policy testimony,
which indicated that recent softness in consumer spending should prove short-lived
and emphasized the FOMC’s commitment to price stability, spurred a rise in
expectations for the path of policy.  Over the intermeeting period to date, though,
policy expectations have been revised down on net, as incoming data have pointed to
weaker-than-anticipated spending and more subdued core inflation (Chart 1).  Money
market futures and options prices, as well as the Desk’s survey of primary dealers,
suggest that market participants are virtually certain of a 25-basis-point increase in the
target federal funds rate at the August meeting.  Nearly all the primary dealers expect
the Committee to retain balanced risk assessments for both growth and price stability,
and many commented that they expect it to repeat the “measured pace” language or
some variant of it.  Looking further out, futures quotes now indicate that investors
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Twelve Months Ahead
Six Months Ahead
Policy Uncertainty*
*Width of a 90 percent confidence interval for the federal funds rate
computed from the term structures for both the expected federal funds
rate and implied volatility.
Daily
FOMC
August 5, 2004
June 29, 2004
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premia and other adjustments.
Policy Expectations
Futures Market
Dealer Survey (median)
Risks to:
Sustainable Growth
Price Stability
Expected Federal Funds Rate
                    (percent)
August Meeting  
      1.50
      1.50
Assessment of Risks     
          (number of dealers)
To the
  Upside
       0
       1
Year-End  
       2.00
       2.00
Balanced
        19
        18
Almost
Equal
Inflation Compensation*
*Based on a comparison of an estimated TIPS yield curve to an estimated
nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
FRB Philadelphia
Michigan
Survey Measures of Long-Term Inflation Expectations
expect the funds rate to rise to around 2 percent by the end of this year and
the time of the June meeting.2
(2) Yields on intermediate- and long-term nominal Treasury securities fell
about 20 to 30 basis points on balance over the intermeeting period, consistent with
the downward revision to policy expectations and perhaps also reflecting heightened
concerns about terrorism.  Standard measures of volatility and liquidity in the Treasury
securities market appear to have held fairly steady at typical levels.  (See the box on
page 3 for a discussion of recent survey evidence on liquidity in funding and
derivatives markets.)  Yields on inflation-indexed issues declined a bit less than those
on nominal Treasuries since the last meeting, leaving inflation compensation measures
narrower and as much as ½ percentage point below their highs of mid-spring.  Survey
measures of inflation expectations also ticked down in July.  The most recent data
suggest that corporate credit quality remains strong, and credit spreads on investment-
and speculative-grade bonds changed little over the intermeeting period (Chart 2).  In
equity markets, most broad indexes fell 5 to 6 percent, but the Nasdaq index dropped
about 10 percent.  Although earnings grew rapidly in the second quarter, equity
investors reacted negatively to the cautious outlook for sales reported by some major
companies, particularly technology firms.  Investor sentiment was also said to be
adversely affected by the sharp increases in spot and futures prices for crude oil over
the intermeeting period (Chart 3).
(3) In foreign exchange markets, the dollar was about unchanged on balance
against other major currencies since the last FOMC meeting.  The dollar appeared to
be supported by Chairman Greenspan’s monetary policy testimony as well as the
announcement of a narrower U.S. trade deficit for May, but it was weakened by signs
of softer U.S. growth.  On a bilateral basis, the dollar climbed most versus the yen,
rising more than 3 percent over the intermeeting period.  The yen was pressured by
Chart 2
Capital Market Developments
Ten-Year AA
Ten-Year Swap
Higher-Tier Corporate Bond Spreads*
*AA spread measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield
 curve. Swap spread measured relative to the on-the-run Treasury
 security.
Basis Points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year high-yield (right scale)
Lower-Tier Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Bond Default Rate of
Nonfinancial Companies
Percent of outstandings
*6-month moving average.
    Source. Moody’s Investors Service.
Bond Ratings Changes of
Nonfinancial Companies
Q1
Q2
Percent of outstandings
S&P 500 EPS
NIPA, economic
profits before tax
Corporate Earnings Growth Percent
*Change from four quarters earlier.
    Source. I/B/E/S for S&P 500 EPS.
Wilshire
Nasdaq
Stock Prices
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
Commodity Prices
$U.S./ounce $U.S./barrel
Gold (left scale)
Oil (right scale)
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Indexes Index(12/31/02=100)
Broad
Major Currencies
Daily
FOMC
Other Important Trading Partners
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields
Percent
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Daily FOMC
Japan (right scale)
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
EMBI+ Index
Basis Points
Daily
FOMC
Financial Market Conditions
Financial institutions and markets seemed to have taken the June policy tightening
in stride, with few signs of the volatility and market stress that accompanied the
onset of some past episodes of policy tightening.  A variety of indicators of market
stress—including implied volatilities for equities and long-term bonds, credit
default swap spreads for financial firms, and on-the-run premiums and bid-ask
spreads for Treasury securities—have been fairly steady in recent weeks.  A recent
survey of primary dealers asked the respondents to characterize conditions in long-
and short-term funding markets and interest-rate derivatives markets.  A total of
eighteen dealers responded to the survey.  For both long- and short-term funding
markets, a sizable net percentage of respondents indicated that dealers’ willingness
to act as market makers or underwriters was above normal.  Moreover, about half
of the dealers judged investors’ willingness to bear risk and overall market liquidity
to be normal.  However, several assessed these characteristics as below normal,
hinting at some caution in markets that is not evident in risk and liquidity spreads,
which are relatively narrow.  A few respondents commented that some market
participants were hesitant to take large positions, given expectations for continued
policy tightening.  The net percentage of dealers reporting below-normal liquidity
in interest-rate derivatives markets was somewhat larger than for cash markets,
reportedly reflecting, in part, scaled-back activity of mortgage investors and hedge
funds.
official comments early in the period suggesting that policy tightening was not
imminent in Japan and by disappointing sales and production data.  Higher oil prices
and lower earning expectations at Japanese firms also may have contributed to
theweakness in the yen.  The dollar gained ½ percent against the euro over the
intermeeting period, but lost about 2¼ percent versus the Canadian dollar.  Yields on
long-term government bonds in foreign industrial countries declined by amounts that
either matched or were somewhat smaller than the drop in yields on corresponding
U.S. securities.  Foreign equity prices moved down 2 to 6 percent over the period.3
(4) The dollar was also essentially unchanged over the intermeeting period
against an index of currencies of our other important trading partners.  In Brazil, signs
of improvement in the domestic economy, as well as continued strong export
performance, boosted stock prices and helped push the real up 2 percent versus the
dollar.  Brazil’s EMBI+ spread narrowed 50 basis points to about 6 percentage points.
The Mexican peso also gained slightly versus the dollar, as the Banco de Mexico
tightened in late July, citing inflation risks.  China’s slower growth and the somewhat
weaker outlook for some major high-tech firms weighed on share prices in Asian
equity markets, and the Korean won and the Taiwanese dollar both declined
somewhat versus the U.S. dollar.  Russian financial markets were roiled by an ongoing
dispute between the government and the country’s largest oil producer and, for a time,
by runs on several banks.  Russian stock prices fell almost 6 percent, and Russia’s
EMBI+ spread widened somewhat to about 3¼ percentage points.
(5) In U.S. credit markets, growth in overall business debt was subdued in
the second quarter, but it appears to have picked up a little in July as an increase in
short-term borrowing more than offset a net paydown of corporate bonds (Chart 4).
On a month-average basis, commercial and industrial (C&I) loans rose in both June
and July, the first successive months of growth since 2001.  On net, about a third of
the respondents to the July Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey reported that
demand for C&I loans had increased over the past three months, with firms indicating
that the loan proceeds were used to finance inventories, accounts receivable, plant and
equipment, and mergers and acquisitions.  Supply conditions likely are playing a role
in the recent growth of business loans, as significant net fractions of banks reported
easing business credit standards and terms for the third consecutive survey.  Net
issuance of commercial paper, which had turned positive in the first half of 2004 after
three years of run-offs, jumped in July, likely owing to some of the same demand
factors driving C&I lending.  Household borrowing, while still brisk, appears to have
moderated somewhat in the second quarter, as higher interest rates weighed on
mortgage debt growth and the slower advance in consumption spending limited the
need for consumer credit.  Federal debt continued to grow rapidly in the second
Chart 4
Debt and Money
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
Monthly rate
Changes in C&I Loan Standards and Demand
Growth of Household Debt Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
e Estimated.
Q2
 e
Q2
 e
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Applications
(left axis)
Originations
(right axis)
Source. Staff estimates.
Mortgage Refinancing Activity
$BillionsIndex(3/16/90 = 100)
Monthly, s.a. Monthly, s.a.
Equity Funds
Bond Funds*
Net Inflows to Equity
and Bond Mutual Funds
Monthly rate, n.s.a.
* Includes hybrid funds but excludes reinvested dividends.
e Estimated.
Velocity
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
Percent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
quarter, but state and local government debt issuance dropped, partly as a result of the
improving fiscal conditions of many states.  Total domestic nonfinancial sector debt is
estimated to have advanced at about a 7½ percent annual rate in the second quarter,
more than a percentage point below the first-quarter pace.
(6) Following several months of robust expansion, M2 grew at only a
recent weakness can be attributed to the decline in mortgage refinancing activity this
spring and the related runoff of the earlier inflows to liquid deposits.  In addition,
retail money market funds experienced outflows in June and July, as households
apparently found capital market investments more attractive.  Flows into equity
mutual funds, which had lagged in May, picked up in June and July, and bond funds
experienced modest inflows last month following three months of outflows.  In
contrast to other components of M2, currency growth strengthened over the past two
months, partly as a result of strong demand from Iraq and Russia.  The opportunity
cost of holding M2 edged up in the second quarter for the first time in two years as
short-term market interest rates rose in anticipation of the June 30 monetary policy
action.  Nonetheless, M2 expanded briskly on balance in the second quarter, resulting
in a modest decline in velocity.
Policy Alternatives
(7) Weaker-than-expected incoming data on spending have led the staff to
mark down its projection for GDP growth in 2004 to about 4 percent, significantly
below the previous forecast and also below the 4½ to 4¾ percent central tendency of
forecasts made by Committee participants at the June meeting.  As a consequence, the
staff has trimmed its assumed path for monetary policy, with the federal funds rate
now reaching 2¾ percent by the end of next year.  The staff anticipates that yields on
longer-term securities will edge down further over the projection horizon, as the lift
from rising short-term rates is more than offset by a shallower trajectory for the funds
rate than currently incorporated in market prices.  Equity prices are expected to rise
enough from current levels to generate risk-adjusted returns in line with returns on
fixed-income instruments, while the nominal trade-weighted index of the dollar’s
value against major foreign currencies is assumed to fall at an annualized rate of
½ percent.  Oil prices are anticipated to decline to about $38 per barrel by the end of
next year, $4 per barrel higher than in the June forecast.  In 2005, less accommodative
monetary policy and a shift toward fiscal restraint contribute to a moderation in the
advance of GDP to around 3½ percent, still a tad faster than estimated growth in
potential GDP.  As a result, the output gap is projected to contract gradually over the
forecast period and the unemployment rate to edge down to 5¼ percent, a little above
the staff’s estimate of the NAIRU.  The staff continues to forecast core PCE inflation
of about 1¾ percent for 2004, but its forecast for overall PCE inflation has been
boosted to around 2½ percent, reflecting higher energy prices.  Core inflation is
projected to edge down to 1½ percent in 2005, owing to the pass-through of falling
energy and non-oil import prices as well as lingering economic slack, while total PCE
price inflation drops to 1¼ percent.
(8) Table 1 presents three alternatives for near-term policy for the
Committee’s consideration, including draft language for the announcement.  Under
Alternative A, the existing stance of policy would be maintained at this meeting.
Alternative B would raise the target for the federal funds rate 25 basis points to
Table 1: Alternative Language for the August FOMC Announcement
June FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy
Decision
The Federal Open Market
Committee decided today to keep
its target for the federal funds rate
at 1-1/4 percent.
The Federal Open Market
Committee decided today to raise its
target for the federal funds rate by 25
basis points to 1-1/2 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee decided
today to raise its target for the federal funds rate
by 50 basis points to  1-3/4 percent.
The Committee believes that the
accommodative stance of monetary
policy, coupled with robust
underlying growth in productivity, is
providing ongoing support to
economic activity.
The Committee continues to believe that robust
underlying growth in productivity is providing
ongoing support to economic activity.
The evidence accumulated over the
intermeeting period indicates a
moderation in output growth and
some slowing in the pace of
improvement in labor market
conditions.
The evidence accumulated over the
intermeeting period indicates that labor
market conditions continue to
improve.  Although output growth has
moderated in recent months, the
economy appears poised to expand at
a solid pace going forward absent
significant further increases in energy
prices.
The evidence accumulated over the intermeeting
period indicates that output growth has
moderated but appears poised to resume a
stronger pace going forward and that labor
market conditions continue to improve.
Recent inflation data have been
somewhat elevated, though a
portion of the rise in prices
evidently reflects transitory factors.
Recent inflation data have been
somewhat elevated, though a portion
of the rise in prices evidently reflects
transitory factors.
Although a portion of the rise in inflation this
year appears to have been due to transitory
factors, continuing and substantial increases in
energy prices are putting persistent upward
pressure on costs and overall prices.
Assessment 
of
[Unchanged] [Unchanged]
In current circumstances, the Committee believes
that the existing degree of policy accommodation, if
sustained over the next few quarters, could foster
economic growth that is more likely to be above
than below its long-run sustainable pace.  Similarly,
with respect to the Committee’s goal of price
stability, such an unchanged policy stance implies
greater risks to the upside than the downside.
With underlying inflation still
expected to be relatively low, the
Committee believes that policy
accommodation can be removed at
a pace that is likely to be measured. 
Nonetheless, the Committee will
respond to changes in economic
prospects as needed to fulfill its
obligation to promote price stability
and sustainable growth.
[Unchanged] [None]
The first two alternatives propose a structure of the announcement fairly close to that
employed at the last meeting.  Alternative C, however, offers a substantial departure
from the form and substance of recent announcements.  It involves an assessment
that the risks to growth and inflation are tilted to the upside—conditioned explicitly
on an unchanged stance of policy following the action—and elimination of the
“measured pace” sentence.  Paragraph 18 discusses a hybrid of Alternatives B and C in
which the funds rate would be increased 25 basis points while some of the language
proposed for Alternative C would be incorporated in the announcement.  Regarding
the rationale section of the announcement, the Committee’s characterization of the
labor market, and possibly of the economic outlook more generally, may be affected
by the release on Friday of the employment report for July.  If that report comes in
about as the staff expects, the Committee might wish to indicate, as under
Alternatives B and C, that “labor market conditions continue to improve.”  However, if the
report is again on the soft side, as in June, the Committee might wish to cite “some
slowing in the pace of improvement in labor market conditions,” as in Alternative A.
(9) Although the recent pace of economic growth has been less vigorous
than projected in the June Greenbook, the Committee may still judge that the
economy is poised for significant expansion going forward, as in the current staff
forecast.  Under this view, a gradual tightening of monetary policy should be
consistent with a pace of growth sufficient to make some headway in reducing
economic slack while keeping inflation well contained.  If the Committee subscribes
to such an outlook, it may find it appropriate to continue paring the degree of
monetary policy accommodation and thus be attracted to the 25-basis-point firming at
this meeting of Alternative B.  Policy likely will need to be firmed considerably over
time:  The real federal funds rate, measured as the difference between the nominal
funds rate and lagged four-quarter core PCE inflation, remains negative and below the
estimates of its equilibrium value implied by selected staff models (Chart 5).  And
given recent inflation trends, as well as the continued climb in crude oil prices in
recent weeks, a further tightening of policy might be viewed as desirable to reduce the
odds of an upturn in inflation expectations and more generally to help ensure that
Chart 5
Actual Real Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Estimated Equilibrium Real Rates
Actual Real Funds Rate
TIPS-Based Estimate
Historical Average: 2.62
  (1964Q1-2004Q2)
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. A
Equilibrium Real Funds Rate Estimates (Percent)
June Bluebook
June Bluebook
June Bluebook
June Bluebook
June Bluebook
Statistical Filter
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data*
FRB/US Model
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data**
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities
*   Also employs the staff projection for the current and next quarters.
** Also employs the staff projection for the current quarter.
core inflation does not rise above acceptable levels.  At the same time, the Committee
may believe that a gradual pace of policy adjustment will likely be sufficient to foster
achievement of its goals, particularly given the apparent persistence of economic slack,
which should help restrain inflation.  Also, the recent data may be read as hinting that
the sluggishness in spending of the past few months might prove more protracted
than forecast in the Greenbook, arguing for only a modest firming step at this
meeting.  Estimated policy rules generally suggest that a such a tightening at this
meeting would be consistent with the Committee’s past policy conduct (Chart 6).
(10) In announcing implementation of Alternative B, the Committee would
presumably want to modify its previous statement that “output is continuing to expand at a
solid pace” to acknowledge both the softness in economic activity in the past few
months and the potential effects on economic prospects of energy price
developments.  One way to accomplish this would be to note that “Although output
growth has moderated in recent months, the economy appears poised to expand at a solid pace going
forward absent significant further increases in energy prices.”  With regard to recent price
developments, core consumer inflation was subdued on a monthly basis in June
although the twelve-month inflation rate was higher than a year earlier.  The
Committee may wish to retain the sense of its previous announcement regarding
inflation while not putting excessive weight on the latest monthly data by saying
“Recent inflation data have been somewhat elevated, though a portion of the rise in prices evidently
reflects transitory factors.”  If the Committee finds the staff projection of aggregate
demand and supply conditions plausible, it could reiterate its previous assessment that
the risks to the attainment of sustainable growth and price stability are balanced for
the next few quarters.  The Committee might again wish to communicate a view of
the likely pace of policy adjustment by stating that, “With underlying inflation still expected
to be relatively low . . . policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured,”
while also retaining the indication that it would tighten at a faster pace if necessary to
maintain price stability.
(11) Market participants apparently have viewed the incoming data, in the
context of the FOMC’s June announcement and the Chairman’s monetary policy
Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, Bt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt-yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, it-1 the lagged federal
funds rate, gt-1 the residual from the rule’s prescription the previous quarter, (yt+3|t-yt+3|t*) the staff’s
three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap, () yt+3|t-) yt+3|t*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less
potential output growth three quarters ahead, Bt+3|t a three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t-
ut+3|t*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast of the unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from
the Greenbook and staff memoranda closest to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Rule Specification
Root-mean-
square error
it = 2 + Bt + 0.5(yt-yt*) + 0.5(Bt-
2) .94 .95
it = 2 + Bt + (yt-yt*) + 0.5(Bt-2) .72 .73
it = .53it-1 + 0.47 [1.07
 + 0.97(yt-yt*) + 1.51Bt]+ 0.48gt-1 .24 .26
it = .72it-1 + 0.28 [0.41
 + 1.08(yt+3|t-yt+3|t*) + 1.67Bt+3|t]
 + 0.33gt-1
.25 .27
it = 0.49it-2 + 0.51 [0.26
 ! 2.10(ut+3|t-ut+3|t*) + 1.60Bt+3|t] .45 .66
it = it-1 + 0.5() yt+3|t-) yt+3|t*)
 + 0.5(Bt+3|t-2)
.83 .32
From Financial Markets
it = 0.97it-1+ [-1.18 + 0.63Bcomp5|t] .43# .47
# RMSE calculated for 1999:1-2004:2.
testimony, as implying that the FOMC will firm policy another 25 basis points at this
meeting, again assess the risks to growth and inflation as balanced, and retain the
reference to a “measured pace.”  Moreover, a range of indicators continues to suggest
that investors generally remain well prepared for gradual policy tightening.4  Thus, the
market reaction to implementation of this alternative would likely be rather muted, as
in June.  However, the mention of crude oil prices as a factor potentially influencing
future economic growth could prompt investors to focus more closely on evolving
energy price developments in revising their expectations for monetary policy.
(12) If the Committee is concerned by the slow pace of progress in reducing
resource slack projected in the Greenbook or is worried that the forecasted rebound
in growth could fail to materialize, it may prefer the unchanged policy stance of
Alternative A.  The sluggish consumption spending of late and the still-limited pickup
in capital investment—even ahead of the expiration of the partial-expensing tax
provisions at year-end—might be read by policymakers as suggesting that aggregate
demand could remain soft for some time.  Such concerns about prospects for
economic activity could intensify if the labor market report for July turns out to be
surprisingly weak.  The possibility that business and consumer confidence could be
impaired by heightened terrorist threats might also be seen as posing some downside
risk to spending and output.  With inflation apparently moving down somewhat from
its elevated levels of earlier this year and inflation expectations apparently contained, a
brief hiatus in the process of firming policy might involve little risk of higher inflation
and would permit the accumulation of additional data that could be helpful in
assessing whether spending is rebounding in line with projections.
(13) The announcement accompanying a decision to leave rates unchanged
could point to the evidence of “a moderation in output growth” and possibly, as mentioned
above, a slowing in the pace of improvement in labor market conditions.  The
inflation sentence could well be similar to that under Alternative B.  If FOMC
members are especially concerned that the recent weakness in spending might prove
persistent, they might consider an assessment that risks to sustainable growth are
weighted to the downside.  However, the Committee may judge that, especially given
the easing of market interest rates that would likely accompany an unchanged policy
stance, the risks to both sustainable growth and price stability would remain in
balance.  Assuming that the Committee still sees a need to move over time toward a
neutral stance, it probably would want to retain in the announcement the judgment
that policy accommodation can likely be removed at a “measured pace.”  Consistent with
its motivation for selecting Alternative A, the Committee might also wish to note that
policy will be adjusted as appropriate to promote “sustainable growth” as well as price
stability in the last sentence of the risk assessment section.
(14) Unless market expectations for the decision at this meeting are altered
substantially by a weak employment report for July, announcement of an unchanged
policy stance would come as a considerable surprise to investors and might trigger a
sizable drop in short-term interest rates, a rally in bond prices, and some depreciation
in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.  The drop in bond yields would tend to
support equity prices, but that influence could be offset if the policy announcement
led investors to believe that economic activity and corporate profits were likely to be
weaker than previously anticipated.  The declines in market interest rates and in the
dollar would likely be even more pronounced, and a fall in equity prices more likely, if
the FOMC provided an assessment of net downside risks to sustainable growth or
otherwise communicated concern about prospective economic weakness.
(15) If the Committee sees the recent slower growth of aggregate demand as
likely to be transitory but suspects that the pickup in core inflation could well be more
durable than the staff anticipates, it might choose to raise the funds rate 50 basis
points at this meeting, as in Alternative C.  FOMC members may consider inflation
already to be close to the top of an acceptable range and see several reasons to
question the decline in inflation in the staff forecast.  With inflation expectations
remaining in a 2 to 3 percent range, well above the Greenbook forecast, the
Committee may believe that underlying inflation has considerable momentum.  Also,
high energy prices may prove to be longer lasting than anticipated by the staff forecast
and the markets, providing less downward pressure on overall inflation.  Policymakers
may see less slack in prospect than in the Greenbook projection, because they may
perceive the economy as already close to its potential or the growth rate of potential
output as lower than estimated by the staff.  Finally, Committee members might be
uneasy about inflation prospects if they place less weight on the most recent spending
indicators and foresee more robust growth in aggregate demand than in the staff
forecast, perhaps along the lines of the “Spending Rebound” scenario in the
Greenbook.  In light of these considerations, the FOMC may judge a 25-basis-point
move at this meeting—which would leave the real funds rate in negative territory—as
insufficient, whereas a 50-basis-point move would at least bring the real rate to around
(16) With market participants interpreting a “measured pace” as implying at
most 25-basis-point moves, policymakers probably would want to alter that phrase
significantly or drop it from an announcement of Alternative C.  While some
policymakers might prefer not to provide guidance about the likely pace of policy
change, they may be comfortable giving an indirect indication of its probable
direction.  If so, the last sentence of the announcement might read: “In current
circumstances, the Committee believes that the existing degree of policy accommodation, if sustained
over the next few quarters, could foster economic growth that is more likely to be above than below its
long-run sustainable pace.  Similarly, with respect to the Committee’s goal of price stability, such an
unchanged policy stance implies greater risks to the upside than the downside.” 5  Given the
explicit conditioning on the stance of policy in this assessment, a reference to the role
of monetary accommodation in the first sentence of the rationale paragraph would be
redundant.  That paragraph might instead begin: “The Committee continues to believe that
robust underlying growth in productivity is providing ongoing support to economic activity.”  If the
Committee thinks that the “soft patch” in the economy is probably behind us and that
conditions are in place for a robust snap-back, it might also want to state that output
growth “appears poised to resume a stronger pace going forward.”  To underscore its concerns
about the effect of energy price increases on the inflation outlook, the Committee
might want to say: “Although a portion of the rise in inflation this year appears to have been due
to transitory factors, continuing and substantial increases in energy prices are putting persistent
upward pressure on costs and overall prices.”
(17) Unless the employment report for July turns out to be exceptionally
strong, market participants would be quite surprised by the combination of a 50-basis-
point move and the announcement proposed under Alternative C.  The assessment of
upside risks to growth and inflation and the deletion of the “measured pace”  language
would reinforce the sense that the trajectory of policy would be steeper than
previously anticipated.  Market interest rates would likely increase sharply, while stock
prices would drop and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would rise.
(18) If the Committee favors only a modest firming in policy at this time but
wishes to move away from the “measured pace” language before long, it might wish
to combine the 25-basis-point firming action and rationale of Alternative B
with the conditional assessment of upside risks proposed for Alternative C.
That assessment would imply a need for continued policy tightening and thus could
facilitate dropping the measured pace language, perhaps even at this meeting.  If that
language were dropped on Tuesday, the market reaction to the announcement of
conditional upside risks could be fairly sharp, approaching that expected under
Alternative C, as market participants would probably conclude that the FOMC no
longer believed that policy tightening was likely to be gradual.  But if the “measured
pace” wording were retained for this meeting, the response might be rather muted,
with perhaps a small rise in market yields and a modest decline in equity prices.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(19) Under the Greenbook projection, M2 is expected to continue to expand
at a subdued pace, averaging only around 1¼ percent from July through December.
Historical evidence indicates that deposit interest rates are likely to respond sluggishly
to rising short-term market rates, leading to a widening of the opportunity cost of
holding monetary assets.  As a consequence, households are expected to shift their
portfolios away from deposits and toward market instruments.  The lagged effects on
deposit balances of the continuing slowdown in mortgage refinancing activity are also
expected to damp money growth, but to declining degree in the months ahead.
(20) The growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is forecast to slow to a
higher mortgage rates slow residential investment and home price appreciation.  By
contrast, business borrowing is expected to increase as internal funds fail to keep pace
with rising capital expenditures and as equity retirements quicken with increased
merger activity.  Federal debt growth is expected to moderate somewhat from its
robust first half pace, but budget deficits are projected to remain sizable.  As the fiscal
positions of state and local governments continue to improve, and with long-term
interest rates expected to remain about flat, growth of state and local debt should slow
M2 Growth Under Alternative Policy Actions
M2 M2
No Change Tighten 25 bp Tighten 50 bp Greenbook Forecast*
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(21) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to
those presented in Table 1 are provided below.
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
at/TO an average of around _______ 1¼ percent.
(2) Risk Assessments
A. The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters are roughly equal.  With underlying inflation still expected to be
relatively low, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be
removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the
Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to
fulfill its obligation to promote price stability and sustainable growth.
B. The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters are roughly equal.  With underlying inflation still expected to be
relatively low, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be
removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the
Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to
fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.
C. In current circumstances, the Committee believes that the existing
degree of policy accommodation, if sustained over the next few quarters,
could foster economic growth that is more likely to be above than below
its long-run sustainable pace.  Similarly, with respect to the Committee’s
goal of price stability, such an unchanged policy stance implies greater
risks to the upside than the downside.
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Aug 
Sep 
Oct 
Nov 
Dec 
     
Jan  
Feb  
Mar  
Apr  
May  
Jun  
Jul
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jul  
Jul  
Jul  
Jul  
Jul  
Aug
Jul  
Jul  
Jul  
Jul  
Jul  
Jul  
Jul  
Jul  
Jul  
Aug  
Aug  
Aug  
Aug
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
August 9, 2004
Money Aggregates
Seasonally adjusted
nontransactions components
Annual growth rates(%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
  2001            
  2002            
  2003
Quarterly(average)
  2003-Q3         
       Q4         
  2004-Q1         
       Q2
Monthly
  2003-July       
       Aug.       
       Sep.        
       Oct.        
       Nov.        
       Dec.        
                   
  2004-Jan.        
       Feb.        
       Mar.        
       Apr.        
       May         
       June        
       July e
Levels ($billions):
Monthly
  2004-Feb.        
       Mar.        
       Apr.        
       May         
       June
Weekly
  2004-June  7     
            14     
            21     
            28     
                   
       July  5     
            12     
            19p    
            26p
Period
In M3 onlyIn M2
p    prel iminary   
 e    est imated
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 Strictly Confidential
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted) Class II FOMC
August 5, 2004
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5 
Agency total
Intermeeting Period
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
