Content last modified 05/27/2010.
Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
SEPTEMBER 16, 2004
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.)          September 16, 2004
Class I – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The Committee’s decision at the August meeting to increase the target
federal funds rate 25 basis points, to 1½ percent, and to retain the assessment of
balanced risks with respect to sustainable economic growth and price stability was
widely expected in financial markets.1  The accompanying statement, however, was
read as setting a more optimistic tone about economic prospects than had been
anticipated, prompting investors to mark up their expectations for the near-term path
of policy (Chart 1).  That sentiment was reinforced over the remainder of the period
by the comments of several Federal Reserve officials and the release of the most
recent employment report, which seemed to convince market participants that the
economy was emerging from its “soft patch.”  As a result, policy rate expectations for
the next two quarters ended the intermeeting period slightly firmer.  Longer-term
policy expectations, however, moved noticeably lower as relatively benign readings on
inflation and the Chairman’s comments on the inflation outlook in testimony to the
House Budget Committee apparently eased investors’ concerns.  According to a
recent survey conducted by the Desk, dealers unanimously anticipate the upcoming
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Twelve Months Ahead
Six Months Ahead
Policy Uncertainty*
*Width of a 90 percent confidence interval for the federal funds rate
computed from the term structures for both the expected federal funds
rate and implied volatility.
Daily
FOMC
September 16, 2004
August 9, 2004
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premia and other adjustments.
Inflation Compensation*
*Based on a comparison of an estimated TIPS yield curve to an estimated
nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
One-Year Forward Rate Ending
Ten Years Ahead*
*Forward rate is the one-year rate maturing in ten years
that is implied by a smoothed Treasury yield curve.
*Based on October 2004 federal funds futures contract.
Probability of a 25 Basis Point Hike at the
September FOMC Meeting*
meeting to conclude with a quarter-point tightening and retention of an assessment of
balanced risks with respect to both of the Committee’s objectives.  Judging from
futures quotes, investors expect the funds rate to rise to around 2 percent by year-
end—consistent with expectations of two quarter-point hikes over the three
remaining FOMC meetings this year—and to reach about 2¾ percent by the end of
(2) The term structure of interest rates flattened over the intermeeting
period, with the two-year Treasury yield about unchanged and the ten-year Treasury
yield losing 20 basis points.  In addition to the effects of the shift in policy
expectations, longer-term yields may have been pulled down by a reduced assessment
of risk to the interest rate outlook or a heightened willingness to take on risk.  In that
regard, forward-looking measures of price volatility in financial markets declined from
already low levels despite a wide swing in crude oil prices.  Yields on inflation-indexed
Treasury issues changed little, leaving measures of inflation compensation lower.
While credit spreads on investment-grade corporate bonds narrowed a bit, spreads on
speculative-grade issues fell somewhat more, particularly in riskier segments,
apparently reflecting greater confidence about prospects in the business sector
(Chart 2).  Further evidence of such confidence was visible in equity markets, where
broad indexes have advanced 5½ to 7¼ percent since the market close before the
August FOMC meeting.
Chart 2
Capital Market Developments
Ten-Year AA
Ten-Year Swap
Higher-Tier Corporate Bond Spreads*
*AA spread measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield
 curve. Swap spread measured relative to the on-the-run Treasury
 security.
Basis Points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year high-yield (right scale)
Lower-Tier Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Long-run real Treasury yield*
* Yield on synthetic Treasury perpetuity minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year
     expected inflation.
  + Denotes the latest observation using daily interest rates and stock prices
     and latest earnings data from I/B/E/S.
Sept.
15
Wilshire
Nasdaq
Stock Prices
*Spot WTI price.
S&P 500 (left scale)
Ten-Year Treasury Note (right scale)
Implied Volatility
Daily
FOMC
(3) The exchange value of the dollar against other major currencies was
essentially unchanged on net over the intermeeting period (Chart 3).2  The dollar rose
more than 2½ percent against sterling, as the Bank of England held its policy stance
unchanged and market participants grew increasingly convinced that the cycle of
tightening in the United Kingdom was coming to an end.  The dollar rose less, about
¾ percent, vis-à-vis the euro during the intermeeting period as disappointing data
raised concerns about softer European growth.  Against the yen, the dollar moved in a
narrow range during most of the period and ended down slightly less than 1 percent.
The dollar fell about 1¾ percent on net versus the Canadian dollar; the Bank of
Canada raised its policy rate 25 basis points on September 8, citing concerns about
inflation arising in part from higher oil prices.  Yields on long-term government bonds
declined about 15 basis points in Japan, but were little changed in most other foreign
industrial countries.  Foreign equity prices rose 2 to 5 percent over the period,
somewhat less than the rise in U.S. equities.  The dollar was also about unchanged
over the intermeeting period against an index of currencies of our other important
trading partners.
(4) Total debt of the domestic nonfinancial sector grew at a 7¾ percent
annual rate in the second quarter and appears to be expanding at roughly the same
pace in the current quarter.  In the domestic nonfinancial business sector, debt
continued to grow at a moderate pace in August.  Corporate bond issuance picked up,
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Indexes Index(12/31/02=100)
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields
Percent
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
EMBI+ Index
Basis Points
FOMC
Daily
likely in part reflecting opportunistic borrowing by firms taking advantage of the
decline in longer-term interest rates early in the month (Chart 4).  Firms paid down
commercial paper modestly on net, but commercial and industrial loans at banks
increased further.  As best as can be gauged, household debt growth is continuing at a
rapid pace in the current quarter.  Mortgage debt likely is expanding briskly given
attractive mortgage rates and the continued strong pace of mortgage applications and
home sales.  Consumer credit growth rebounded in July from its slow pace in the
spring, reflecting a jump in credit card borrowing.  Debt growth in the federal sector
has remained robust.
(5) After contracting slightly in July, M2 expanded at a 1½ percent annual
pace last month.  Money growth has been damped of late by a rise in the opportunity
cost of holding M2 assets.  (Such a rise typically accompanies policy tightenings as
increases in deposit rates lag those of short-term market rates.)  In addition, the lift to
M2 from mortgage refinancings that occurred during the spring was likely still
unwinding over the past couple of months, depressing the growth of liquid deposits.
Overall, available data suggest M2 growth has slowed substantially in the third quarter
relative to the first half of the year, as the increase in opportunity costs has buoyed
Chart 4
Debt and Money
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
Monthly rate
Growth of Household Debt Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
x
Jul
Fixed Rate (30-Year)
Adjustable Rate (30-Year)
Residential Mortgage Rates
Source. Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey.
Weekly, n.s.a
Applications
(left axis)
Originations
(right axis)
Aug
Aug
Source. Staff estimates.
Mortgage Refinancing Activity
$BillionsIndex(3/16/90 = 100)
Monthly, s.a. Monthly, s.a.
Six-Month Treasury Bill
Six-Month Bank CD*
Deposit and Market Rates Percent
Velocity
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
Percent
e Estimated.
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
e
Q3
e
Q3
Policy Alternatives
(6) Over the period since the August Greenbook was put to bed, incoming
information—including the employment report for July, which was released just after
that Greenbook was distributed—suggested, on balance, that the prospects for
economic activity in the period ahead have become less favorable.  In response, the
staff has marked down both its forecast for the growth of output for the next couple
of quarters and its assumption for the path of monetary policy.  The federal funds rate
is now assumed to reach 2¼ percent by the fourth quarter of 2005 (½ percentage
point less than in the August Greenbook) and 2¾ percent by the fourth quarter of
in contrast, currently price in about ½ percentage point more cumulative tightening
over the next two-and-one-quarter years.  The staff assumes that investors’
expectations will gradually fall into line with the Greenbook policy path, causing
longer-term yields to edge lower over the balance of this year and early next year and
to remain flat subsequently.  Over the projection period, equity prices rise at a pace
sufficient to yield risk-adjusted returns in line with those on fixed-income instruments,
and the real value of the dollar in terms of a broad basket of foreign currencies is
assumed to decline gradually.  Under these financial conditions, real gross domestic
product is forecast to expand at nearly a 4 percent pace from the third quarter of this
year through the end of 2006, a little above the staff’s estimate of growth in potential
GDP of just under 3½ percent.  As a result, the output gap more or less closes by the
end of the projection period and the civilian unemployment rate drops to around the
years, along with continued sizable gains in structural productivity and the pass-
through effects of decelerating non-oil import prices, are expected to exert downward
pressure on core inflation, with increases in the core PCE price measure slipping from
at 2¼ percent in 2004, drops to 1¼ percent in each of the next two years.
(7) Table 1 presents three alternatives for near-term policy, together with
draft language for the Committee’s announcement.  Under Alternative A, the existing
federal funds rate target would be maintained at this meeting.  Alternative B would
raise the target 25 basis points, to 1¾ percent.  Under Alternative C, the funds rate
would similarly be raised 25 basis points, but the language of the statement would be
consistent with the possibility of more rapid firming than is currently built into
financial prices.  Under all of the alternatives, some updating of the language in the
rationale paragraph would seem appropriate.
(8) The Committee, like the staff, may have read incoming data, on balance,
as on the soft side, but it still may believe that the economic expansion will remain on
track under current financial conditions, which incorporate market expectations of
gradual policy firming.  In such circumstances, the Committee might find it
appropriate to validate those expectations by tightening 25 basis points at this
meeting, as in Alternative B.  Even with the two tightening steps that the Committee
has taken to date, the real federal funds rate is still close to zero and near the bottom
of the range of equilibrium values estimated by the staff (Chart 5).   Such a low real
Table 1: Alternative Language for the September FOMC Announcement
August FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee
decided today to keep its target for the
federal funds rate at 1-1/2 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee
decided today to raise its target for the
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to
1-3/4 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee
decided today to raise its target for the
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to
1-3/4 percent.
The Committee believes that the
accommodative stance of monetary
policy, coupled with robust underlying
growth in productivity, is providing
ongoing support to economic activity.
[Unchanged] [Unchanged]
Even though output appears to have
regained some traction after
moderating earlier this year, the pace of
improvement in labor market
conditions remains modest.
After moderating earlier this year
partly in response to the substantial
rise in energy prices, output appears to
have regained some traction.  The pace
of improvement in labor market
conditions, however, remains modest.
Output appears to be regaining traction, and
labor market conditions have improved
modestly.
Despite the rise in energy prices,
inflation and inflation expectations
have eased in recent months.
Despite the rise in energy prices,
inflation and inflation expectations
have eased in recent months.
Inflation and inflation expectations have
eased in recent months, but elevated energy
prices continue to put upward pressure on
costs and prices.
Assessment 
of
[Unchanged] [Unchanged] [Unchanged]
With underlying inflation still expected
to be relatively low, the Committee
believes that policy accommodation
can be removed at a pace that is likely
to be measured.  Nonetheless, the
Committee will respond to changes in
economic prospects as needed to fulfill
its obligation to promote price stability
and sustainable growth.
[Unchanged] [None]
Chart 5
Actual Real Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Estimated Equilibrium Real Rates
Actual Real Funds Rate
TIPS-Based Estimate
Historical Average: 2.72
  (1964Q1-2004Q2)
●25 b.p. Tightening
Current Rate
Equilibrium Real Funds Rate Estimates (Percent)
August Bluebook
August Bluebook
August Bluebook
August Bluebook
Statistical Filter
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data*
FRB/US Model
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data**
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities***
*     Also employs the staff projection for the current and next quarters.
**   Also employs the staff projection for the current quarter.
*** Adjusts the five-year forward, five-year real rate by an assumed term premium of 75 basis points.
federal funds rate may be viewed as appropriate in the exceptional circumstances of
last year but no longer warranted today.  A modest further reduction in
accommodation would also be consistent with a number of monetary policy rules
included in Chart 6.  At the same time, though, some forces evidently are still
weighing on current and prospective economic performance in a manner that may
incline the Committee to be cautious about the extent and speed with which it
removes policy accommodation.  In particular, crude oil prices, while falling back
somewhat in recent weeks, remain high and could continue to limit growth in
aggregate demand.  Looking forward, fiscal policy is poised to shift from stimulus to
restraint at the end of this year as the investment expensing provision expires.  And
recent news on spending for high-tech equipment has been less upbeat.
(9) With regard to the announcement of Alternative B, the Committee could
again repeat the themes that the stance of policy remains accommodative even after
the policy move and that this stance, combined with strong trend productivity growth,
is supporting economic activity.  However, the Committee presumably will wish to
modify the next few sentences of the announcement to reflect the tenor of recent
data.  One way of updating the key points in the discussion of real-side developments
would be to hold that: “After moderating earlier this year partly in response to the substantial
rise in energy prices, output appears to have regained some traction.  The pace of improvement in labor
market conditions, however, remains modest.”  In view of the recent string of relatively
benign inflation reports, the Committee might also wish to indicate that “Despite the rise
in energy prices, inflation and inflation expectations have eased in recent months.”  Incoming data
Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, Bt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt-yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, B* policymakers’
long-run objective for inflation, it-1 the lagged federal funds rate, gt-1  the residual from the rule’s
prescription the previous quarter, (yt+3|t-yt+3|t*) the staff’s three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap,
() yt+3|t-) yt+3|t*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less potential output growth three quarters ahead,
Bt+3|t a three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t-ut+3|t*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast of the
unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from the Greenbook and staff memoranda
closest to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Rule Specification
Root-mean-
square error
Rules with Imposed Coefficients
.83 .32
Rules with Estimated Coefficients
it = .53it-1 + 0.47 [1.07
 + 0.97(yt-yt*) + 1.51Bt]+ 0.48gt-1 .24 .26
it = .72it-1 + 0.28 [0.41
 + 1.08(yt+3|t-yt+3|t*) + 1.67Bt+3|t]
 + 0.33gt-1
.25 .27
it = 0.49it-2 + 0.51 [0.26
 ! 2.10(ut+3|t-ut+3|t*) + 1.60Bt+3|t] .45 .66
it = 0.97it-1+ [-1.18 + 0.63Bcomp5|t] .43# .47
# RMSE calculated for 1999:1-2004:2.
would seem to support a renewed assessment that the risks to both sustainable
economic growth and price stability are roughly balanced.  And, as suggested above,
the newly available evidence would also seem consistent with a judgment that policy
accommodation can be removed at a measured pace.
(10) Investors appear to have viewed incoming data over the intermeeting
period as pointing to continued moderate economic expansion and limited pressures
on inflation.  This interpretation of the data, together with statements by the
Committee and individual policymakers, has suggested to market participants that the
FOMC almost certainly will firm another 25 basis points at this meeting, will again
announce that the risks to sustainable growth and price stability are balanced, and will
reiterate the view that policy can be tightened at a measured pace.  Accordingly, an
action and an announcement along the lines of that proposed in Alternative B should
have little immediate effect in financial markets.  The conditional nature of the
statement makes it likely that investors will remain quite sensitive to key economic
readings, such as reports on payroll employment and consumer prices, in the weeks
that follow.  Should these data come in consistent with the staff forecast, interest rates
may well edge lower on the building expectation that less cumulative policy tightening
will be needed over the next few years than was previously anticipated.
(11) While the Committee may be convinced that a sustainable economic
expansion is in place, it may be concerned that the pace of output growth will not be
sufficiently vigorous to make satisfactory progress in reducing economic slack.  In the
Greenbook forecast, for instance, resource slack persists for much of the next two
years and core inflation drifts lower.  If the Committee finds this to be undesirable, it
may consider leaving the funds rate target unchanged at this meeting, as in
Alternative A.  The resulting easing of financial conditions would presumably better
ensure satisfactory growth in aggregate demand.  A relatively slow pace of firming may
be warranted by concerns that aggregate demand growth could be restrained in
coming quarters by a number of factors, including efforts on the part of households
to raise their saving rates and the drag of the widening trade deficit, and especially so
if such factors develop more quickly or forcefully than in the Greenbook outlook.  In
addition, in the staff forecast, persisting slack and lower energy and import prices
impart a slight downtrend to core inflation that could bring it to levels that the
Committee might find uncomfortably low, given the limits to conventional policy
maneuvering posed by the zero bound to nominal interest rates.  The “measured
pace” language would not seem to be an obstacle to pausing the process of firming, in
that futures rates indicate that financial market participants already anticipate inaction
at one of the next three meetings—although apparently not this one.  Indeed, a pause
at this time might be seen as having the benefit of ensuring that market participants
do not come inappropriately to view the “measured pace” language as a promise to
firm policy at every meeting.
(12) In announcing Alternative A, the Committee might wish to state that
“Even though output appears to have regained some traction after moderating earlier this year, the
pace of improvement in labor market conditions remains modest.”  This wording is broadly
similar to that proposed for Alternative B but puts more stress on the limited
improvement in labor market conditions and less stress on energy price movements as
the source of earlier economic weakness.  As part of the rationale for leaving rates
unchanged, the Committee could employ the language for describing inflation
developments that is proposed for Alternative B, that is, “Despite the rise in energy prices,
inflation and inflation expectations have eased in recent months.”  Even if the Committee found
good reason to pause in its process of firming policy, it might still perceive the risks to
both growth and inflation as balanced.  In addition, if the Committee viewed the
hiatus as consistent with an intention to move policy over time toward a more neutral
stance, rather than representing a fundamental reappraisal of policy strategy, it might
repeat the judgment that policy could be firmed at a measured pace.  Lastly, the
Committee might wish to indicate under this alternative that future policy adjustments
will depend on prospects for sustainable growth as well as for price stability.
(13) An absence of policy tightening at this meeting would come as a
complete surprise to market participants.  Interest rates would decline appreciably
across the yield curve, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would probably
decline.  The effect on equity prices might depend on whether investors viewed the
absence of action as suggesting a significantly weaker economic outlook than they had
previously perceived, in which case equity prices might decline, or, instead, as a shift
by the Federal Reserve toward a more stimulative posture, in which case a rally could
ensue.  At least a portion of the recent decline in the volatilities of financial prices
might unwind as the outlooks for both the economy and monetary policy become less
(14) The Committee may be concerned that greater-than-usual uncertainty
surrounds the outlook for the economy as spending moves out of its recent soft
patch.  If the Committee put much weight on the possibility that growth will rebound
sharply, it may believe that the scope of its future action is constrained on the upside
by the “measured pace” language and may prefer to drop the last two sentences from
the statement, as is considered in Alternative C.  Monetary policy has been highly
accommodative for an extended period, and as noted, the real federal funds rate is
currently about zero and may well be considerably below its equilibrium level.  Indeed,
given the decline in longer-term yields and increases in equity prices, financial
conditions likely eased further over the intermeeting period.  Policymakers may be
concerned that this monetary stimulus could be stoking a buildup of overall
inflationary pressures or fostering misalignments of asset prices.  As to the former, if
the prospects for aggregate supply were described not by the Greenbook baseline but
by the “Less room to grow” alternative simulation (in which the NAIRU is higher and
the labor force participation rate does not rise any further to augment labor inputs),
then the Committee might envision more forceful action sometime soon.  As to the
latter concern about asset prices, some could view the rapid rise in home values,
which presumably is being fed in part by the low level of real interest rates, as a
possible manifestation of misallocation of resources and a potential threat to financial
stability (see box).  Removing the “measured pace” language would capture market
attention and result in a tightening of financial market conditions that would provide
some restraint on asset prices and inflation.
Housing Prices and Monetary Policy
Over the last several years, real home prices in the United States have increased sharply
(left panel).  Moreover, house prices have risen well above gains in rents, indicating either an
expectation of future significant increases in rents, a lowered risk premium, or a decline in the
risk-free rate of discount.  In any case, and as shown in the right panel, the price-rent ratio has
moved well above its typical range, potentially raising some of the same challenges for monetary
policy posed by the stock market boom in the late 1990s.  With the value of homes accounting
for about a quarter of household assets, changes in their prices could well have an appreciable
effect on spending.  In addition, a significant misalignment of housing prices could prompt
resource misallocations.  Housing prices, however, are much less volatile than equity prices,
suggesting that these developments would tend to unfold slowly, if at all.
Such concerns have led some observers to argue that the FOMC take more explicit
account of perceived deviations of house prices from fundamentals in formulating monetary
policy.  In particular, advocates of such an approach generally argue that it may be desirable to
tighten more aggressively at present than would otherwise be the case so as to contain or even
reverse the perceived asset price misalignment and thereby avoid an especially sharp and painful
asset price correction at some future date.
An alternative view is that monetary policy should respond to perceived asset price
misalignments only to the extent that they contain information about the outlook for inflation
and output.  Moreover, the available empirical evidence demonstrates only that asset (house)
prices are high compared with predicted values from models based on historical behavior. 
Models, however, are imperfect, and consequently it remains a judgment call whether this
deviation really represents a departure from fundamentals or is a manifestation of changed
fundamentals not fully accounted for by the model.
Even if house prices were known with certainty to be overvalued, the appropriate policy
response is not obvious. More aggressive policy tightening might reduce the demand for real
estate and gradually bring home prices in line with fundamentals, although the appropriate degree
of tightening would be difficult to calibrate.  If the misalignment, however, were viewed as likely
to correct itself in short order, it might well be appropriate to ease policy (or tighten less
aggressively) to cushion the expected fall in demand.  Given such uncertainties, the standard
prescription is that monetary policy should be driven primarily by economic fundamentals–the
outlook for output and inflation–even when home prices or other asset prices may not be.
(15) In the description of economic developments in the statement, the
Committee could relate that “Output appears to be regaining traction” and, reflecting the
slightly better employment report for August and the relatively low level of initial
claims for unemployment, assert that “labor market conditions have improved modestly.”
Regarding price developments, the announcement could indicate, as in Alternatives A
and B, that “Inflation and inflation expectations have eased in recent months” but add that
“elevated energy prices continue to put upward pressure on costs and prices.”  The appropriate risk
assessment under Alternative C poses a difficult issue.  If an assessment of balanced
risks were retained, the deletion of the final two sentences of the statement would
remove any explicit sense that policy firming would continue, leaving the earlier
indication that “the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative” as the only
hint of the future direction of policy.  This concern could conceivably be remedied if
the Committee chose, as discussed at the August meeting, to condition its risk
assessment explicitly on an unchanged federal funds rate and judge that the risks to
growth and inflation under that assumption were tilted to the upside.  However,
members might be concerned that such an approach would lead to a sharp upward
revision in market participants’ expectations for the path of policy.
(16) Adoption of Alternative C would surprise market participants and, given
the precedent of the marked reaction when the “considerable period” sentence was
modified in January, could prompt significant swings in financial prices.  The path
expected for the funds rate would rotate up, and market participants probably would
become somewhat more chary about risk-taking.  Equity prices, in all likelihood,
would decline.  Interest rates would jump, although the rise in bond yields could be
damped should equity prices fall steeply.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(17) Under the staff forecast, M2 is expected to expand slowly for the
remainder of this year and begin to accelerate next year, with growth averaging about
the staff forecast slows the increase in the opportunity cost of holding M2 over the
next two quarters.  Annual growth from the fourth quarter of last year to the fourth
quarter of this year is projected to come in near 4¼ percent.
(18) The growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is forecast to moderate
to 7½ percent in the second half of 2004 and then slow a bit further next year.
Household debt decelerates as mortgage borrowing falls off in response to a less-rapid
pace of home price appreciation.  Federal debt advances at a somewhat slower rate in
deficit.3  Business sector borrowing, however, strengthens as capital spending picks up
relative to the generation of internal funds.
M2 Growth Under Alternative Policy Actions
No change Tighten 25 bp*
Monthly Growth Rates
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(19) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to
those presented in Table 1 are provided below.
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around _______ 1½ percent.
(2) Risk Assessments
A. The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters to be roughly equal.  With underlying inflation still expected to
be relatively low, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can
be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the
Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to
fulfill its obligation to promote price stability and sustainable growth.
B. The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters to be roughly equal.  With underlying inflation still expected to
be relatively low, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can
be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the
Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to
fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.
C. The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters to be roughly equal.
Appendix Chart 1
The Yield Curve
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
September 16, 2004   
August 9, 2004
Selected Treasury Yield Curves*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Appendix Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies*
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies*
Other Important**
* Trade−weighted average of currencies of the Euro area, Canada, Japan, U.K., Switzerland, Australia, and Sweden.
         ** Trade−weighted average of currencies of 19 other important trading partners.
         *** Trade−weighted average of currencies of all important trading partners.
Appendix Chart 3
Stock Indexes
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
Ratio Scale
Deflated Index Level*
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
S&P 500
Appendix Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter (median value of respondents).
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Appendix Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
+
+
Ten−Year Treasury Yield Less Ten−Year Inflation Expectations
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
+
+
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the Blue Chip
         Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters thereafter (median
         value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year inflation expectations from that
         survey (mean value of respondents).
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Appendix Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
Journal of Commerce Index
Ratio scale, index (1967=100)
CRB Spot Industrials
CRB Futures
Appendix Chart 7
Growth of Real M2 and M3
Appendix Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2 and Two
Estimates of V*
GDP implicit
price deflator (P)
Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*), given
current M2 and constant V*
Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*) given
current M2 and V* with shift
* Change in GDP implicit price deflator over the previous four quarters.
Constant V*
V* with shift
* Change in GDP implicit price deflator over the previous four quarters.
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted)
nontransactions components
Annual growth rates(%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
  2001            
  2002            
  2003
Quarterly(average)
  2003-Q3         
       Q4         
  2004-Q1         
       Q2
Monthly
  2003-Aug.       
       Sep.       
       Oct.        
       Nov.        
       Dec.        
                   
  2004-Jan.        
       Feb.        
       Mar.        
       Apr.        
       May         
       June        
       July        
       Aug. p
Levels ($billions):
Monthly
  2004-Apr.        
       May         
       June        
       July        
       Aug. p
Weekly
  2004-Aug.  2     
             9     
            16     
            23     
            30p    
                   
       Sep.  6p
Period
In M3 onlyIn M2
p    prel iminary
Changes in System Holdings of Securities
 1 Strictly Confidential
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Class II FOMC
September 16, 2004
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs  5
Agency total
Intermeeting Period
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
