Content last modified 05/27/2010.
Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) April 29, 2004
Class I – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1)  The FOMC’s decision at its March meeting to leave the intended level
of the federal funds rate unchanged had been fully anticipated in markets, but the
assessment of the economy in the accompanying statement was read as having a soft
cast, and interest rates moved lower.1  In the weeks that followed, however, interest
rates rose sharply in response to the much-stronger-than-expected employment report
for March and to other data releases pointing to firming household and business
spending and rising prices, as well as to the Chairman’s statement in congressional
testimony that “the threat of deflation is no longer an issue.”  Futures markets and
dealer surveys suggest virtually no expectation of a rate move at the May meeting.
With regard to the associated statement, dealers apparently anticipate that the
Committee will modify or drop the reference to “patience” and characterize the risks
to the achievement of sustainable growth and to price stability as balanced.  Market
participants now appear to believe that tightening will commence in the third quarter,
rather than late in the year as previously thought, and will bring the federal funds rate
to nearly 3½ percent by the end of 2005, a full percentage point higher than
anticipated at the time of the March meeting (Chart 1).
(2) This shift over the intermeeting period toward the expectation of
prompter and more substantial monetary policy tightening precipitated increases of
over 70 basis points in nominal Treasury yields at maturities between two and ten
years.2  Rates on inflation-indexed securities rose somewhat less, leaving inflation
compensation modestly higher (as discussed in the box entitled “Inflation
Expectations and CPI Futures”).  Despite the backup in real interest rates, equity
indexes edged higher over the intermeeting period, supported importantly by earnings
reports that generally outstripped market expectations.  Investment-grade private
yields moved up in line with Treasuries, but those on lower-rated instruments posted
smaller increases, leading to a further narrowing of high-yield risk spreads (Chart 2).
Investment-grade yields are now about a percentage point higher than at the time of
last June’s policy easing, while those on high-yield instruments are around a
percentage point lower.
(3) The dollar appreciated about 1¾ percent on balance against other major
currencies during the intermeeting period, principally in response to further
indications of strength in the U.S. economy and the associated increases in interest
rates (Chart 3).  The dollar gained 2½ percent versus the euro as convincing signs of a
quickening in economic activity in the euro area failed to emerge.  The ECB held
policy steady.  The Bank of Canada responded to continued sluggish economic
performance with another 25-basis-point cut in its policy rates in mid-April–the third
such action this year–and the dollar ended the period about 2¾ percent higher against
the Canadian dollar.  The dollar recorded an unusually wide swing against the yen,
dropping more than 6 percent over the second half of March before reversing most of
that loss.  In addition to the effects of U.S. data surprises, the turnaround may have
reflected Japanese investors taking new dollar positions following the end of their
fiscal year on March 31.  In a distinct break from their previous policy, Japanese
Inflation Expectations and CPI Futures
Inflation compensation, as measured by the difference between yields on nominal
and indexed Treasury securities, edged up over the intermeeting period for both the
next five years and the subsequent five years.  Inflation compensation over the next
five years has been on an uptrend since last summer, likely reflecting strengthening
economic activity, rising energy and commodity prices, and recent data showing
higher-than-expected realized inflation.  By contrast, the forward inflation
compensation measure has changed little, on net, over that period.
For a more complete view of investors’ outlook, inflation compensation can be
computed for all outstanding ten-year indexed notes, which have remaining
maturities spanning 2007 to 2014 (chart).  At shorter maturities, this information
can now be supplemented with readings from CPI futures contracts.  CPI futures
were recently introduced by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and cover maturities
shorter than those of Treasury indexed debt.  While CPI futures remain illiquid, the
two measures of inflation compensation match up fairly well–although not
perfectly–where they meet near the end of 2006.  Inflation compensation increases
appreciably over the next two years and moves up more gradually thereafter,
reaching around 2½ percent at the ten-year maturity.  Although some portion of
the upward slope to inflation compensation may owe to inflation risk premiums, it
seems likely that inflation is also expected to rise over the next few years.
.  The Desk did not
intervene during the latest period for the accounts of the System or the Treasury.
authorities refrained from intervening in foreign exchange markets after mid-March.3
Yields on longer-term government bonds in major industrial countries rose 25 to 50
basis points over the intermeeting period, considerably less than in the United States.
Stock markets in most major foreign economies continued to make solid gains, with
the 7 percent average increase in Japanese stocks leading the pack.
(4) The dollar rose about 1 percent during the intermeeting period against
an index of currencies of other important trading partners.  The dollar moved up
more than 3½ percent on balance versus the peso on evidence that economic activity
in Mexico was weaker than expected.  The Mexican central bank surprised market
participants by tightening policy, in part to bring inflation down to within the official
target range.  Mexico’s EMBI+ spread was about unchanged over the intermeeting
period, but Brazil’s spread widened 100 basis points, to over 6½ percentage points.
The People’s Bank of China raised reserve requirements and tightened restrictions on
lending in late April in an effort to prevent overheating of the Chinese economy.
(5) The expansion of domestic nonfinancial sector debt remained brisk in
the first quarter, supported by a pickup in federal issuance and strong household
borrowing (Chart 4).  A further jump in the federal budget deficit resulted in record
sales of marketable Treasury debt in the first quarter.  Residential mortgage debt
growth continues to be rapid, albeit somewhat off the record rates of the last two
years, as the recent drop-off in refinancing applications has yet to show through
materially to originations.  Financing conditions for businesses have continued to
improve, with banks further easing standards and terms between January and April as
reported in the most recent Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.  Although business
credit demands have strengthened a bit this year along with a faster pace of capital
expenditures, borrowing needs have been held down by robust corporate profits.
Bond issuance by investment-grade firms rose in the first quarter as interest rates fell
but seems to have weakened a bit in April with the backup in rates.  Lower-tier bond
issuance has remained robust, reflecting in part the narrowing of spreads on such
instruments.  Short-term business debt contracted again in the first quarter, but at a
slower pace than last year, and has edged up in recent weeks.
(6) M2 growth was quite strong in March and April, boosted in part by the
temporary effects of elevated refinancing activity in the first quarter.  Currency
growth, by contrast, has been held down by weak demand from abroad.  In addition
to ongoing substitution of euros for dollars in Europe and elsewhere, foreign demand
for U.S. currency has been damped by relative stability in countries that had been
significant sources of demand.
Policy Alternatives4
(7) Incoming data on spending and employment over the intermeeting
period led the staff to mark up its estimate of first-quarter growth but not to change
materially the contours of the forecast of output thereafter.  The past few readings on
inflation also ran faster than expected, reflecting in part the effects of higher energy
and non-oil import prices and outsized increases in a few volatile components.  The
staff saw some signal in these releases and revised up its projection of core consumer
price inflation about ¼ percentage point this year and next.  In light of these
developments, the staff now assumes that the Committee will start tightening in the
fall, a quarter earlier than in the March Greenbook, and firm gradually thereafter.
Longer-term interest rates move sideways over the forecast period, with the upward
push of tighter policy about offsetting the downward pull of revisions to expected
future short-term rates as investors realize that inflation is likely to remain lower and
policy to tighten by less than currently expected.  Equity prices and the foreign
exchange value of the dollar have both been marked up to reflect their current,
higher-than-anticipated levels.  Equity prices are again assumed to rise to yield
risk-adjusted returns in line with those on fixed-income instruments and the dollar to
edge lower at a rate similar to that assumed in the March Greenbook.  With
accommodative monetary and fiscal policy supporting growth, real GDP is projected
to expand at about a 5 percent rate over the final three quarters of 2004.  However,
monetary policy tightening and a swing in fiscal policy toward restraint contribute to a
moderation of GDP growth to about 3¾ percent in 2005–a touch above the
estimated growth rate of potential output.  The unemployment rate is expected to end
the forecast period at 5¼ percent, still somewhat above the staff’s estimate of the
natural rate, as productivity growth continues to be robust and labor force
participation picks up.  With oil prices moderating, commodity prices stabilizing,
longer-term inflation expectations apparently remaining well-anchored, and a portion
of the gap between output and its potential persisting until the end of the forecast
period, core PCE inflation is projected to edge lower to about 1¼ percent later this
year and remain near that level through next year.
(8) This Bluebook presents three alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized by the draft statements in Table 1.  Alternatives A and B
assume that the federal funds rate holds at 1 percent but differ as to the Committee’s
characterization of the strength of the economy and its willingness to be patient in
removing policy accommodation.  Alternative C contemplates a quarter-point firming
and aligns the wording of the statement accordingly.  Under any of these alternatives,
several changes seem necessary to update the characterization of economic
conditions.  In particular, with employment growth averaging 170,000 per month over
the first three months of the year, the rationale paragraph could indicate that “hiring
appears to have picked up.”  And the unexpectedly high inflation figures could be
acknowledged by stating that “incoming inflation data have moved somewhat higher.”
Assuming that the Committee now sees the odds of a significant further decline in
inflation as remote, the assessment-of-risks paragraph should indicate that “the upside
and downside risks to the goal of price stability are seen as roughly equal.”
(9) In light of the data released over the intermeeting period, the Committee
may feel more confident that vigorous output growth will be sustained and that slack
in labor markets will diminish.  Moreover, the higher-than-anticipated price data might
be taken as evidence that inflation has bottomed.  In these circumstances, the
Committee might want to adopt language that would provide more flexibility about
future action so that it has scope to begin unwinding its current policy
accommodation if circumstances soon warrant, as in Alternative B.  Even if such
action were not viewed as imminent, the Committee might favor a change in the
wording if members put some weight on the possibility of tightening in the next few
months as more information bearing on the strength of the labor market and inflation
Table 1: FOMC Statement Alternatives for the May Bluebook
March FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy
Decision
Unchanged Unchanged
The Federal Open Market Committee
decided today to raise its target for the
federal funds rate to 1¼  percent.
Unchanged Unchanged
The Comm ittee continues to believe
that robust underlying growth in
productivity is providing important
ongoing support to economic activity.
The evidence accumulated over the
intermeeting period indicates that
output is continuing to expand at a
solid rate and hiring appears to have 
picked up.
The evidence accumulated over the
intermeeting period indicates that
output is continuing to expand at a
solid rate and hiring appears to have
picked up.
The evidence accumulated over the
intermeeting period indicates that
output is continu ing to expand at a solid
rate and hiring appears to have picked
up.
Although incoming inflation data have
moved somewhat higher, core
inflation is expected to rem ain low.
Although incoming inflation data have
moved somewhat higher, long-term
inflation expectations appear to have
remained well-anchored.
Long-term inflation expectations appear
to have remained well-anchored,
although incoming inflation data have
moved somewhat higher.
Against this backdrop, the Committee
felt that some reduction in the degree of
monetary accommodation was desirable
to promote price stability  and thus help
sustain the economic expansion.
Assessment 
of
Unchanged Unchanged
With this policy action, the Committee
perceives that the upside and downside
risks to  the attainm ent of susta inable
growth for the next few quarters are
roughly equal.
Similarly,  the upside and downside
risks to the goal of price stability are
seen as roughly equal.
Similarly,  the upside and downside
risks to the goal of price stability are
seen as roughly equal.
Similarly,  the upside and downside risks
to the goal of price stability are seen as
roughly equal.
Nonetheless, with inflation low and
resource use slack, the Committee
believes that it can be patient in
removing its policy accommodation.
At this juncture, with inflation low and
resource use slack, the Committee
believes that policy accommodation
can likely be removed at a measured
pace.
Even following today’s action, the
Comm ittee judges that the stance of
policy is qu ite accom modative . 
However, with inflation low and
resource use slack, the Committee
believes that policy accommodation can
likely be removed at a  measured pace.
trends becomes available.  Deferring policy firming, at least for a time, may not be
seen as especially costly:  Even if somewhat stronger employment growth and a
slowing in the rate of advance of productivity pushed up labor costs, competitive
pressure may lead firms to trim currently high profit margins, limiting the pass-
through of rising costs to inflation.  And, while inflation compensation five to ten
years out implied by TIIS yields moved up some over the intermeeting period, it has
changed little, on net, since last fall, suggesting that longer-term expectations remain
(10) The Committee has multiple opportunities in its statement to indicate
that the odds of policy firming in the near future are higher than at the March
meeting, as shown in the column labeled Alternative B in Table 1.  At the same time,
it might also offer a reason in the rationale paragraph why it does not see the need to
tighten immediately by noting that “longer-term inflation expectations appear to have remained
well-anchored.”  With the risks to the outlook balanced and the economy potentially
picking up steam as the gloom that weighed on business investment and hiring
disperses, Committee members may feel that it is now appropriate to drop the
sentence referring to patience in removing policy accommodation.  Such a change
may be seen as particularly desirable if the Committee believes that investors’
confidence that interest rates will remain low has been encouraging the development
of financial market imbalances that could have adverse macroeconomic effects as they
unwind.  However, members may be concerned that eliminating any characterization
of the Committee’s future action might lead market participants to build in outsized
expectations about the speed with which policy accommodation will be removed,
thereby augmenting the considerable tightening in financial conditions of the past few
weeks.  The Committee could convey the sense that its current outlook was consistent
with a gradual return to a neutral policy stance by providing assurance at the end of
the assessment of risks paragraph that, “At this juncture, with inflation low and resource use
slack, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can likely be removed at a measured pace.”
Even with the inclusion of such a sentence, however, a statement along these lines
would likely lead market participants to bring a bit closer in time the expected date of
the commencement of monetary policy tightening.  In response, interest rates would
rise, stock prices likely would decline, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar
would tend to appreciate.
(11) If Committee members were sufficiently confident that the expansion
was now self-sustaining or saw the recent increase in core inflation as signaling an
upturn in underlying inflation, then they might find an increase of ¼ percentage point
in the federal funds rate at this meeting, as in Alternative C, to be appropriate.  The
Committee may view the advances in investment outlays, coupled with the more
recent evidence that hiring is picking up, as suggesting that the tentativeness that had
earlier marked business behavior has lifted.  Indeed, as increased hiring buoys incomes
and consumer confidence, the resulting growth in spending may support faster gains
in investment spending and employment than expected by the staff, implying a swifter
erosion of resource slack.  Members may also be less confident than the staff that
aggregate supply will continue to expand at a rapid pace and that the recent increases
in energy and non-oil import prices will leave only a small imprint on inflation
expectations.  If so, the Committee, like financial market participants, may see a
significant risk that inflation could move higher, suggesting that the time has come to
adjust policy.  Indeed, if the Committee believes that expected inflation may rise, then
it might see an increase in the target funds rate as necessary just to avoid a reduction
in the real federal funds rate and a consequent easing of policy relative to measures of
the equilibrium funds rate (Chart 5).  The argument for tighter policy would be
strengthened to the extent that the Committee wants to keep inflation near its recent
lows over the longer term, rather than allowing some increase.  While policy
tightening might put some strains on financial markets for a time, Committee
members might not be convinced that the elevated uncertainty and financial market
turbulence of 1994-95 is as relevant a precedent as some observers assert, in part
because investors seem to expect that significant tightening will commence soon (see
box on “Lessons From the 1994-95 Tightening Cycle”).
Lessons from the 1994-95 Tightening Cycle
The current policy environment is similar in some respects to that prevailing before the
policy tightening in 1994-95.  In both cases, an initially sluggish expansion in
employment was accompanied by a real federal funds rate that fell to near zero for a
time.  The nominal federal funds rate target, shown in the left panel on the next page, is
currently 2 percentage points lower than at the start of 1994, reflecting in part the net
decline in inflation over the intervening ten years.  The policy tightening that began in
February 1994 sparked a period of financial market turbulence that caused serious
difficulties for some financial institutions.  This adverse outcome has raised concerns
about whether similar volatility could follow a move to tighter policy this year.
The seemingly outsized market reaction to the 1994-95 tightening reflected several
factors.  First, many market participants had not fully expected a policy tightening at that
time and so were poorly positioned.  Second, investors considerably underestimated the
ultimate extent of tightening, though part of that forecast error reflected the surprising
strength of the economy after the tightening process had begun.  (The staff was
surprised as well, and the Greenbook forecast of the unemployment rate in the fourth
quarter of 1994 fell about ¾ percentage point over the course of that year.)  Third,
uncertainty about the timing and magnitude of future policy actions was high, particularly
early in the tightening cycle.  Investors reacted to the changed economic and policy
outlook by selling long-term securities to limit capital losses and hedge the lengthening
durations of mortgage portfolios that resulted from higher interest rates.  These portfolio
adjustments at times took place over short periods of time, leading to volatile moves in
long-term rates.  As shown in the right panel, long-term yields increased almost as much
as short-term rates early in the tightening cycle.
To be sure, the historical record does suggest that changes in the direction of the policy
rate tend to elicit a stronger market response than actions extending the existing trend in
the policy rate.  And the turbulence in financial markets last summer and fall may suggest
that hedging flows will magnify the amplitude of any swings in longer-term interest rates. 
As a result, some firms with large interest rate exposures could face substantial losses
when interest rates rise.  That said, there are some signs that financial firms and markets
may be able to handle policy tightening better than they did in 1994.  Although the
expected policy path is not as steep now as the actual tightening that took place ten years
ago, it is nonetheless considerably steeper than that foreseen immediately before the first
tightening in 1994.  Even if interest rates do respond strongly to a move toward tighter
policy, financial institutions appear better positioned to withstand the impact owing to
improved risk-management practices.  And, although the size of the mortgage market is
now much larger, the recent run-up in interest rates has reduced prepayment rates
enough to moderate the extent to which any further increase in rates will induce hedging
flows.
Lessons from the 1994-95 Tightening Cycle (Continued)
(12) If the Committee chooses to tighten policy at this meeting, then it might
well be inclined to issue a statement like that shown in the last column of Table 1.
This statement starts by noting the change in policy: “The Federal Open Market
Committee decided today to raise its target for the federal funds rate to 1¼ percent.”  To avoid
repetition later, the first sentence of the rationale paragraph might refer only to
productivity growth–“Robust underlying growth in productivity is providing important ongoing
support to economic activity.”  The explanation for the policy move could follow at the end
of the paragraph: “Against this backdrop, the Committee felt that some reduction in the degree of
monetary accommodation was desirable to promote price stability and thus help sustain the economic
expansion.”  So long as the Committee believed that the policy move, and the expected
reaction to that move in financial markets, was likely to be sufficient to contain upside
risks for the time being, then it might want to indicate that, “With this policy action, the
Committee perceives that the upside and downside risks to the attainment of sustainable growth for
the next few quarters are roughly equal.  Similarly, the upside and downside risks to the goal of price
stability are seen as roughly equal.”  In order to leave a sense that additional policy
tightening was likely at some point but that the Committee did not foresee a rapid
return to a neutral stance, the statement could end with “Even following today’s action, the
Committee judges that the stance of policy is quite accommodative.  However, with inflation low and
resource use slack, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can likely be removed at a
measured pace.”  While market participants expect policy to tighten in the not-too-
distant future, action at this meeting would come as a considerable surprise, especially
given the reference to patience included in the March statement.  Market interest rates
would likely move significantly higher, stock prices would fall, and the dollar would
rally.  If investors took the final sentence of the statement to heart, then these
reactions might be somewhat damped.
(13) While the Committee might find some encouragement in the stronger
tone of recent economic data, it may not yet be convinced that the expansion has
become self-sustaining and may still expect inflation to remain low.  In early 2002, for
instance, the expansion appeared to be gaining traction for a time and market
expectations about the onset of tightening were building, but the expansion
subsequently faltered.  If the Committee believed that the case for tighter policy
would likely require at least several more months of evidence, it might choose a
statement fairly close to the one released following the March meeting, as in
Alternative A.  With investment spending still reported to be primarily for
replacement rather than for expansion and with only one month of reasonably strong
employment data in hand, the Committee may not yet be confident that business
gloom has really lifted all that much.  Indeed, with the impetus to both household and
business spending from expansionary fiscal policy expected to wane over coming
quarters and financial conditions having tightened considerably of late, some members
may be concerned that growth could fall back more than in the staff projection.  The
recent uptick in inflation might be seen as primarily the result of temporary factors
and, therefore, leaving open the possibility that the underlying trend in inflation could
edge lower (much as is discussed in the “Inflation Reversal” simulation in the
Greenbook).  Moreover, some Committee members might see the level of inflation
over the past year as at the low end of its desirable range over the longer term and so
may not be averse to a modest step-up.  Against this backdrop, the Committee may
continue to view downside surprises to inflation as more costly than upside surprises,
implying that a cautious approach to monetary policy tightening remains appropriate.
(14) If the Committee finds sufficient merit in the selection of Alternative A,
it could issue a statement like that shown in the corresponding column of Table 1.
While the recent increase in inflation should be noted, the statement could indicate
that the rise is likely to be transitory: “Although incoming inflation data have moved somewhat
higher, core inflation is expected to remain low.”  Even in this view, the risks to the
attainment of price stability related in the assessment of risks paragraph would
presumably be balanced.  However, with the vigor of the expansion seen as less
certain and the upside risks to inflation less pressing, the Committee might choose to
retain with only minor adjustment the sentence indicating its belief that it can be
“patient in removing its policy accommodation.”  Market participants think that the
Committee is likely to modify or drop the reference to patience in the statement at
this meeting, and its retention would probably lead them to push back somewhat the
expected timing of policy tightening.  The resulting decline in market interest rates
would likely spark a modest rally in stock markets but weigh on the foreign exchange
value of the dollar.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(15) M2 growth is projected to slow from its recent rapid pace, as the
temporary boost from last quarter’s high level of mortgage refinancing ebbs.
Nonetheless, this aggregate is expected to grow about 5½ percent this year, about the
same as last year and ½ percentage point faster than projected at the time of the last
Bluebook.  The higher projected growth reflects in part the stronger-than-expected
underlying money growth thus far this year.  Foreign demand for U.S. currency is also
anticipated to rebound from the low growth rate posted in the first quarter.
Nonetheless, as the economic expansion continues, households are expected to shift
the composition of their portfolios further toward capital market instruments at the
expense of monetary assets, implying a modest rise in M2 velocity this year.
(16) Growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt this year is projected to
remain near the 8 percent pace posted in 2003.  Household debt growth should slow
as higher mortgage rates damp residential investment and refinancing activity, and so
trim mortgage debt growth.  However, with increases in investment outlays outpacing
gains in profits, business borrowing should gradually pick up, though from a very low
level.  Federal debt growth is also expected to be a little higher this year, reflecting the
wider deficit, before falling back next year as fiscal policy moves toward restraint.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(17) Should the Committee wish to follow the same procedure as at the last
two meetings, it could vote on the directive and on the language of the assessment of
risks.  Draft language with a range of options for the assessment of risks identical to
those presented in Table 1 is provided below.
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around _______ 1 percent.
(2) Risk Assessments
(A)  The Committee perceives that the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of sustainable growth for the next few quarters are roughly
equal.  Similarly, the upside and downside risks to the goal of price
stability are seen as roughly equal.  Nonetheless, with inflation low and
resource use slack, the Committee believes that it can be patient in
removing its policy accommodation.
(B)  The Committee perceives that the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of sustainable growth for the next few quarters are roughly
equal.  Similarly, the upside and downside risks to the goal of price
stability are seen as roughly equal.  At this juncture, with inflation low
and resource use slack, the Committee believes that policy
accommodation can likely be removed at a measured pace.
(C)  With this policy action, the Committee perceives that the upside and
downside risks to the attainment of sustainable growth for the next few
quarters are roughly equal.  Similarly, the upside and downside risks to
the goal of price stability are seen as roughly equal.  Even following
today’s action, the Committee judges that the stance of policy is quite
accommodative.  However, with inflation low and resource use slack, the
Committee believes that policy accommodation can likely be removed at
a measured pace.
M2 Growth Under Alternative Policy Actions
No Tighten
Change 25 bp
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, Bt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt-yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, it-1 the lagged federal
funds rate, gt-1 the residual from the rule’s prescription the previous quarter, (yt+3|t-yt+3|t
*) the staff’s
three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap, () yt+3|t-) yt+3|t
*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less
potential output growth three quarters ahead, Bt+3|t a three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t-
ut+3|t
*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast of the unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from
the Greenbook and staff memoranda closest to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Rule Specification
Root-mean-
square error
Coefficients are benchmark values, not estimated.
it = 2 + Bt + 0.5(yt-yt
*) + 0.5(Bt-
2)
.92 .87
Coefficients are benchmark values, not estimated.
it = 2 + Bt + (yt-yt
*) + 0.5(Bt-2) .74 .75
Rule includes both lagged interest rate and serial
correlation in residual.
it = 0.55it-1 + 0.45 [1.17
 + 0.96(yt-yt
*) + 1.45Bt]+ 0.42gt-1
.25 .27
Rule includes both lagged interest rate and serial
correlation in residual.
it = 0.72it-1 + 0.28 [0.65
 + 1.05(yt+3|t-yt+3|t
*) + 1.57Bt+3|t]
 + 0.36gt-1
.26 .28
Unemployment and inflation forecasts are from
semiannual “central tendency” of FOM C forecasts,
interpolated if necessary to yield 3-qtr-ahead values;
u t* forecast is from staff memoranda.  Inflation
forecasts are adjusted to core PCE deflator basis.  Rule
is estimated at semiannual frequency, and projected
forward using G reenbook forecasts.
it = 0.49it-2 + 0.51 [0.26
 ! 2.10(ut+3|t-ut+3|t
*) + 1.60Bt+3|t] .45 .72
Coefficients are benchmark values, not estimated.
it = it-1 + 0.5() yt+3|t-) yt+3|t
*)
 + 0.5(Bt+3|t-2)
.87 .32
From Financial Markets
Bcomp5|t denotes the time-t difference between 5-yr
nominal Treasury yields and TIPS.  Sample begins in
it = 0.96it-1+ [-1.31 + 0.76Bcomp5|t] .44# .48
# RMSE calculated for 1999:1-2004:1.
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
p - preliminary data
Apr 
May 
Jun 
Jul 
Aug 
Sep  
Oct  
Nov  
Dec  
     
Jan  
Feb  
Mar
Feb  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Apr  
Apr  
Apr  
Apr  
Apr
Apr  
Apr  
Apr  
Apr  
Apr  
Apr  
Apr  
Apr  
Apr  
Apr  
Apr  
Apr  
Apr
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money Aggregates
Seasonally adjusted
nontransactions components
Annual growth rates(%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
  2001
  2002
  2003
Quarterly(average)
  2003-Q2
       Q3
       Q4
  2004-Q1
Monthly
  2003-Apr.
       May
       June
       July
       Aug.
       Sep.
       Oct.
       Nov.
       Dec.
Levels ($billions):
Monthly
  2003-Nov.
       Dec.
  2004-Jan.
       Feb.
       Mar.
Weekly
  2004-Mar.  1
             8
            15
            22
            29
Apr.  5
            12p
            19p
Period
In M3 onlyIn M2
p    prel iminary   
 e    est imated
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 Strictly Confidential
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted) Class II FOMC
April 29, 2004
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5 
Agency total
Intermeeting Period
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
