Content last modified 05/27/2010.
Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) March 11, 2004
Class I – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Although the Committee’s decision at its January meeting to leave the
target federal funds rate at 1 percent had been widely anticipated by financial market
participants, the substitution of the “can be patient” clause for the “considerable
period” phrase in the announcement elicited an appreciable market reaction.
Investors apparently perceived the wording change as a precursor of policy tightening
and brought forward the expected onset of firming from the fall to the summer
(Chart 1).  That sentiment did not persist:  The Chairman’s monetary policy testimony
and weaker-than-expected data on nonfarm payroll employment for January and,
especially, February seemed to reassure investors that policy tightening was some way
off.  Implied federal funds rates fell as much as 55 basis points, on net, over the
intermeeting period and now indicate that a full 25 basis points of tightening is not
expected until around year-end.  According to a recent survey by the Trading Desk,
none of the twenty-three primary dealers expect a change in the funds rate target at
this meeting, and about two-fifths anticipate firming to be deferred until next year.1
(2) Movements in nominal Treasury yields during the intermeeting period
tracked changes in policy expectations, with intermediate- and long-term Treasury
yields falling about 20 to 35 basis points on net.  Market participants continued to
speculate that heavy purchases of Treasury securities by foreign official institutions
were holding down these yields, but, as discussed in the box entitled “Foreign Official
Holdings of U.S. Treasury Securities,” such effects are difficult to quantify.  Late in
the period, the shortening duration of mortgages as prepayment risks picked up led to
Foreign Official Holdings of U.S. Treasury Securities
Foreign official holdings of U.S. Treasury securities have increased
rapidly in recent years,
.   Treasury securities held in custody for foreign official
institutions at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York have expanded more
than $275 billion since mid-2002, to about $900 billion–or about one-quarter
of all outstanding marketable Treasury securities (Chart).  Market participants
have been interpreting the elevated level of indirect bidding at auctions as
evidence of increased participation by these institutions.
Some market participants have argued that purchases by foreign official
institutions have depressed Treasury yields.  While the run-up in foreign
official holdings coincided with declines in Treasury yields, it is difficult to
quantify the effects of these purchases.  One might presume that the purchases
would have some impact because they have been quite large–amounting to
about one-third of net Treasury issuance since 2002–and have been made by
entities that generally do not substitute among alternative instruments.  That
said, the considerable size and liquidity of the Treasury market should tend to
limit any price consequences.  Moreover, some of these institutions have
concentrated their purchases in shorter-term securities, where more private
assets are available to other investors as substitutes and where prices are more
strongly anchored by monetary policy expectations.  In that regard, swap
spreads have generally narrowed, on balance, since mid-2002, in contrast to the
widening that would be expected if foreign official purchases were shifting the
overall balance of demand toward Treasury securities.
.  The Desk did not intervene during the period
for the accounts of the System or the Treasury.
hedging flows that may also have contributed to the downdraft in yields.  Yields on
inflation-indexed Treasury securities declined roughly in line with their nominal
counterparts over the intermeeting period, leaving inflation compensation little
changed.  Yields on high-grade corporate securities followed those on comparable
Treasury securities (Chart 2).  In contrast, spreads on speculative-grade corporate
bonds, particularly at the lowest quality levels, climbed 20 to 120 basis points, as
investors apparently reassessed the riskiness of weaker firms in the wake of soft
economic data releases.  Also probably indicative of concerns about the economy–and
renewed worries about terrorism more recently–was the 3 to 8 percent declines in
major equity indexes.  These share price declines were posted even as analysts
continued to revise up their earnings forecasts, implying a widening of the spread of
the forward-looking earnings-price ratio for the S&P 500 over the real long-term
Treasury yield, and were associated with an uptick in forward-looking measures of
price volatility.
(3) The foreign exchange value of the dollar against other major currencies
varied widely over the intermeeting period (Chart 3).  The dollar declined, on net, until
the middle of February, but subsequently rebounded to end the period up almost
versus the euro, and 1½ percent versus the Canadian dollar and the British pound.
Japanese authorities made frequent and large intervention purchases of
dollars–including during periods when the dollar was rising–which may have bolstered
the dollar’s performance against the yen.2  Factors supporting the dollar against
European currencies are harder to identify, but remarks by some euro-area leaders
calling for monetary policy easing by the ECB may have contributed to a change in
sentiment.  Despite this talk, the ECB held policy steady throughout the period.  The
Bank of England tightened policy 25 basis points in early February, citing concerns
about rising house prices, and the Bank of Canada cut its policy rate 25 basis points in
early March as inflation there dipped further below its target.  Stock prices in most
foreign industrial countries rose modestly over much of the period, but erased those
gains today in the wake of the act of terrorism in Madrid.  Yields on long-term
government bonds generally declined–albeit slightly less than those on comparable
U.S. Treasury securities.  Amid further signs of gathering economic strength in Japan,
share prices rose, and long-term yields were about unchanged.
(4) The dollar rose slightly against an index of currencies of our other
important trading partners.  The Bank of Mexico tightened policy in February, its first
firming in nearly a year.  The Mexican peso traded in a narrow range and declined
about 1 percent on net vis-a-vis the dollar over the intermeeting period.  Brazil’s
EMBI+ spread widened 130 basis points, to about 5½ percentage points, and
Brazilian share prices dropped sharply, as prospects for the government’s reform
program worsened in the face of a corruption scandal.  Asian stock markets recorded
mixed performances amid concerns about the possible adverse effects of avian flu,
but sentiment about the region remained positive overall as economic activity
continued to be buoyant.
(5) Debt of the domestic nonfinancial sectors appears to have accelerated of
late and is anticipated to rise at an 8 percent pace in the first quarter.  Although
businesses remain flush with funds in the aggregate, they have stepped up their
borrowing both in financial markets and from banks (Chart 4).  For the nonfinancial
business sector as a whole, debt is estimated to be expanding at a 5 percent rate this
quarter, a bit faster than in the fourth quarter.  In the household sector, debt is on
track to grow at a 9 percent rate in the first quarter.  Consumer credit growth
registered a substantial pickup in January from the slow pace at the end of last year,
and low interest rates and higher house prices have supported mortgage debt growth.
Federal debt is projected to expand at a nearly 13 percent rate this quarter.
(6) After four consecutive months of decline, M2 edged up in January and
expanded at a 10¼ percent rate in February.  The depressing effect of the earlier
drop-off in mortgage refinancing has apparently waned so that the ongoing robust
growth of nominal income is now showing through to M2 growth.
Policy Alternatives
(7)  Economic data released over the intermeeting period, especially readings
on the labor market, fell short of staff expectations, and the projection of GDP growth
over the first half of this year has been marked down about ½ percentage point relative
to that in the January Greenbook.  Still, accommodative monetary policy and robust
productivity gains are expected to support output growth later this year and next,
leaving the projection little changed over that period.  In this Greenbook as in the
previous one, the staff assumes that the Committee will begin to tighten policy in 2005,
raising the target federal funds rate to 2 percent by the end of that year.  Stock prices
are anticipated to appreciate from current levels at a rate that provides investors with
risk-adjusted returns comparable to those on fixed-income instruments.  Longer-term
Treasury yields increase gradually over the forecast period, but corporate yields are
expected to hold steady as the improvement in the economic outlook trims risk
spreads.  The dollar is again assumed to depreciate gradually, albeit starting from its
current higher level.  The downward revision to economic growth forecasted over the
first half of this year implies less headway in reducing resource slack.  Although the
output gap is cut by more than half over the next two years, it follows a track about
½ percentage point deeper than that in the last Greenbook and ends 2005 at around
¾ percent.  The output gap puts downward pressure on inflation over the forecast
horizon, offsetting upward pressures from higher oil and non-oil import prices.  On
net, core PCE inflation is projected to hold steady near 1 percent this year and next.
As compared with the forecasts of the Board members and Bank presidents prepared
for the January meeting, the staff anticipates that real GDP will grow at the top end of
policymakers’ central tendency of 4½ to 5 percent for 2004 and that inflation will
come in at the lower end of the 1 to 1¼ percent central tendency.
(8) At its last meeting, the Committee instructed the staff to include a more
complete analysis in the Bluebook of possible wording choices for the policy
announcement (see box entitled “Some General Issues Concerning Statement
Language”).  Given current economic circumstances and the Committee’s January
policy announcement, the staff viewed a change in the federal funds rate at this
Some General Issues Concerning Statement Language
As is evident in the chart below, the words of the FOMC’s statements are important:  The
overall tone and content of FOMC statements can elicit significant immediate market
reactions and sometimes may color the way market participants respond to subsequent
incoming news and events.  But while “words matter” in FOMC communications,
statement language should not be viewed as an independent instrument of monetary policy. 
Presumably, the statement influences markets because participants believe that it conveys
information that bears directly or indirectly on potential future policy actions.  Thus, at least
over the longer run, the importance of statement language depends on its connection with
observed policy actions.
The likely market reaction to an FOMC statement is hard to judge.  When the policy rate is
changed, one can forecast the market reaction by using surveys and interest rate futures to
measure ex-ante market expectations.  When only the wording of the announcement is
changed, predicting the market reaction is much more problematic.  There is no simple way
to map alternative wording in FOMC statements into basis-point equivalents to arrive at
the analogue of a policy rate change.  And even if this were possible, one would still need to
know the language that the market expects.  These caveats notwithstanding, the discussion
in this Bluebook does hazard speculations about likely market reactions to alternative
FOMC statements; these represent the staff’s best guesses of the likely market reactions,
but the confidence intervals are quite wide.
meeting as sufficiently unlikely that this Bluebook presents three draft FOMC
statements associated with an unchanged funds rate.  These alternatives–A, B, and C in
Table 1–are differentiated solely by their characterizations of the economy in the
rationale paragraph and in the balance-of-risks assessment.3
Alternative B
(9) Although economic data over the intermeeting period have generally run
on the soft side of expectations, the Committee might still believe that, with financial
conditions registering only a small net change, the economy is positioned to attain
sustainable economic growth with measures of core inflation remaining close to levels
that many members have characterized as effective price stability.  While the
Committee may be disappointed that economic slack now seems likely to persist at a
higher level than anticipated in January, it might also judge that additional policy ease
would likely have its most stimulative effects when the economy was already close to
its potential.  The case for inaction may be compelling even if members harbor some
doubts about the outlook.  On the one hand, were capital spending to expand more
slowly than in the staff forecast, the alternative simulation in the Greenbook tracing
out the effects of lingering caution on the part of business executives would suggest
that overall GDP growth would not be materially impaired.  On the other hand, if the
Committee believed that pressures on resources might build relatively quickly, the
potential costs of a policy error associated with an unchanged policy stance might still
be judged to be less worrisome than the costs that could be associated with tightening
policy at this time.  While the current degree of policy accommodation cannot be
sustained in the long run, market participants are not likely to view retention of the
current stance of policy as a reason to mark up inflation expectations, given persisting
resource slack and rapid productivity growth.
(10) In these circumstances, the Committee might choose to retain the January
FOMC statement essentially in its entirety, with only minor revisions similar to those
Table 1: FOMC Statement Alternatives
January FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
The Federal Open Market Committee decided
today to keep its target for the federal funds rate
at 1 percent.
Unchanged Unchanged Unchanged
The Comm ittee continues to believe that an
accommodative stance of monetary policy,
coupled with robust underlying growth in
productivity, is providing important ongoing
support to economic activity.
Unchanged Unchanged Unchanged
The evidence accumulated over the intermeeting
period confirms that output is expanding briskly.
The evidence accumulated over the
intermeeting period indicates that
output is continuing to expand
The evidence accumulated
over the intermeeting period
indicates that output is
continuing to expand briskly.
The evidence accumulated over the intermeeting
period  indicates that output is continuing to
expand briskly.
Although new hiring remains subdued, other
indicators suggest an improvement in the labor
New hiring has been disappointing
and resource utilization generally
appears likely to remain somewhat
below levels consistent with the
economy operating at its
productive potential for some time.
Although new hiring has
been disappointing, other
indicators suggest continued
improvement in the labor
Although new hiring remains subdued, other
indicators suggest continued improvement in the
labor market.
Increases in core consumer prices are muted and
expected to remain low. Unchanged Unchanged
To date, increases in core consumer prices have
been muted  and inflation expectations remain
The Comm ittee perceives that the upside and
downside risks to the attainm ent of susta inable
growth for the next few quarters are roughly
Unchanged Unchanged Unchanged
The probability of an unwelcome fall in inflation
has diminished in recent months and now appears
almost equal to that of a rise in inflation.
The probability, though minor, of
an unwelcome fall in inflation has
diminished in recent months but
likely exceeds that of a rise in
The probability of a rise in inflation about equals
that of an unwelcome decline in inflation.
With inflation quite low and resource use slack,
the Committee believes that it can be patient in
removing its policy accommodation.
Unchanged Unchanged
The Comm ittee recognizes that the stance of
monetary policy has been quite accommodative
for some time.  Nonetheless, with inflation low
and resource use slack, the Committee believes
that it can still be patient in removing its policy
shown in Alternative B.  Given the incoming data, the Committee might wish to
acknowledge that the pace of new hiring has been “disappointing” but note that other
indicators point to “continued” improvement in the labor market.  Also, the Committee
might want to state that “evidence . . .indicates that output is continuing to expand briskly.”  If
the Committee’s sense of the economic risks has not changed greatly since the January
meeting, the wording of the January balance-of-risks assessment would seem
appropriate at this meeting.  Market participants would likely read such a statement as
confirming that the Committee’s economic and policy outlook is basically unchanged,
and any market reaction to the statement would probably be small.
Alternative C
(11) In contrast, the Committee may have become more confident, in view of
continued brisk spending growth and gains in manufacturing output, that the
expansion has become self-sustaining.  To be sure, news about the labor market has
been disappointing, but this may point to continued strong gains in productivity.
Indicators generally suggest that aggregate demand is holding up quite well.  The recent
strength of capital spending has been particularly noteworthy, perhaps offering
increasingly concrete evidence that the pervasive gloom about business prospects
evinced by corporate executives over much of the last two years is lifting.  Against that
backdrop, the Committee also might be more wary about the risk that inflation
pressures could begin to emerge despite the current output gap.  Indeed, rising oil and
commodity prices might be cited as hints of inflation pressures.  As in the alternative
simulation presented in the Greenbook, a significant pickup in inflation expectations
would pull real interest rates below their already-low levels and gradually feed into
actual inflation.  However, even if the Committee viewed these arguments as
compelling, it might see some benefit in deferring tightening to a time when markets
were better prepared for such action.
(12) Given this assessment, the Committee might wish to issue a statement
structured like that in Alternative C.  The Committee could convey some sense of
increased wariness about inflation pressures in the final sentence of the rationale
paragraph by noting simply that “To date, increases in core consumer prices have been muted and
inflation expectations remain contained,” eliminating the forward-looking phrase “and are
expected to remain low” that appeared in the January statement.  This tone could be
reinforced by modest revisions in the balance-of-risks assessment.  For example, the
Committee could indicate a slight change in its inflation outlook by stating that “the
probability of a rise in inflation about equals that of an unwelcome decline in inflation.”  Lastly,
while the Committee may not be prepared at this meeting to dispense with references
to “patience,” it might wish to add a sentence that hints that its patience is not
unlimited.  This could be accomplished with an insertion so that the revised passage
read, “The Committee recognizes that the stance of monetary policy has been quite accommodative for
some time.  Nonetheless, with inflation low and resource use slack, the Committee believes that it can
still be patient in removing its policy accommodation.”  Market participants would be quick to
notice these revisions and, in all likelihood, would interpret the changes as further steps
aimed at clearing the way for an eventual return of the target federal funds rate to a
more neutral setting.  Interest rates likely would move up on that reading, resulting in a
concomitant dip in stock prices, but the retention of some reference to patience would
likely diminish the odds of an outsized market reaction.
Alternative A
(13) The Committee might view the jury as still out as to whether the
expansion has become self-sustaining at the current setting of policy.  Indeed,
members might regard the continued sluggishness in employment as a sign that
businesses similarly have yet to reach a judgment on that score.  And with fiscal
impetus expected to wane, there may be some concern that weak employment growth
could begin to weigh on consumer confidence and spending, eventually calling for an
easing of policy.  Such concern might be all the more acute if the Committee viewed a
stable nominal funds rate in the face of downward revisions to many measures of the
equilibrium federal funds rate (Chart 5) as an effective tightening of policy.  The
Committee would be particularly uncomfortable with this development if the
prevailing inflation rate were viewed to be already on the low side of its preferred
inflation cushion.  While the Committee might see some benefit to an easier stance of
policy, it might stay its hand at this meeting because of the offsetting risk that currently
benign inflation expectations could respond in an adverse manner if its already
considerable policy accommodation were augmented.
(14) With this view, the Committee might wish to issue a statement structured
like that shown in Alternative A.  The Committee could convey a sense of its concerns
through a somewhat less sanguine assessment of the labor market in the rationale
paragraph.  The third sentence could drop the reference to other indicators pointing to
improvement in labor markets and state simply that “New hiring has been disappointing.”
Adding a clause to this sentence suggesting that “. . .and resource utilization generally appears
likely to remain somewhat below levels consistent with the economy operating at its productive potential
for some time” would underscore the Committee’s concern about economic slack.  The
Committee’s assessment could be amplified still more by modest revisions to its
characterizations of the balance of risks.  For example, the Committee might note that
“the probability, though minor, of an unwelcome fall in inflation has diminished in recent months but
likely exceeds that of a rise in inflation.”  Interest rates would probably move a bit lower
following an announcement of this sort.  Equity prices might be buoyed somewhat if
the statement was read primarily as reaffirming the FOMC’s resolve to foster
sustainable output growth at a pace sufficient to eliminate economic slack.  The rise in
stock prices could be damped or even reversed, however, if investors took the
statement as implying higher odds that the vigor of economic growth could wane over
coming quarters.
Money and Debt Forecast
(15) Stronger money growth of late has led the staff to nudge up its forecast
for M2 growth this year about ½ percentage point, to 5 percent, relative to that in the
January Greenbook.  Still, households are expected to continue tilting the composition
of their portfolios toward capital market instruments at the expense of monetary
assets, pushing up M2 velocity about 1 percent for the year.  The staff forecast for total
domestic nonfinancial debt growth in 2004 has also been marked up by about
½ percentage point.  For the corporate sector, the staff’s projections of profits and
internal funds for this year have been trimmed.  Faced with less ample internal funds
and also heavier funding needs associated with mergers and acquisitions and equity
paydowns, businesses are expected to tap credit markets more intensively.
Nonfinancial business debt growth is now projected at 5½ percent this year, up about
¾ percentage point since the January Greenbook.  Although household debt is
expected to decelerate over the forecast horizon, the forecast for household borrowing
has also been revised up significantly since the last round, primarily on a much stronger
outlook for home price appreciation and the attendant impetus to mortgage
borrowing.  The outlook for federal borrowing is about the same as in the last round.
A sizable fiscal deficit implies growth in federal debt at about a 12¼ percent pace this
year.  Federal debt growth is projected to slow in 2005 with the anticipated expiration
of investment tax incentives at the end of this year and as tax receipts pick up as the
economy expands.  On balance, total domestic nonfinancial debt growth–projected at
about 2 percentage points.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(16) Should the Committee wish to follow the same procedure as at the
January meeting, it could vote on the directive and on the language of the assessment
of risks.  Draft language with a range of options for the assessment of risks consistent
with those described in Table 1 is provided below.
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve
markets consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds
rate at/TO an average of around _______ 1 percent.
(2) Risk Assessments
(A)  The Committee perceives that the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of sustainable growth for the next few quarters are roughly
equal.  The probability, though minor, of an unwelcome fall in inflation
has diminished in recent months but likely exceeds that of a rise in
inflation.  With inflation quite low and resource use slack, the Committee
believes that it can be patient in removing its policy accommodation.
(B)  The Committee perceives that the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of sustainable growth for the next few quarters are roughly
equal.  The probability of an unwelcome fall in inflation has diminished in
recent months and now appears almost equal to that of a rise in inflation.
With inflation quite low and resource use slack, the Committee believes
that it can be patient in removing its policy accommodation.
(C)  The Committee perceives that the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of sustainable growth for the next few quarters are roughly
equal.  The probability of a rise in inflation about equals that of an
unwelcome decline in inflation.  The Committee recognizes that the
stance of monetary policy has been quite accommodative for some time.
Nonetheless, with inflation low and resource use slack, the Committee
believes that it can still be patient in removing its policy accommodation.
M2 Growth Rate*
* Forecasted M2 growth is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, Bt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt-yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, it-1 the lagged federal
funds rate, gt-1 the residual from the rule’s prescription the previous quarter, (yt+3|t-yt+3|t
*) the staff’s
three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap, () yt+3|t-) yt+3|t
*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less
potential output growth three quarters ahead, Bt+3|t a three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t-
ut+3|t
*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast of the unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from
the Greenbook and staff memoranda closest to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Rule Specification
Root-mean-
square error
Coefficients are benchmark values, not estimated.
it = 2 + Bt + 0.5(yt-yt
*) + 0.5(Bt-
2)
.92 .90
Coefficients are benchmark values, not estimated.
it = 2 + Bt + (yt-yt
*) + 0.5(Bt-2) .75 .77
Rule includes both lagged interest rate and serial
correlation in residual.
it = 0.55it-1 + 0.45 [1.18
 + 0.96(yt-yt
*) + 1.45Bt]+ 0.43gt-1
.25 .28
Rule includes both lagged interest rate and serial
correlation in residual.
it = 0.71it-1 + 0.29 [0.72
 + 1.04(yt+3|t-yt+3|t
*) + 1.55Bt+3|t]
 + 0.35gt-1
.26 .29
Unemployment and inflation forecasts are from
semiannual “central tendency” of FOM C forecasts,
interpolated if necessary to yield 3-qtr-ahead values;
u t* forecast is from staff memoranda.  Inflation
forecasts are adjusted to core PCE deflator basis.  Rule
is estimated at semiannual frequency, and projected
forward using G reenbook forecasts.
it = 0.48it-2 + 0.51 [0.31
 ! 2.09(ut+3|t-ut+3|t
*) + 1.59Bt+3|t] .45 .72
Coefficients are benchmark values, not estimated.
it = it-1 + 0.5() yt+3|t-) yt+3|t
*)
 + 0.5(Bt+3|t-2)
.87 .33
From Financial Markets
Bcomp5|t denotes the time-t difference between 5-yr
nominal Treasury yields and TIPS.  Sample begins in
it = 0.94it-1+ [-1.39 + 0.84Bcomp5|t] .44# .49
# RMSE calculated for 1999-2003 period.
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
p - preliminary data
Mar 
Apr 
May 
Jun 
Jul 
Aug  
Sep  
Oct  
Nov  
Dec  
     
Jan  
Feb
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Feb  
Feb  
Feb  
Feb  
Mar  
Mar
Feb  
Feb  
Feb  
Feb  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money Aggregates
Seasonally adjusted
nontransactions components
Annual growth rates(%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
  2001
  2002
  2003
Quarterly(average)
  2003-Q1
       Q2
       Q3
       Q4
Monthly
  2003-Feb.
       Mar.
       Apr.
       May
       June
       July
       Aug.
       Sep.
       Oct.
       Nov.
       Dec.
Levels ($billions):
Monthly
  2003-Oct.
       Nov.
       Dec.
  2004-Jan.
       Feb. p
Weekly
  2004-Feb.  2
             9
            16
            23p
Mar.  1p
Period
In M3 onlyIn M2
p    prel iminary
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 Strictly Confidential
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted) Class II FOMC
March 11, 2004
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5 
Agency total
Intermeeting Period
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
