Content last modified 05/27/2010.
Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
JUNE 24, 2004
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) June 24, 2004
Class I – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The decision at the May 4th FOMC meeting to keep the target federal
funds rate at 1 percent came as no surprise to market participants.  Moreover, the
replacement of the sentence in the announcement reporting that the Committee could
be “patient” in removing policy accommodation with one indicating that “policy
accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured” had little net
effect on money market futures rates that afternoon.1  In subsequent weeks, however,
investors marked up the extent of expected policy tightening significantly in response
to economic releases that indicated robust gains in employment and spending and
somewhat elevated inflation, as well as to comments by Committee members assuring
that policy would be tightened as necessary to contain any incipient inflationary
pressures.  Current readings on near-term money market futures and options suggest
that market participants are nearly certain of a 25-basis-point increase in the target
federal funds rate at this meeting.  All twenty-three primary dealers responding to the
most recent survey by the Trading Desk expect the FOMC to retain the reference to a
“measured” pace of tightening or to substitute a close variant in its announcement
(Chart 1).  Most dealers also expect the statement to indicate balanced risks with
respect to price stability and output, although a few anticipate a shift to upside risks to
at least one of these objectives.  Through the end of next year, the expected federal
funds rate indicated by futures quotes is 20 to 40 basis points higher than at the time
of the May meeting, placing the funds rate at about 2¼ percent by the end of this year
and 3¾ percent by the end of 2005.
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
Ten-Year Treasury
Two-Year Treasury
Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Twelve Months Ahead
Six Months Ahead
Policy Uncertainty*
*Width of a 90 percent confidence interval for the federal funds rate
computed from the term structures for both the expected federal funds
rate and implied volatility.
Daily
FOMC
June 24, 2004
May 3, 2004
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premia and other adjustments.
Policy Expectations
Futures Market
Dealer Survey (median)
Growth Risks
Inflation Risks
"Measured" Sentence
Expected Federal Funds Rate
                    (percent)
June Meeting  
      1.25
      1.25
Assessment of Risks Paragraph
          (percent of dealers)
To the Upside
        17
        22
Use "Measured"
        70
Year-End  
       2.24
       2.00
Balanced
        83
        78
Similar Language
        30
Inflation Compensation*
*Based on a comparison of an estimated TIPS yield curve to an estimated
nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
FRB Philadelphia
Michigan
Survey Measures of Long-Term Inflation Expectations
The Recent Behavior of Inflation Compensation
Inflation compensation, as measured by comparing the yields on nominal and indexed
Treasury securities, has moved up appreciably in recent months as incoming economic
data have suggested a more robust expansion and higher inflation than had been
anticipated (lower left-hand panel of Chart 1).  During the intermeeting period, inflation
compensation initially moved higher, at least partly in response to stronger-than-expected
employment data, the high PPI inflation reading for April, and a runup in oil prices, all of
which may have boosted both expected inflation and inflation risk premiums.  Notably,
five-year inflation compensation five years ahead, which had remained in a range between
about 2¾ percent and 3¼ percent since early last summer, increased more than 40 basis
points to almost 3½ percent by mid-May.  This measure of inflation compensation fell
back over the second half of the period, however, reflecting in part responses to the
benign May CPI report and remarks by Chairman Greenspan and other Committee
members emphasizing that monetary policy would be tightened as necessary to keep
inflation in check.  These remarks apparently helped to reduce expected inflation and may
have lowered investors’ perceptions of inflation risk.  On balance, inflation compensation
for the next five years increased 8 basis points over the intermeeting period, and five-year
inflation compensation five years ahead was about unchanged, ending the period in the
middle of its recent range.
While the recent movements in inflation compensation seem to provide plausible
indications of shifts in expected inflation and inflation risk premiums, there are reasons to
be cautious in interpreting these readings.  For example, the indexation of TIPS occurs
with a lag, and so the recent high headline CPI readings may have boosted inflation
compensation above the level consistent with the inflation rate actually expected to prevail
in future months.  In addition, increasing numbers of institutional investors have
reportedly begun purchasing TIPS this year, owing at least in part to an assessment that
the market has become sufficiently large and mature to make investment desirable.  Such
purchases may be pushing TIPS yields lower, boosting measured inflation compensation.
(2) In part reflecting the upward revision in policy expectations, yields on
nominal Treasury coupon securities climbed 10 to 40 basis points over the
intermeeting period.  The shift upward in yields was accounted for by increases in
forward rates at short to intermediate maturities, as forward rates at longer maturities
were little changed on net.  Yields on inflation-indexed Treasury securities rose less
than those on their nominal counterparts, as strengthening aggregate demand
reportedly caused inflation compensation to move a little higher.  (The box below
provides more detail on the recent behavior of inflation compensation.)  Some survey
measures of inflation expectations have also ticked up recently.  In the market for
corporate securities, yields on investment- and speculative-grade bonds generally rose
by about the same amounts as those on comparable Treasuries, leaving risk spreads
about unchanged (Chart 2).  Notwithstanding the backup in interest rates, major
equity indexes edged higher, on net, over the intermeeting period, buoyed by generally
positive news about the economy and earnings prospects.
(3) The dollar depreciated about 2¼ percent, on balance, against other
major currencies over the intermeeting period, driven in part by increased geopolitical
tensions (Chart 3).2  The dollar moved down almost 3 percent against the yen, as new
data in Japan showed a continued firming of economic activity.  The dollar fell about
3 percent against the British pound and 4½ percent against the Swiss franc, as
monetary authorities in both of those countries tightened policy.  Amid some signs
that inflation in many parts of the world may be drifting higher, expected short-term
interest rates in major industrial countries increased noticeably over the intermeeting
period.  Yields on longer-term government bonds in Europe and Canada rose 10 to
25 basis points and those in Japan gained 40 basis points.  Despite higher interest
rates, equity indexes moved in narrow ranges in most countries.
(4) Over the intermeeting period, the dollar edged up a bit against an index
of currencies of our other important trading partners.  Expectations that Chinese
authorities will act to rein in China’s expansion, along with the rise in U.S. interest
rates, drove stock prices down in many countries across Asia, prominently including
Korea and Taiwan.  Indonesian stock prices also dropped significantly amid concerns
about political unrest, and the rupiah fell about 7½ percent over the period.  In Latin
America, both the Mexican peso and the Brazilian real weakened versus the dollar in
the wake of the U.S. employment report for April.  The peso more than retraced its
loss, as incoming data suggested a brightening economic outlook.  Economic activity
picked up in Brazil too, but the real lost nearly 5 percent of its value on concerns
about the stalling of Brazilian fiscal reforms and worries about the sustainability of its
debt position.
Chart 2
Financial Market Indicators
Ten-Year AA
Ten-Year Swap
Higher-Tier Corporate Bond Spreads*
*AA spread measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield
 curve. Swap spread measured relative to the on-the-run Treasury
 security.
Basis Points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year high-yield (right scale)
Lower-Tier Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Mid-
June
S&P 500 EPS Revisions Index
Percent, Monthly Rate
Wilshire
Nasdaq
Stock Prices
Earnings-Price Ratio for S&P 500
and Real Treasury Yield
Monthly
Twelve-Month Forward E/P Ratio
Real Treasury Yield*
*Yield on synthetic Treasury perpetuity minus Philadelphia Fed ten-year 
 expected inflation.
+ Denotes latest daily observation, June 23, 2004.
Daily
FOMC
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Ten-year Government Bond Yields
Percent
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
FOMC
Daily
Nominal Trade-weighted Dollar
Indexes Index(12/31/02=100)
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
FOMC
Daily
EMBI+ Index
Basis Points
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr.
Commodity Prices
$U.S./ounce $U.S./barrel
Gold (left scale)
Oil (right scale)
(5) Business demands for credit have remained subdued in recent months,
as internal funds for the most part again have sufficed to finance higher capital
expenditures and some inventory restocking.  Short-term business debt posted small
increases in May and in the first part of June, but corporate bonds outstanding have
declined on net as higher interest rates have depressed issuance (Chart 4). 
Nevertheless, credit seems to be readily available to businesses:  Bond risk spreads are
relatively narrow, and the May Survey of Terms of Business Lending showed that
spreads on C&I loans not made under a previous commitment—which should reflect
current loan pricing—declined noticeably in the second quarter.  Borrowing by
households, while still brisk, appears to be slowing somewhat in the second quarter in
response to rising interest rates and an accompanying deceleration in mortgage and
consumer debt.  With federal debt continuing to expand rapidly, total domestic
nonfinancial sector debt is expected to advance at about a 7¼ percent annual rate in
the current quarter, more than a percentage point below its first-quarter pace.
(6) M2 surged at a 13 percent annual rate in May after advancing at an
almost 9 percent pace in March and April.  The brisk expansion of the money stock
since late winter followed on the heels of a record contraction in the fourth quarter of
2003 and tepid growth in January.  This pattern may have partly reflected the
transitory effects of considerable swings in mortgage refinancing activity.  Strong gains
in nominal income and perhaps portfolio shifts by households out of equities and
bonds have buoyed M2.  Nonetheless, data for the first half of June suggest much
slower growth.  For the second quarter as a whole, M2 velocity declined after three
quarters of expansion, albeit to a level still appreciably above that suggested by
historical relationships between velocity and opportunity costs.
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Applications
(left axis)
Originations
(right axis)
June
 e
June
 e
Source. Staff estimates.
e Estimated.
Mortgage Refinancing Activity
$BillionsIndex(3/16/90 = 100)
Monthly, s.a. Monthly, s.a.
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
Monthly rate
Growth of Household Debt Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
e Estimated.
Q2
 e
Q2
 e
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of Federal Debt
e Estimated.
Note. Treasury debt held by the public at period-end.
Velocity
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
Percent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
Includes estimated data for the second quarter of 2004.
*Two-quarter moving average.
Equity Funds
Bond Funds*
Net Inflows to Equity
and Bond Mutual Funds
Monthly rate, n.s.a.
* Includes hybrid funds but excludes reinvested dividends.
e Estimated.
Policy Alternatives
(7) Incoming information over the intermeeting period tended to confirm
that the economy is expanding briskly but suggested somewhat higher underlying
inflation than had previously been thought.  Accordingly, the staff has marked up its
inflation projection a bit.  In putting together its forecast, the staff has assumed that
the FOMC will respond to the higher path of inflation by tightening policy earlier and
by more than in the previous Greenbook, with the target federal funds rate increasing
75 basis points by the fourth quarter of this year and 200 basis points by the fourth
quarter of next year—still somewhat less than apparently anticipated by market
participants.  Despite the assumed firming of policy, yields on longer-term Treasury
securities remain near current levels as investors come to realize that policy will not
need to be tightened quite as rapidly as currently built into market prices, and equity
values rise at a pace sufficient to provide a risk-adjusted return comparable to those
on fixed-income instruments.  Oil prices are anticipated to edge lower over the
forecast period—albeit along a trajectory about $3 a barrel above the last projection. 
Given this backdrop, real GDP expands at a 5 percent annual rate over the second
half of 2004 before slowing to 3½ percent in 2005, with the deceleration owing in part
to a shift toward fiscal restraint next year and progressively less accommodative
monetary policy.  The projected growth in real activity exceeds the estimated rate of
expansion of the economy’s potential, especially this year, and the unemployment rate
declines by the end of the forecast horizon to 5¼ percent, a touch above its estimated
natural rate.  With actual GDP lingering below potential output, import prices
decelerating, and oil prices unwinding some of their recent surge, core PCE inflation
is projected to edge down to 1½ percent next year.  Total PCE inflation is about
2 percent this year and 1¼ percent next year.
Longer-run Scenarios
(8) To analyze strategies and risks for monetary policy, several simulations
were conducted using a new version of the FRB-US model that embodies model-
consistent expectations in asset pricing.  In this variant, financial markets are assumed
to have perfect foresight regarding the future path of the federal funds rate, while the
expectations of households and firms are based on statistical forecasts generated from
a limited subset of variables, as in the standard version of the FRB-US model.
(9)  The baseline for these simulations was prepared by using the FRB-US
model (with judgmental adjustments) to extend the staff forecast through the end of
the decade.  On the supply side, potential output is projected to grow 3½ to 4 percent
per year over this period, premised on the underlying assumption that structural
multifactor productivity increases at an annual rate of about 1¾ percent.  The NAIRU
is assumed to hold at 5 percent.  As for aggregate demand, the household saving rate
is expected to rise gradually back toward its historical norm, while the unified federal
budget deficit increases from 2¼ percent of nominal GDP in 2005 to nearly 
2¾ percent in 2010.  Despite real depreciation of the foreign exchange value of the
dollar of 4 percent per year, the current account deficit is projected to widen further,
reaching 7 percent of nominal GDP by the end of the decade.  The stance of
monetary policy is assumed to adjust in response to these supply and demand factors
so as to keep core PCE inflation close to 1½ percent throughout the decade and to
facilitate the return of the unemployment rate to its natural rate.  In particular, the
nominal federal funds rate rises to 4¼ percent as the real federal funds rate settles at a
long-run equilibrium level of about 2¾ percent.
(10) The first simulation determines an optimal path for the federal funds
rate from mid-2004 forward assuming that policymakers have an equal distaste for
deviations in unemployment from its natural rate, deviations in inflation from a long-
run goal, and changes in the federal funds rate.3  This exercise is similar in spirit to the
“policymaker perfect foresight” simulations that have appeared in previous
Bluebooks, but the assumption that asset prices are based on model-consistent
expectations implies that policymakers are not able to fool investors systematically. 
The long-run objective for core PCE inflation is taken to be 1½ percent, the same as
in the Greenbook extension.  As shown in the upper panel of Chart 5, the optimal
funds rate follows a path similar to that built into the baseline, resulting in similar
trajectories for inflation and the unemployment rate as well.4
(11) Chart 6 displays results under alternative assumptions about the inflation
objective, with 1½ percent serving as the benchmark.  Under an objective of
1 percent, the optimal policy implies a more rapid increase in the funds rate; by mid-
2005, the funds rate exceeds the optimum path for the benchmark case by about
75 basis points.  Because households and firms (unlike investors) only gradually revise
their beliefs about long-run policy objectives, rapid disinflation would require an
immediate and sizable opening of an output gap.  The optimal policy avoids such an
extreme and instead pursues a gradual decline in inflation and a small and persistent
rise in unemployment.5  With an inflation objective of 2 percent, the optimal
tightening in policy this year and next is attenuated.  The nominal funds rate
eventually exceeds that of the baseline, but the real funds rate remains lower—and a
bit below its equilibrium value—through 2010, fostering a gradual pickup in inflation. 
The unemployment rate declines somewhat more quickly than in the benchmark case
and then remains below the NAIRU throughout the remainder of the decade.  
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(12) Table 1 presents three alternatives for near-term policy for the
Committee’s consideration, including drafts of language for the announcement. 
Under Alternative A, the existing stance of policy would be maintained at this
meeting.  Alternative B would raise the target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis
Chart 5
Optimal Policy for the Benchmark Inflation Objective
Real Federal Funds Rate
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Greenbook Baseline
Optimal Policy
Civilian Unemployment Rate
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Chart 6
Optimal Policy with Alternative Inflation Objectives
Real Federal Funds Rate
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Inflation objective
1 percent
1.5 percent
2 percent
(Four-quarter percent change)
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Table 1: FOMC Statement Alternatives for the June Bluebook
May FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy
Decision
[Unchanged]
The Federal Open Market Committee
decided today to raise its target for the
federal funds rate to 1¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee
decided today to raise its target for the
federal funds rate to 1½ percent.
[Unchanged]
The Committee believes that, even
after this action, the stance of
monetary policy remains
accommodative and, coupled with
robust underlying growth in
productivity, is providing ongoing
support to economic activity.
The Committee believes that, even after
this action, the stance of monetary policy
remains accommodative and, coupled
with robust underlying growth in
productivity, is providing ongoing
support to economic activity.
The evidence accumulated over the
intermeeting period indicates that
output is continuing to expand at a
solid rate and hiring has picked up.
The evidence accumulated over the
intermeeting period indicates that
output is continuing to expand at a
solid rate and hiring has picked up.
The evidence accumulated over the
intermeeting period indicates that, with
output expanding at a solid rate and
hiring having picked up, the economic
expansion is now well established.
Although incoming inflation data are
somewhat elevated, a portion of the
increase in recent months
presumably has been due to
transitory factors.
Although incoming inflation data are
somewhat elevated, a portion of the
increase in recent months has been due
to transitory factors.
Incoming inflation data are somewhat
elevated, and long-term inflation
expectations have shown some tendency
to edge higher.
Assessment 
of
The Committee perceives that the
upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable
growth and price stability for the
next few quarters are roughly equal.
The Committee perceives that the
upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth
and price stability for the next few
quarters are roughly equal.
The Committee perceives that the upside
and downside risks to the attainment of
sustainable growth for the next few
quarters are roughly equal.
[Covered above] [Covered above] However, the upside risks to the goal of
price stability now appear to outweigh
the downside risks.
With underlying inflation still
relatively low and resource use slack,
the Committee believes that policy
accommodation can be removed at a
pace that is likely to be measured.
With underlying inflation still expected
to be relatively low, the Committee
judges the outlook to be such that
policy accommodation can be
removed at a pace that is likely to be
measured.  Nonetheless, the
Committee will respond to changes in
economic prospects as needed to fulfill
its obligation to maintain price stability
so as to foster maximum sustainable
economic growth.
points to 1¼ percent.  Alternative C would boost the funds rate by 50 basis points to
1½ percent.  In these alternatives, the Committee could update its description of the
current situation in part by indicating more definitively than previously that “hiring has
picked up” and by characterizing recent inflation developments according to its
interpretation of recent events.
(13) If the Committee finds the staff analysis in the Greenbook compelling
and the forecasted outcome about the best available in current circumstances, it might
implement the 25 basis point firming of Alternative B.  Any earlier concerns the
Committee may have harbored about the sustainability of the expansion probably
have been assuaged by recent economic indicators, including the past few
employment releases and anecdotal information such as that contained in the June
Beigebook.  Meanwhile, inflation has run on the high side of late—above both staff
projections made early this year and the Committee’s expectations for 2004 revealed
in the central tendency projections published in the February Monetary Policy Report. 
Moreover, according to a wide range of estimates, the current real federal funds rate is
distinctly below its likely equilibrium value (Chart 7) and also lies below the
prescriptions from a variety of policy rules (Chart 8).  In view of these considerations,
the Committee may feel that the time has come to begin returning the real federal
funds rate to a more neutral level.  At the same time, the Committee might prefer to
start the process gradually with a 25-basis-point move at this meeting so as to
promote an orderly transition to a tightening cycle in financial markets, particularly
given the widespread interpretation in markets of the Committee’s “measured”
language.  Such a modest move would also be favored if the Committee, like the staff,
sees underlying inflation as still low and a considerable degree of slack remaining in
resource markets.
(14) In announcing implementation of Alternative B, the Committee would
presumably want to modify its existing indication that the accommodative stance of
policy is providing “important” support to economic activity but could retain the
associated point regarding the impetus given by productivity.  One way to accomplish
this is to say that “. . . even after this action, the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative
Chart 7
Actual Real Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Estimated Equilibrium Real Rates
Actual Real Funds Rate
TIPS-Based Estimate
Historical Average: 2.64
  (1964Q1-2004Q1)
● Current Rate
Equilibrium Real Funds Rate Estimates (Percent)
May Bluebook
May Bluebook
May Bluebook
May Bluebook
May Bluebook
Statistical Filter
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data*
FRB/US Model
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data**
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities
*   Also employs the staff projection for the second and third quarters of 2004.
**  Also employs the staff projection for the second quarter of 2004.
Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, Bt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt-yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, it-1 the lagged federal
funds rate, gt-1 the residual from the rule’s prescription the previous quarter, (yt+3|t-yt+3|t*) the staff’s
three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap, () yt+3|t-) yt+3|t*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less
potential output growth three quarters ahead, Bt+3|t a three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t-
ut+3|t*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast of the unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from
the Greenbook and staff memoranda closest to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Rule Specification
Root-mean-
square error
it = 2 + Bt + 0.5(yt-yt*) + 0.5(Bt-
2) .92 .87
it = 2 + Bt + (yt-yt*) + 0.5(Bt-2) .74 .75
it = 0.55it-1 + 0.45 [1.17
 + 0.96(yt-yt*) + 1.45Bt]+ 0.42gt-1 .25 .27
it = 0.72it-1 + 0.28 [0.65
 + 1.05(yt+3|t-yt+3|t*) + 1.57Bt+3|t]
 + 0.36gt-1
.26 .28
it = 0.49it-2 + 0.51 [0.26
 ! 2.10(ut+3|t-ut+3|t*) + 1.60Bt+3|t] .45 .72
it = it-1 + 0.5() yt+3|t-) yt+3|t*)
 + 0.5(Bt+3|t-2)
.87 .32
From Financial Markets
it = 0.96it-1+ [-1.31 + 0.76Bcomp5|t] .44# .48
# RMSE calculated for 1999:1-2004:1.
and, coupled with robust underlying growth in productivity, is providing ongoing support to economic
activity.”  Assuming that the Committee agreed on a modest move toward restraint in
part because it viewed inflation prospects as relatively benign, the statement could
note that, “although incoming inflation data are somewhat elevated, a portion of the increase in
recent months presumably has been due to transitory factors.”  Under this alternative, the
Committee would probably again see the risks to sustainable growth as balanced if its
outlook for growth did not differ much from that at the May meeting.  Similarly, the
Committee might continue to view the risks to price stability as balanced in light of its
step to begin removing policy accommodation.  In view of the recent inflation
surprises, though, as well as the relatively small adjustment to the nominal funds rate
under this alternative in comparison with the acceleration in prices that has already
occurred, a case could be made for characterizing the risks to inflation as tilted to the
upside and for jettisoning the language that policy accommodation could be removed
at a “measured” pace.  However, if the Committee sees the risks as balanced, it might
prefer to guard against an exaggerated market reaction by reaffirming its view that,
given relatively low underlying inflation and continued resource slack, it need not
tighten policy aggressively.  The Committee could retain the “measured” language while
emphasizing the conditional nature of its expectation for policy and underscoring its
commitment to price stability by saying,“With underlying inflation still expected to be
relatively low, the Committee judges the outlook to be such that policy accommodation can be removed
at a pace that is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to changes in
economic prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability so as to foster
maximum sustainable economic growth.”
(15) As noted above, market participants appear to have read the incoming
data, together with policymakers’ public statements, as implying a 25-basis-point
firming at this meeting along with an assessment of balanced risks for growth and
inflation and retention of “measured” or similar language.  A number of other
indicators, such as information on the trading positions of market participants, as well
as anecdotal information, suggest that most market participants are well prepared for a
commencement of tightening.6  Accordingly, the immediate market reaction to
implementation of this alternative would likely be rather subdued, with rates perhaps
increasing slightly in response to the inclusion of the proposed final sentence.  If,
however, the Committee shifted to an assessment that the risks to inflation were tilted
to the upside, or if it dropped the “measured” phrase, both fixed-income and equity
markets would most likely sell off.
(16) The Committee might view the largely unanticipated step-up in inflation
in recent months that has yet to be reversed as vitiating its previous conditional
expectation that policy moves could be “measured.”  If so, a 50-basis-point increase in
the federal funds rate, as in Alternative C, might be favored if Committee members
doubt that inflation will be restrained by slack in the economy to the extent forecast
by the staff, either because of skepticism about the output gap framework or concern
that the economy is closer to potential than estimated by the staff, as in the “Less
Room to Grow” scenario in the Greenbook.  Alternatively, members might favor this
option if they put greater odds than the staff does on the possibility of a sizable pass-
through of higher energy and import prices to the general price level.  Also, a
relatively large policy move could be viewed as necessary at this point in part to reduce 
the potential for a sustained increase in inflation expectations.  Indeed, the Committee
may be troubled that longer-term inflation expectations—even before their recent
uptick—seemed to embed an anticipation that prices would increase at a rate faster
than that consistent with long-run price stability, perhaps indicating that there was
some uncertainty among the public about the Federal Reserve’s objective.  If the
Committee’s goal is to keep the bias-adjusted consumer price level unchanged on
average, roughly consistent with measured core PCE inflation of 1 percent, the
simulations reported earlier suggest that a somewhat firmer near-term path of policy
than in the baseline would be desirable.
(17) In contrast to the language proposed for Alternative B, the
announcement accompanying a 50-basis-point hike could indicate that “incoming
inflation data are somewhat elevated, and long-term inflation expectations have shown some tendency
to edge higher,” as part of the rationale for the action.  As in the other alternatives, the
Committee presumably would choose under this alternative to state that the risks to
growth were balanced if its outlook for real GDP is roughly in line with the
Greenbook.  In principle, it could also retain an assessment that the risks to price
stability were balanced in view of the restraining effects of the relatively large policy
move.  However, if the Committee were sufficiently worried about inflation to select
such an aggressive policy at this time, it might well see the risks to inflation as now
skewed to the upside.  With regard to the final sentence of the existing risk
assessment, a 50-basis-point move would seem to call for deletion of the “measured”
language.
(18) The combination of policy action and explanation proposed under
Alternative C would come as a considerable shock to market participants.  Most
investors appear to view the Committee’s “measured” language, in the context of the
recent data as well as comments from policymakers, as essentially ruling out such an
opening move and accordingly have positioned for a 25-basis-point increase.  The
accompanying indication that the inflation risks were tilted to the upside would
reinforce the sense that the trajectory of policy tightening would be significantly
steeper than previously anticipated.  In all likelihood under this alternative, market
interest rates would rise across the yield curve, stock prices would drop sharply, and
the foreign exchange value of the dollar would increase.
(19) The Committee might be attracted to the unchanged policy stance of
Alternative A if it thinks that the recent increase in inflation owes largely to transient
factors and fears that the pace of economic growth might prove insufficient to work
down resource slack should policy begin to tighten at this time.  In the staff forecast,
which envisions tightening sometime soon, output remains a little below its potential
and the unemployment rate comes to rest ¼ percentage point above the staff’s
estimated NAIRU in the fourth quarter of 2005.  The Committee might be concerned
that growth could fall short of even this projection, given the prospective shift in
fiscal policy toward restraint, the possibility that the current slowdown in
consumption growth could persist, and the risk that investment spending will not
accelerate to the degree necessary to offset slowing growth in household spending in
an environment of heightened geopolitical tensions.  The easier financial market
conditions that would accompany implementation of this alternative would tend to
support interest-sensitive spending, such as housing, consumer durables, and business
investment, and contribute to a stronger pace of economic growth, especially later this
year and during 2005.  Moreover, the simulations reported earlier could be interpreted
as implying that pursuing a somewhat stronger path for output might not involve
much cost in terms of higher inflation.  Indeed, the Committee might prefer to see
inflation in the future center around 2 percent, rather than 1½ percent as in the
baseline, in order to provide a significant inflation buffer against the zero bound to
nominal interest rates.
(20) As indicated in Table 1, the announcement accompanying a decision to
leave rates unchanged could note that “although incoming inflation data are somewhat elevated,
a portion of the increase in recent months presumably has been due to transitory factors.”  The
Committee could retain its reference to the “measured” removal of policy
accommodation by indicating that “With underlying inflation still relatively low and resource use
slack, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be
measured.”  If the Committee were to select Alternative A, presumably it would also
retain the judgment it reached at the May meeting that the risks to both sustainable
growth and price stability are balanced.  Because market participants are virtually certain
of a tightening of policy at this meeting of 25 basis points, adoption of this alternative
would come as a considerable surprise and might trigger a sizable drop in short-term
interest rates, a sharp rally in bond and stock prices, and some depreciation in the
foreign exchange value of the dollar—provided that the Committee’s announcement
bolstered investors’ confidence that inflation was unlikely to be a problem.  These
market reactions could be considerably more adverse, however, if market participants
instead perceived that monetary policy was falling “behind the curve.”
Money and Debt Forecasts
(21) Under the Greenbook projection, M2 is expected to decelerate sharply
to about a 3 percent annual pace over the May-to-December period.  This growth rate
is 1½ percentage points slower than projected in the April Bluebook, primarily
reflecting the higher path of interest rates in this projection.  Households are expected
to shift the composition of their portfolios noticeably toward market instruments at
the expense of monetary assets later in the year, as rising interest rates significantly
boost the opportunity cost of holding money from current record lows.  The lagged
effects on deposit balances of the recent slowdown in mortgage refinancing activity
accentuates the deceleration in money growth.  Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is
forecast to expand at a 7¼ percent pace over the second half of this year.  Household
debt growth is expected to slow slightly, as residential investment and refinancing
activity increasingly respond to the higher level of mortgage rates.  Business
borrowing should gradually pick up, though from a very low level, as capital
expenditures rise faster than internal funds and as inventory investment rises.  Given
the large projected budget deficit, federal debt growth is forecast to remain brisk. 
State and local debt growth is likely to decline from its recent pace, as interest rates
rise and municipal budget positions improve.
M2 Growth Under Alternative Policy Actions
No change Tighten 25 bp Tighten 50 bp Greenbook Forecast*
Monthly Growth Rates
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(22) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to
those presented in Table 1 are provided below.
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around _______ 1 percent.
(2) Risk Assessments
(A) The Committee perceives that the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters are roughly equal.  With underlying inflation still relatively low
and resource use slack, the Committee believes that policy
accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.
(B) The Committee perceives that the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters are roughly equal.  With underlying inflation still expected to be
relatively low, the Committee judges the outlook to be such that policy
accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured. 
Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to changes in economic
prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability so
as to foster maximum sustainable economic growth.
(C) The Committee perceives that the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of sustainable growth for the next few quarters are roughly
equal.  However, the upside risks to the goal of price stability now
appear to outweigh the downside risks.
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Jun 
Jul 
Aug 
Sep 
Oct 
Nov  
Dec  
     
Jan  
Feb  
Mar  
Apr  
May
Apr  
Apr  
May  
May  
May  
May  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money Aggregates
Seasonally adjusted
nontransactions components
Annual growth rates(%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
  2001
  2002
  2003
Quarterly(average)
  2003-Q2
       Q3
       Q4
  2004-Q1
Monthly
  2003-May
       June
       July
       Aug.
       Sep.
       Oct.
       Nov.
       Dec.
Levels ($billions):
Monthly
  2004-Jan.
       Feb.
       Mar.
       Apr.
       May
Weekly
  2004-May   3
            10
            17
            24
            31
June  7p
            14p
Period
In M3 onlyIn M2
p    prel iminary
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1 Strictly Confidential
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted) Class II FOMC
June 24, 2004
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5 
Agency total
Intermeeting Period
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
