Content last modified 03/31/2011.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
JANUARY 27, 2005
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.)     January 27, 2005 
Class I – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The Committee’s decision at its December meeting to increase the target
federal funds rate 25 basis points to 2¼ percent, to assess the risks to both sustainable
economic growth and price stability as balanced, and to retain the “measured pace”
language had been widely anticipated.  Nonetheless, the expected path of policy
shifted down a little following the announcement as investors had apparently put
some odds on a firmer tone to the statement.  That decline was more than reversed
over the intermeeting period, however, following economic data releases that were
read as confirming that the expansion remains on track and the publication of the
minutes of the December FOMC meeting (see box), on the new, expedited schedule. 1
As to the minutes, market participants reportedly focused on the concerns about
inflation expressed by some at the December meeting as well as comments about
possible excessive risk-taking in asset markets.  Judging from federal funds futures
quotes and the Desk’s most recent survey of primary dealers, investors are virtually
certain of a 25 basis point increase in the target federal funds rate at the upcoming
meeting and apparently place high odds on similar hikes at the two subsequent
meetings (Chart 1).  Currently, futures quotes suggest an expected federal funds rate
of about 3¼ percent at the end of 2005, but primary dealers reported an average
expectation about ¼ percentage point higher.
Expedited Release of the December FOMC Minutes
The minutes of the December 2004 FOMC meeting were published on January 4, the 
first release of minutes on the new expedited schedule.  Market participants were reportedly a 
bit surprised by the extent of the discussion of upside risks to inflation and, in response, 
marked up the expected pace of policy tightening somewhat.  The discussion of “excessive 
risk-taking” also garnered some attention from market participants.  Two-year yields rose 
about 6 basis points in a narrow window around the release of the minutes, while inflation 
compensation measured from TIPS fell a touch.
The figure below shows the change in two-year yields around the release of minutes 
over the last eight years.  The December minutes had an effect that was among the larger 
reactions to minutes releases over the last eight years, but it is hard to know if this is because 
they provided more information than usual, because they were more timely, or because the 
press and the public paid particularly close attention given the novelty of the expedited 
release.  The effect of the December minutes was in any case well within the range of 
responses to previous FOMC minutes releases.  Going forward, the expedited schedule may, 
to some extent, speed up the dissemination of information about the FOMC’s outlook that 
was previously provided incrementally.  If so, market responses to speeches delivered after the 
minutes release, and even to the statement at the subsequent FOMC meeting may become 
more muted.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 2 of 41
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 3 of 41
(2) The upward revision to the anticipated path of monetary policy contributed
to a rise in yields on short- and intermediate-term Treasury notes.  In contrast, the
ten-year Treasury yield was little changed, on net, implying that longer-horizon
forward rates declined notably.  Much of the drop in these forward rates appears to be
attributable to declines in real rates, judging from TIPS yields and flat survey measures
of long-term inflation expectations.  The reasons for the decline in far-ahead nominal
forward rates are not entirely evident.  Higher oil prices may have led investors to trim
their assessment of the cumulative amount of monetary policy restraint required to
foster sustainable economic growth.  Moreover, actual and implied volatility of
interest rates declined further, possibly contributing to a narrowing of term premiums
embedded in longer-term rates.
(3) Yields on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds generally
followed those on Treasuries, and as a result, risk spreads on such securities barely
budged (Chart 2).  Spreads in both sectors remain thin by historical standards, no
doubt in part because default rates are quite subdued and corporate balance sheets are
generally healthy.  Broad equity indexes, weighed down by higher oil prices and
lackluster earnings announcements and guidance, ended the period down about
(4) The value of the dollar against a broad index of currencies moved over a
wide range, but ended the intermeeting period about unchanged (Chart 3).  Ongoing
concern about the U.S. current account deficit pushed the dollar toward record lows
in December, but the dollar subsequently rolled back those losses as focus shifted to
the continuing strength of the U.S. economic expansion and a firmer outlook for
monetary policy in the United States.  Markets were volatile at times following a
variety of comments by officials that were interpreted as offering differing views on
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 4 of 41
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 5 of 41
the inclinations of foreign officials to intervene to stabilize currency values.2  Against
individual major foreign currencies, the dollar fell 2¼ percent versus the Japanese yen
and very slightly against the Canadian dollar.  However, the dollar firmed almost
government bonds generally were little changed during the intermeeting period, while
foreign stock prices rose between 1 and 4 percent.
(5) Against several other Asian currencies, the dollar fell about 2 percent, and
monetary authorities in Korea and Taiwan were said to be intervening heavily in
foreign exchange markets to stem upward pressure on their currencies.3  Rates on
forward contracts on the Chinese renminbi fluctuated amid conflicting comments by
Chinese officials about future changes in China’s currency peg and on speculation that
the Chinese currency regime would be a topic at the G-8 meeting in early February.
In Brazil, the central bank increased its policy rate 50 basis points in late December
and another 50 basis points in mid-January in response to inflationary pressures; the
real appreciated almost 4 percent against the dollar, but Brazilian stocks lost about 5
percent over the intermeeting period.
(6) Domestic nonfinancial business sector debt is estimated to have risen at a
supported by a pickup in net bond issuance and a sizable increase in C&I loans
(Chart 4).  According to the latest Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, commercial
banks again eased terms and standards for lending to businesses in recent months,
and loan demand from households weakened slightly.  Nevertheless, household debt
appears to have continued to grow briskly in the fourth quarter.  Federal debt
accelerated to a 7¼ percent annual rate in the final quarter of 2004, and total domestic
nonfinancial debt also expanded at a 7¼ percent pace. 
                                           
2
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 7 of 41
(7) M2 increased at about a 4¼ percent annual rate in December and appears
to be accelerating to about a 5¾ percent pace in January.4  Within this aggregate,
growth in small time deposits—returns on which tend to track market rates closely—
was particularly brisk, although apparently at the expense of liquid deposits—whose
return tends to lag market interest rates.  Smoothing through monthly fluctuations,
M2 appears to be growing a bit below the pace of nominal income, a pattern
consistent with its rising opportunity cost as monetary policy tightens.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 9 of 41
Economic Outlook
(8) The basic contours of the staff forecast have changed little since the
December Greenbook, with real GDP growth again expected to average around
market expectations of policy action observed over the intermeeting period and now
envisions that the federal funds rate will reach 3½ percent by the end of 2006, a
quarter-point higher than in the December Greenbook.  Long-term yields are
anticipated to remain fairly steady this year and next, as the effects of rising short-term
rates are offset over time by reductions in market participants’ expectations for future
inflation and the path of policy.  As in previous forecasts, the stock market is assumed
to generate risk-adjusted returns similar to those on fixed-income investments,
although prices launch off a slightly lower base, reflecting the recent sell-off in shares.
The foreign exchange value of the dollar is assumed to depreciate this year and next at
about the same gradual pace as in the December Greenbook.  Oil prices are now
higher than the staff had expected and, in line with futures prices, are projected to
come down a little more steeply.  On net, financial conditions still seem quite
supportive of growth, and aggregate demand is seen as expanding at a rate a bit above
that of potential output, putting the unemployment rate on a shallow downward
trajectory that by the end of 2006 nearly reaches 5 percent—the staff’s estimate of the
natural rate of unemployment.  Core PCE inflation is expected to remain near 1½
percent this year and next, with the waning influence of resource slack about offset by
the diminished pass-through from oil prices and the dollar.
Longer-Run Strategy
(9) To analyze strategies and risks for monetary policy, several sets of
simulations were conducted using a version of the FRB/US model with the following
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 10 of 41
properties:  policymakers have perfect foresight about the entire economy; financial
markets have perfect foresight regarding the future path of the federal funds rate,
thereby ensuring that the policy path is not associated with systematic forecast errors
by investors; and households and firms form their expectations using more limited
information, as in the standard version of the model.  One set of simulations was
oriented toward evaluating the implications of alternative values of a long-run
inflation objective for the core PCE price index, while other simulations were used to
investigate different assumptions about productivity growth and the personal saving
rate.  Each of the latter scenarios was simulated under the assumption of a
funds rate was computed by assuming that policymakers have an equal distaste for
deviations of unemployment from its natural rate, deviations of inflation from a long-
run goal, and changes in the federal funds rate.5
(10) The baseline for these simulations was prepared using the FRB/US model
(with judgmental adjustments) to extend the staff forecast through the end of the
decade.  On the supply side, structural labor productivity growth is assumed to
moderate toward historical norms, declining from 3 percent last year to 2¾ percent
during 2005 and about 2½ percent by 2010.  Adjusting for trend movements in the
labor force and other factors, these productivity gains are sufficient to keep potential
output growing at a fairly steady pace of about 3¼ percent per year during the rest of
the decade, while the NAIRU is assumed to remain at 5 percent.  As for aggregate
demand, the personal saving rate is expected to rise gradually back toward its
historical average, while the unified federal budget deficit stays at around 2½ percent
of nominal GDP during the remainder of the decade.  Although the foreign exchange 
                                           
5 More precisely, the federal funds rate path is chosen to minimize the equally weighted sum of three 
components:  the squared deviations of unemployment from its natural rate; the squared deviations 
of core PCE inflation from target; and squared changes in the funds rate.  The last term helps ensure 
that the optimal funds rate path in the simulation exhibits the smooth adjustment observed in the 
historical record.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 11 of 41
value of the dollar is assumed to depreciate at an average annual rate of about
inflation close to 1½ percent throughout the decade while facilitating the return of
unemployment to its natural rate.  In particular, the nominal federal funds rate rises to
(11) The first set of simulations analyzes the implications of alternative
specifications of the long-run objective for core PCE inflation.  The solid line in each
panel of Chart 5 denotes the scenario in which policymakers desire that the core PCE
inflation rate eventually settle at 1½ percent.  The optimal path of monetary policy in
this case is not much above that assumed in the Greenbook:  The funds rate, shown
in the upper-left panel, rises steadily over the next three years, peaking at about
inflation rate—shown in the lower two panels—also follow trajectories similar to
those in the Greenbook extension.  The dashed line in each panel corresponds to a
long-run inflation objective of 1 percent.  The optimal policy aims to achieve this
outcome by tightening only a bit more rapidly than under the 1½ percent inflation
objective and then holding the real funds rate at a somewhat elevated level over an
extended period (upper-right panel).  Given the tighter path of policy, the
unemployment rate stays around 5¼ percent through the remainder of the decade,
while inflation declines gradually toward the long-run objective.  In contrast, a higher
inflation objective of 2 percent (dotted line) allows policymakers to pause on the road
to further tightening until the end of this year, and the real funds rate remains a bit
below its value in the benchmark scenario through 2010.  This policy fosters a gradual
pickup in inflation, while unemployment declines somewhat more quickly than in the
benchmark case and then remains below the NAIRU throughout the remainder of the
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 12 of 41
(12) The second set of simulations highlights the implications of different
assumptions about aggregate supply, under the maintained assumption that the
inflation objective is 1½ percent. 6  The solid lines in Chart 6 are identical to those in
the previous chart, depicting the benchmark scenario (as in the extended Greenbook
baseline) in which structural productivity growth gradually moderates toward
historical norms.  The dashed lines in this chart depict an alternative scenario in which
structural productivity continues to grow at a pace close to that experienced in recent
years (similar to the scenario in the Greenbook “Faster Productivity Growth”).  In
this case, the real funds rate settles to a value that, because of higher levels of wealth
and permanent income, is about 60 basis points higher than in the benchmark
scenario.  Given the benchmark inflation objective of 1½ percent and in light of the
substantial response of aggregate demand to the faster productivity growth, the
assumed policy preference function is maximized with a steeper path for the nominal
funds rate, which peaks at nearly 5 percent in mid-2007 and then declines a bit in
subsequent years.  Core PCE inflation remains stable at a rate slightly below
below the NAIRU for several years thereafter.  In contrast, under the assumption that
productivity growth runs along a lower track than the benchmark (dotted lines), the
real funds rate stabilizes at a level that is about 50 basis points lower than in the
benchmark scenario.  In this case, the optimal policy prescribes a somewhat flatter
path for the nominal funds rate, which reaches about 3½ percent by mid-2007.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 14 of 41
Nevertheless, the unemployment rate remains about ¼ percentage point above the
NAIRU, and core PCE inflation around ¼ percentage point above the inflation
objective, through the rest of the decade.
(13) The third set of simulations illustrates the policy implications of alternative
assumptions about aggregate demand, again assuming a 1½ percent inflation
objective.  The solid lines in Chart 7 are identical to those in the previous two charts,
depicting the benchmark scenario in which the personal saving rate gradually rises
toward its long-run historical average.  In contrast, the dashed lines depict an
alternative scenario in which the saving rate remains at a relatively low level (similar to
the simulation referred to in the Greenbook as the “Stronger Consumption”
scenario).  In this case, the long-run equilibrium value of the real funds rate is about
objective, the optimal policy essentially matches this increase in the equilibrium rate
by prescribing a steeper funds rate path that reaches near 4½ percent by late 2007.
This policy response largely offsets the shift in aggregate demand, so that the
trajectories of unemployment and inflation are essentially the same as in the
benchmark scenario.  The dotted lines in this chart depict the alternative scenario in
which the personal saving rate rises even faster than in the benchmark scenario.  In
this case, the optimal policy prescribes a somewhat lower path for the real funds rate
and thereby prevents the negative aggregate demand shock from having a noticeable
impact on unemployment or inflation.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(14) The universal expectation of a quarter-point policy firming at the upcoming
meeting makes it more challenging than usual to write down plausible policy
alternatives that could help to inform the Committee’s deliberations.  Alternative B, as
presented in Table 1, squarely represents the conventional wisdom, in that it envisions
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 16 of 41
Table 1: Alternative Language for the January FOMC Announcement
December FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 2¼ percent.  The 
Committee’s policy actions since mid-
2004 have materially reduced the degree 
of monetary policy accommodation.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise its 
target for the federal funds rate by 
25 basis points to 2½ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 
2¾ percent.
The Committee believes that the stance 
of monetary policy remains somewhat 
accommodative and, coupled with robust 
underlying growth in productivity, is 
providing ongoing support to economic 
activity.
[Unchanged from
December statement]
The Committee believes that the stance 
of monetary policy remains 
accommodative and, coupled with 
robust the underlying growth in 
productivity, is providing ongoing 
support to economic activity.
Output appears to be growing at a 
moderate pace despite the earlier rise in 
energy prices, and labor market 
conditions seem to be improving 
gradually.
Output appears to be growing at a 
moderate pace despite the earlier 
rise in energy prices, and labor 
market conditions continue to 
improve gradually.
Output appears to be growing at a 
moderate pace despite the earlier rise in 
energy prices, and labor market 
conditions continue to improve 
gradually.
[Unchanged from 
December statement]
[Unchanged from 
December statement]
Inflation and longer-term inflation 
expectations remain well contained, but 
rising business costs have the potential 
to put upward pressure on prices.
[Unchanged from
December statement]
[Unchanged from
December statement]
[Unchanged from
December statement]
Assessment 
of Risk
With underlying inflation expected to be 
relatively low, the Committee believes 
that policy accommodation can be 
removed at a pace that is likely to be 
measured.  Nonetheless, the Committee 
will respond to changes in economic 
prospects as needed to fulfill its 
obligation to promote price stability and 
sustainable growth.
[Unchanged from 
December statement]
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 18 of 41
raising the federal funds rate target to 2½ percent at this meeting and the release of a
statement little changed from that in December.  Alternative A presents a stance of
policy that is easier in multiple dimensions, in that the federal funds rate is held at its
current level, the assessment of the current degree of accommodation is softened, and
language that could be associated with a pause is offered.  In stark contrast,
Alternative C envisions a half-point rate hike accompanied by a darker assessment of
inflation risks and the removal of the “measured pace” language.  No doubt, the
extremes are extreme, but they contain elements of statement language that the
Committee might find more appealing than the wording of Alternative B.  In addition,
these alternatives may be helpful in informing potential changes in the policy
announcement over the next few meetings.  All the alternatives suggest stating that
“Output appears to be growing at a moderate pace despite the rise in energy prices,”
which differs from the December announcement only by dropping the word “earlier”
in recognition of recent increases in oil prices.
(15) If the Committee believes that continued policy firming will likely prove
sufficient to check inflationary pressures while allowing economic slack to be worked
down in an acceptable manner, it might be inclined to raise the target funds rate
another 25 basis points at this meeting, as in Alternative B.  Such an increase would
further unwind the unusual degree of policy accommodation prevailing over the past
several years, seen in Chart 8 as the movement of the real funds rate closer to
estimates of its equilibrium, which themselves moved back to a more typical range in
the last year or so.  It would also be consistent with the long-run scenario of
maintaining a 1½ percent objective for core PCE inflation, as discussed above, and
with several policy rules based on that objective (Chart 9).  While the Committee may
be concerned that financial markets will remain accommodative even after this move,
perhaps encouraging excessive risk-taking, it might also believe that a larger action at
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 19 of 41
Equilibrium Real Rate Chart: Explanatory Notes
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to return 
output to its potential level over time.  The short-run equilibrium rate is defined as the rate that would 
close the output gap in twelve quarters given a model’s projection of the economy, and the medium-run 
concept is the value of the real funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years under the 
assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and 
then keep them equal thereafter.  With the exception of the TIPS-consistent measure, the real federal 
funds rates employ the log difference of the core PCE price index over the previous four quarters as a 
proxy for expected inflation, with the staff projection used for the current quarter.  TIPS indexation is 
based on the total CPI.
Measure Description
Single-Equation 
Model
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and 
its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.  In light of 
this model’s simple structure, the short-run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends 
only on the recent position of output relative to potential, and the medium-run measure is 
virtually constant.
Small Structural 
Model
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, and 
the real bond yield.  Unlike the estimates from the single-equation model, values of the 
equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth, 
fiscal policy, and capital markets.
Large Model 
(FRB/US)
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.  These 
projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the 
three-year horizon relevant for the short-run concept but are less sensible over longer 
horizons.  Thus, we report only the short-run measure for the FRB/US model.
Greenbook-
consistent
Measures of the equilibrium real rate cannot be directly obtained from the Greenbook 
forecast, because the Greenbook is not based on a formal model.  Rather, we use the 
FRB/US model in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook forecast to 
derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that its 
simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is run 
off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output 
gap.  The medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it 
requires a relatively long extension of the Greenbook forecast.
TIPS-consistent Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) incorporate investors’ 
expectations of the future path of real interest rates.  The seven-year instantaneous real 
forward rate derived from TIPS yields reflects the short-term real interest rate expected to 
prevail in seven years as well as any applicable term premium.  The term premium is 
assumed to be 70 basis points.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 21 of 41
Policy Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, Bt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt-yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, B* policymakers’
long-run objective for inflation, it-1 the lagged federal funds rate, gt-1  the residual from the rule’s
prescription the previous quarter, (yt+3|t-yt+3|t
*) the staff’s three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap,
() yt+3|t-) yt+3|t
*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less potential output growth three quarters ahead,
Bt+3|t a three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t-ut+3|t
*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast of the
unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from the Greenbook and staff memoranda
closest to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Rule Specification
Root-mean-
square error
Rules with Imposed Coefficients
*) + 0.5(Bt-B*) .98
a 1.11a
*) + 0.5(Bt-B*) .68
a .65a
+ 0.5(Bt+3|t-B*)
.98a .44a
Rules with Estimated Coefficients
Rule includes both lagged interest rate and
serial correlation in residual.
it = .52it-1 + 0.48 [1.14 + 0.96(yt-yt
*)
+ 1.49Bt]+ 0.49gt-1
.23 .24
Rule includes both lagged interest rate and
serial correlation in residual.
it = .71it-1 + 0.29 [0.59 + 1.06(yt+3|t-yt+3|t
*)
+ 1.62Bt+3|t] + 0.33gt-1
.25 .27
Unemployment and inflation forecasts are
from semiannual “central tendency” of FOMC
forecasts, interpolated if necessary to yield 3-
qtr-ahead values; u t* forecast is from staff
memoranda.  Inflation forecasts are adjusted
to core PCE deflator basis.  Rule is estimated
at semiannual frequency, and projected
forward using G reenbook forecasts.
it = 0.49it-2 + 0.51 [0.27
        ! 2.10(ut+3|t-ut+3|t
*) + 1.60Bt+3|t] .45 .61
Bcomp5|t denotes the time-t difference between
5-yr nominal T reasury yields and TIPS.
Sample begins in 1999  due to  TIPS volatility
in 1997-8.
it = 0.97it-1+ [-1.24 + 0.68Bcomp5|t] .42b .44
a RMSE for rules with imposed coefficients is calculated setting B*=1.5.
b RMSE for TIPS-based rule is calculated for 1999:1-2004:4.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 23 of 41
this time would sow confusion about its assessment of the economy or its objectives,
and perhaps roil financial markets.
(16) The draft statement offered in Alternative B is quite similar to that released
following the December meeting in its evaluation of recent economic conditions,
assessment of balanced risks to the goals of stable prices and sustainable growth, and
retention of the familiar “measured pace” language.  Futures market quotes suggest
that investors are confident of quarter-point policy steps at this meeting and the next,
and primary dealers responding to the Desk’s survey were unanimous in expecting no
change in the Committee’s assessment of the balance of risks at this meeting.  The
minutes of the December meeting, however, may have led analysts to expect a sign of
heightened worries about the inflation outlook, which is missing from the draft
statement provided in Table 1, and its release probably would be accompanied by an
edging lower of yields, a bit of a rally in equity markets, and a small decline in the
exchange value of the dollar.
(17) If the Committee believes that a more rapid return to a neutral policy stance
is needed to prevent output overshooting its potential and putting upward pressures
on inflation down the road, it may choose one or all of the components included in
the statement under Alternative C.  A 50 basis point increase in the target funds rate
at this meeting might be selected if members believe that a more gradual tightening,
along the lines of the Greenbook assumption or the expectations of market
participants, could promote excessive risk-taking, unsustainable spending, and an
increase in inflation.  Private forecasters continue to anticipate a higher rate of
inflation than the staff, and the Committee may share such a forecast under the policy
paths implied by market prices or assumed in the Greenbook.  Members may place
high odds on aggregate demand being stronger than in the staff forecast because they
believe that the saving rate will stay persistently low or that investment spending will
not slip with the end of the partial expensing tax provisions.  Similarly, a less
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 24 of 41
optimistic outlook for aggregate supply and the attendant consequences for inflation
might incline the Committee to pick up the pace of policy firming.7
(18) Even if the Committee prefers a 25 basis point tightening at this meeting, it
may wish to couple such a move with some of the changes in the announcement
listed under Alternative C in Table 1.  For instance, to suggest greater uncertainty
about the pace of structural productivity growth, the announcement could simply
speak of “the underlying growth in productivity” as helping to support economic
activity, without characterizing productivity growth as “robust.”  To signal a relatively
greater concern about the inflation outlook, the Committee could note in the rationale
paragraph that labor market conditions “continue to improve,” without indicating that
the improvement was gradual, and also mention that “rising business costs have the
potential to put upward pressure on prices.”  The Committee could also drop the
“measured pace” language, although, in the absence of other changes in the balance-
of-risks framework, that would place a greater burden on the rationale paragraph to
guide market participants’ expectations for policy, at least until release of the minutes
three weeks later.  If the Committee did choose to firm 50 basis points at this
meeting, the draft language in Table 1 would serve to clarify that the larger move was
not intended to presage a pause.
(19) A 50 basis point policy firming and an announcement like that indicated
under Alternative C would lead to a sharp rise in short-term interest rates and a
decline in bond and stock prices.  Market participants would likely mark up the
amount of cumulative tightening expected over the next year or so.  At the same time,
uncertainty about future policy moves might increase substantially, and market prices
probably would respond more forcefully to data releases and especially to news on
inflation.  The direction of the market moves would be the same, but the amounts
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 25 of 41
attenuated, if the Committee married a quarter-point rate firming with some of the
drafting language of Alternative C.
(20) If the Committee wanted to pause in the process of removing policy
accommodation at this meeting, it might adopt Alternative A.  The Committee may
believe that more of the increases in productivity in recent years have been structural
than assumed by the staff, leaving the economy with more resource slack currently
and raising the odds of a lower inflation rate prospectively under the Greenbook
policy path.  In addition, members may foresee a continuation of labor market slack,
rather than the gradual elimination forecasted by the staff, because of continued
business caution, a faster return to the trend rate of labor force participation, or a
lower NAIRU.  The Committee may also harbor some suspicions about the resilience
of aggregate demand, perhaps on the thought that the saving rate could rise more
rapidly or the drag from net exports intensify more substantially than in the staff
(21) Even if concerns about the vigor of the expansion or confidence in the
prospects for aggregate supply were not, on balance, significant enough to dissuade
the Committee from tightening at this meeting, it might wish to signal in its
announcement that such a possibility may come soon.  This could be accomplished,
for instance, by adding after the first sentence of the announcement, “The
Committee’s policy actions since mid-2004 have materially reduced the degree of
monetary policy accommodation.”  The Committee could emphasize the extent to
which policy has firmed since June by stating that “the stance of policy remains
somewhat accommodative” rather than simply “accommodative.”  It might also
include a note of uncertainty about improvements in the labor market by commenting
that “labor market conditions seem to be improving gradually.”  Finally, it could
allude to both its policy objectives by mentioning “sustainable growth” along with
price stability in the last sentence of the announcement.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 26 of 41
(22) Adoption of all aspects of Alternative A—that is, keeping the funds rate
unchanged and softening the cast of the statement language—would come as a
considerable surprise to market participants, especially after the release of the minutes
of the December meeting.  If the Committee chose a more limited number of the
changes in that column of Table 1, investors would probably mark down their
expectations for the path of policy, causing a decline in short- and longer-term
interest rates, a stock market rally, and a drop in the foreign exchange value of the
dollar.  The decline in longer-term interest rates would be larger and the rise in stock
prices would be smaller to the degree that investors responded to the surprising
FOMC statement by marking down their outlook for economic activity.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(23)  Under the staff forecast, M2 is expected to expand about 4 percent this
year, 1½ percentage points slower than nominal GDP growth, owing to the lagged
response of money demand to increases in short-term interest rates and associated
opportunity costs.  Under the financial assumptions in the Greenbook, potential
substitutability of M2 assets with capital market instruments could have offsetting
effects:  Households may shift out of deposits if they gain confidence in higher
returns on stocks, but the flattening of the yield curve could increase the
attractiveness of the short-term instruments in M2 relative to bonds.  With fewer
policy tightenings in 2006, M2 is expected to expand 4½ percent, only ¾ percentage
point slower than nominal spending.  The growth of domestic nonfinancial sector
debt is expected to fall from the 7¾ percent pace of 2004 to around 7¼ percent this
year and 6½ percent in 2006, reflecting a moderation of government and household
borrowing.  Rising interest rates and less rapid home price increases finally temper the
accumulation of mortgage debt by households.  Business debt growth is projected to
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 27 of 41
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
                                           (percent, annual rate)
No change Raise 25 bp* Raise 50 bp** Greenbook***
Monthly Growth Rates
* Increase of 25 basis points in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter.
                           ** Increase of 50 basis points in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter.
                         *** This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 28 of 41
pick up a little, however, from the sluggish pace of recent years with capital spending
eventually notably exceeding the generation of internal funds.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Statement
(24) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
(1) Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around _______ 2¼ percent.
(2) Risk Assessments
A. The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters to be roughly equal.  With underlying inflation expected to be
relatively low, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be
removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the
Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to
fulfill its obligation to promote price stability and sustainable growth.
B. The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters to be roughly equal.  With underlying inflation expected to be
relatively low, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be
removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 29 of 41
Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to
fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.
C. The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters to be roughly equal.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 30 of 41
Appendix Chart 1
Treasury Yield Curve
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
January 27, 2005   
December 13, 2004
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 31 of 41
Appendix Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 32 of 41
Appendix Chart 3
Stock Indexes
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
S&P 500*
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 33 of 41
Appendix Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 34 of 41
Appendix Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
+
+
+
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
+
+
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
                Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 35 of 41
Appendix Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
Ratio scale, index (1980=100)
Journal of Commerce Index
Ratio scale, index (1967=100)
CRB Spot Industrials
CRB Futures
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 36 of 41
Appendix Chart 7
Growth of Real M2 and M3
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 37 of 41
Appendix Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2 and Two
Estimates of V*
GDP implicit
price deflator (P)
Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*), given
current M2 and constant V*
Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*) given
current M2 and V* with shift
Constant V*
V* with shift
* Change in GDP implicit price deflator over the previous four quarters.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 38 of 41
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
Appendix Table 1
Selected Interest Rates
(Percent)
p - preliminary data
Jan 
Feb 
Mar 
Apr 
May 
Jun  
Jul  
Aug  
Sep  
Oct  
Nov  
Dec
Nov  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Jan
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 39 of 41
Appendix Table 2
Money Aggregates
Seasonally Adjusted
nontransactions components
in M2 in M3 only
M1 M2 M3
Annual growth rates (%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
Levels ($billions):
Monthly
p preliminar y
e estimated
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 40 of 41
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC Page 41 of 41
