Content last modified 03/31/2011.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
JUNE 23, 2005
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR)  June 23, 2005
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The decision at the May FOMC meeting to raise the federal funds rate
target 25 basis points to 3 percent, to maintain an assessment of balanced risks to the
goals of price stability and sustainable growth, and to retain the “measured pace”
language was widely expected in financial markets and elicited little reaction by the
end of the day.1, 2  The minutes that were published three weeks later also held few
surprises for investors.  In the weeks that followed, releases of data on economic
activity appear to have reassured market participants that solid economic expansion
will continue and inflation will likely remain benign.  Policy expectations, which were
buffeted at times by remarks by Federal Reserve officials, ended the period a bit
higher in the near term but markedly lower at longer horizons (Chart 1).  According
to options on federal funds futures, market participants are confident that the FOMC
will hike the funds rate 25 basis points at the June FOMC meeting and view another
such increase at the August meeting as very likely.  However, high odds are placed on
a pause in the tightening cycle later in the year, and the expected funds rate at the end
of 2006 is currently 3.73 percent, down 21 basis points from the level that prevailed
before the May FOMC meeting.  All twenty-two primary dealers responding to the
most recent survey by the Trading Desk predict a 25-basis-point rate increase at the
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
June 23, 2005
May 2, 2005
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premia and other adjustments.
Jun. Aug. Sep. Nov. Dec.
Percent
Probability of a Pause at Upcoming FOMC Meetings
May 2, 2005 (red bars)
June 23, 2005 (black bars)
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
TIPS Yields*
Daily
FOMC
* Estimates are from a smoothed inflation-indexed yield curve. Yields shown
are those on notional par Treasury inflation-indexed securities with
semi-annual coupons.
Inflation Compensation*
*Based on a comparison of an estimated TIPS yield curve to an estimated
nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Spot WTI
Long-dated Oil Futures
Daily
FOMC
Oil Price
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 2 of 42
June meeting and nearly all expect statement language similar to that of the last
(2) Nominal Treasury yields showed mixed changes, on net, over the
intermeeting period:  Two-year yields were unchanged and ten-year yields ended the
period near 4 percent, about 25 basis points below the level at the May meeting.3  The
decline in longer-term nominal Treasury yields masked an increase in real rates as
inflation compensation fell appreciably, even though both spot and far-dated futures
oil prices rose considerably over the same period.  With investors apparently more
confident about the outlook, five- and ten-year TIPS yields rose 22 and 7 basis points,
respectively, although after adjusting for lags in inflation indexing the five-year rate
was up only about 10 basis points and the ten-year rate was about unchanged.  On a
similarly adjusted basis, inflation compensation fell about 25 basis points across the
maturity structure, as investors’ concerns about inflation pressures ebbed.  Some
survey measures of inflation expectations also moved down a little over the
intermeeting period.
(3) Corporate securities markets weathered rating downgrades in the auto
sector over the intermeeting period.  Investors were apparently reassured in part by
economic news pointing to continued firm expansion.  Spreads on investment-grade
corporate bonds were little changed over the intermeeting period, while spreads on
speculative-grade bonds fell 19 basis points—though they remain noticeably above
the very low levels seen earlier in the year (see Chart 2 and the box “Credit Market
and Hedge Fund Developments”).  Over the intermeeting period, broad measures of
corporate credit quality generally remained favorable, implied volatility on equities
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 3 of 42
Chart 2
Capital Market Developments
Basis Points Basis Points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Decomposition of High-Yield Bond Spread
Percentage points
Compensation for Expected Loss
Compensation
for Risk
Bond Default and
C&I Loan Delinquency Rates Percent of outstandings
C&I loan delinquency rate
    (Call Report)
Bond default rate*
*6-month moving average, from Moody’s Investors Service.
Wilshire
Nasdaq
Stock Prices
E/P ratio
Real Long-term Treasury yield*
* Perpetuity Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year expected inflation.
Note. + Denotes the latest observation using daily interest rates and stock 
prices and latest earnings data from I/B/E/S.
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatility
Daily
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 4 of 42
Credit Market and Hedge Fund 
Developments
The difficulties experienced by U.S. automobile 
manufacturers placed strains on the credit 
markets early in the spring.  After rising a good 
bit in March and April, credit default swap (CDS) 
indexes jumped in the wake of earlier-than- 
expected Standard and Poor’s downgrade of Ford 
and General Motors to junk status on May 5.  As 
investors became concerned about the overall 
market impact of the downgrades, implied 
volatility on the investment-grade CDS index also 
surged and market liquidity reportedly 
deteriorated for a time.  Many hedge funds were 
said to have entered the month of May as sellers 
of credit protection and of volatility and may 
have contributed to the strains as they moved to 
reduce their positions.
Market conditions improved substantially 
beginning in mid-May, and both spreads and 
implied volatilities ended the intermeeting period 
somewhat lower, on net.  However, spreads and 
implied volatilities remain well above the levels 
that prevailed before Ford and General Motors 
revised down their outlooks at the beginning of 
March, most likely evidence of both investors’ 
demand for greater compensation for bearing risk 
and increased perception of risk.
The fallout in credit markets appears to have 
been limited.  A number of small- and medium-
sized hedge funds suffered substantial losses in 
April and a few of them were subsequently 
closed.  And some large credit derivatives dealers 
reported notable declines in earnings from 
trading in their fiscal second quarter.  However, 
hedge-fund performance appears to have 
improved since April.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 5 of 42
moved down, and major equity indexes rose appreciably.  Nonetheless, a rough
measure of the equity premium—the gap between the twelve-month forward trend
earnings-price ratio and the real perpetuity Treasury yield—widened some.
(4) The trade-weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar against major
currencies rose 3¼ percent on balance over the intermeeting period (Chart 3).4  The
dollar apparently drew strength from data releases indicating continued solid U.S.
growth, but its moves against individual currencies varied widely.  The dollar gained
almost 7 percent against the euro, in reaction to the emphatic rejection of the
proposed European constitution by French and Dutch voters and several weaker-
than-expected data releases in the euro area.  Comments from ECB officials appeared
to suggest that the ECB’s next policy move could be a rate cut, and one-year-ahead
euro futures rates fell 35 basis points over the period.  Recent data on economic
performance in Japan were more encouraging, but the dollar moved up about 3½
percent against the yen.  In contrast, the dollar fell almost 2 percent against the
Canadian dollar, as stronger employment and trade data prompted upward revisions
to the outlook for Canadian growth.  Except in Japan, yields on long-term
government securities in other major industrial countries declined during the
intermeeting period; yields on some European sovereign issues touched record lows
earlier in the period.  Share prices in foreign industrial countries registered increases
that ranged from 4 to 8 percent, often led by high-tech stocks.  Against the currencies
of our other important trading partners the dollar was about unchanged on balance
over the intermeeting period, as decreases in its value versus the Brazilian real and the
Mexican peso were offset by increases against several Asian currencies, including the
Korean won, the Singapore dollar, and the Thai baht.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 6 of 42
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Index(12/31/02=100)
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
FOMC Daily
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields
Percent
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Stock Price Indexes
Index(12/31/02=100)
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
FOMC Daily
EMBI+ Index
Basis Points
Overall
Brazil
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 7 of 42
(5) With domestic nonfederal debt expected to expand at a somewhat slower
pace in the second quarter, and higher final payments during the April tax season
damping federal borrowing, domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to decelerate to a
corporations was weak in April and May, as elevated spreads held down offerings by
speculative-grade firms.  However, issuance has picked up considerably in recent
weeks, reflecting the decline in long-term interest rates as well as issuance by firms
that had postponed coming to market in May.  Commercial paper issuance has been
solid and business loans have continued to expand, likely spurred in part by merger
and acquisition activity.  Household debt is likely to grow at a brisk rate in the second
quarter, owing to persistent strength in its mortgage component.  Mortgage demand
in recent quarters has been driven in part by rapid increases in house prices.  The
OFHEO purchase-only index rose 10¼ percent over the year ending in the first
(6) M2 has been weak in recent months—contracting in April and advancing
sluggishly on net over May and early June—owing to the increased opportunity cost
of holding M2 assets.  Liquid deposits were especially weak over this period, as rates
on these deposits adjust slowly to rising short-term market rates.  Despite the recent
weakness in M2, its velocity in the current quarter is projected to remain below the
level one would anticipate given historical relationships with opportunity costs.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 8 of 42
Chart 4
Debt and Money
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
Monthly rate
Growth of Household Debt Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of Housing Prices Percent
Quarterly
OFHEO Purchase
Only Index (s.a.)
Growth of Nonfinancial Debt
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2 p
Total
______
Nonfederal
___________
p Projected.
Growth of M2
Velocity
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
Percent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
p Projected.
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 9 of 42
Economic Outlook
(7) The staff’s outlook for spending and output has changed little since the May 
FOMC meeting, but its forecast for inflation has been nudged up.  The cumulative
policy tightening in this projection is the same as in the April Greenbook, although
the staff now assumes that the firming will be more front-loaded, with a 50-basis-
point increase over the balance of 2005 and 25 basis points in 2006.  Bond yields are
expected to edge higher, equity prices increase from their current higher levels at a
pace sufficient to provide risk-adjusted returns in line with those in fixed-income
markets, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar depreciates gradually, albeit
from a level that is about 2¼ percent above that anticipated in the last Greenbook.
The price of West Texas intermediate crude oil, which starts from a spot price that is
more than $6 per barrel above that foreseen in the April Greenbook, is forecast to
move sideways over the next two years in line with futures market quotes.  In view of
recent employment reports and other incoming data, the staff now sees the economy
as operating with a little less resource slack, and output growth is again projected to
narrowly exceed that of potential over the next few quarters.  Slack nevertheless
persists over the forecast period, with the unemployment rate lingering a touch above
the staff’s estimate of the NAIRU and the output gap edging down to the ¾ percent
area.  The upward revision to the forecast for inflation partly reflects the direct and
indirect effects of higher energy prices.  Still, with resources underused, import prices
rising more slowly, and energy prices flattening out, core PCE inflation is projected to
edge down from just above 2 percent this year to a touch under 2 percent next year;
overall PCE inflation is expected to fall from 2½ percent to 1¾ percent over the
same period.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 10 of 42
Longer-Run Strategy
(8) To analyze strategies and risks for monetary policy, several sets of
simulations were conducted using the version of the FRB/US model with the
following properties:  Policymakers base their decisions on complete knowledge of
the model and the forces hypothesized to be consistent with the extended Greenbook
outlook; financial markets—including those for foreign exchange, stocks, and
bonds—understand how monetary policy is set so that the path of policy is not
associated with systematic forecast errors by investors; and households and firms
form their expectations using more limited information, as in the standard version of
the model. For each model simulation, the optimal path of the funds rate was
determined based on policymakers’ relative preferences for minimizing deviations in
unemployment from its natural rate and deviations in inflation from a long-run goal
(defined in terms of the core PCE index) as well as for minimizing changes in the
federal funds rate.5  One set of simulations was oriented towards evaluating the
macroeconomic effects of alternative values of the long-run inflation goal, while a
second set was conducted to analyze factors instrumental in achieving the inflation
(9) The baseline for these simulations was prepared using the FRB/US model
(with judgmental adjustments) to extend the staff forecast through 2015.  On the
supply side, structural labor productivity growth is assumed to moderate toward
historical norms, slowing from 3 percent this year to 2¼ percent by 2015.  Potential
output growth is projected to decrease from 3¼ percent to a little below 2½ percent
by 2015, while the NAIRU is assumed to remain at 5 percent.  As for aggregate
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 11 of 42
demand, the personal saving rate is expected to rise gradually, while the unified federal
budget deficit remains around 2½ percent of nominal GDP over the next decade.
Although the real foreign exchange value of the dollar depreciates at an annual rate of
about 4 percent from 2007 onwards, the current account deficit is projected to widen
to a peak of nearly 8 percent of nominal GDP by 2011 and to decrease gradually
(10) The first set of simulations analyzes the implications of alternative
specifications of the long-run goal for core PCE inflation.  The solid line in each
panel of Chart 5 depicts a scenario in which policymakers aim for the core PCE
inflation rate eventually to settle down at 1½ percent.  In this case, the funds rate rises
steadily over the next eighteen months and then remains at a plateau of about 4
percent through the end of 2012.  With that backdrop of moderately tight financial
conditions, the unemployment rate stays a bit higher than its natural rate over the next
eight years.  Core PCE inflation remains close to 1¾ percent through 2008 and then
begins to fall very gradually towards the long-run goal.  A key factor explaining the
shallowness of the decline in inflation is that the expectations of households and firms
regarding the long-term average rate of inflation recede slowly from nearly 2 percent
in 2005 to about 1.6 percent in 2012.  The dashed line in each panel corresponds to a
lower long-run inflation goal of 1 percent.  In this case, the funds rate reaches a peak
of about 4½ percent by early next year before easing somewhat in subsequent
quarters.  Given the tighter path for policy, the unemployment rate moves up to
around 5½ percent and remains there while inflation moves gradually towards the
long-run goal, falling below 1½ percent by the end of the decade.  In contrast, a
somewhat higher inflation goal of 2 percent (dotted line) allows policymakers to
tighten policy far more gradually this year and next.  This policy does not involve
substantial gaps between unemployment and its natural rate, because the actual path
of inflation is fairly close to the central bank’s goal and to the long-run expectations of
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 12 of 42
Chart 5
Optimal Policy with Alternative Inflation Objectives
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
for inflation expectations.
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 13 of 42
households and firms.
(11) At first glance, an apparently unattractive implication of the preceding
simulations is that policymakers’ pursuit of their inflation objective appears to be
rather tepid, with actual inflation still differing noticeably from the goal at the end of
policymakers place equal weights on stabilizing unemployment and inflation.  Because
the model implies that inflation is quite insensitive to the level of economic activity
and long-term inflation expectations of households and firms evolve slowly in
response to realized inflation, policymakers do not find it worthwhile to create
sufficient resource slack to make more rapid progress in achieving the inflation goal.
The simulations shown in Chart 6 consider two potential mechanisms within this
modeling framework that could hasten the attainment of a long-run goal of 1½
percent core PCE inflation. First, a stronger focus on inflation can be represented by
ratcheting down the relative weight on unemployment deviations; in this case, the
optimal path of policy (as indicated by the dashed lines) is significantly tighter than in
the benchmark case with equal weights on unemployment and inflation (the solid
lines).6  Second, the long-term inflation expectations of households and firms might
move lower, perhaps encouraged by the adoption of an explicit long-run inflation
objective; 7 under this assumption, the optimal path of the funds rate only rises
modestly over the next few quarters to a plateau of about 3½ percent.  While both
approaches succeed in bringing inflation close to the Committee’s assumed goal
within the next few years, the model indicates that the unemployment costs are
substantially smaller when this outcome is achieved through less inertial inflation
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 14 of 42
Chart 6
Alternative Approaches to Stabilizing Inflation
Benchmark Scenario
Focus on Inflation Goal
Explicit Long-Run Inflation Objective
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
for inflation expectations.
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 15 of 42
expectations.  Whether an explicit long-run inflation objective, however, would
achieve that end remains an open question.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(12) Table 1 presents three short-run policy alternatives for consideration by the
Committee.  Under Alternatives A and B, the federal funds rate would be boosted
another 25 basis points at this meeting.  Apart from updating the description of the
current economic situation, the announcement associated with Alternative B is little
changed from that issued after the May meeting.  The announcement accompanying
Alternative A would indicate that policy accommodation had been substantially
reduced and would hint at less tightening going forward.  Under Alternative C, the
Committee would raise the federal funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting, eliminate
all forward-looking language, and make other significant changes to the
announcement.  As usual, the Committee could consider combining policy action and
draft language from more than one alternative or view some of the language choices
as foreshadowing the future direction of its statement.
(13) The Committee may see little reason to diverge at this point from its
established precedent of measured policy firming and thus be attracted to
Alternative B.  Although aggregate spending and output growth evidently slowed in
early spring, the economy appears to remain reasonably robust.  Moreover, the recent
evidence may be read as indicating that the pace of expansion is likely to rebound
during the second half of the year to a rate somewhat above that of the growth of
potential output, even with further modest policy tightening.  That outlook is
consistent with staff estimates of the equilibrium real federal funds rate (Chart 7),
which mostly lie well above the current level of the real federal funds rate.
Meanwhile, although recent inflation readings have proven reassuring, further
increases in energy prices and diminishing slack in the economy may be read by
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 16 of 42
Table 1: Alternative Language for the June FOMC Announcement
May FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 
3-1/4 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 
3-1/4 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the federal 
funds rate by 50 basis points to 3-1/2 
percent.
The Committee believes that, even after 
this action, the stance of the degree of 
monetary policy remains accommodative 
accommodation has been 
substantially reduced.  and, coupled 
with r Robust underlying growth in 
productivity, is providing ongoing  
continues to provide support to 
economic activity.
[no change]
The Committee believes that, even after this 
action, the stance of monetary policy remains 
accommodative and, coupled with robust 
underlying growth in productivity, is 
providing ongoing support to economic 
activity.
Recent data suggest that the solid pace 
of spending growth has Nonetheless, 
growth in spending slowed somewhat 
in the spring, partly in response to the 
earlier increases in elevated energy 
prices. Labor market conditions, 
however, apparently continue to 
improve gradually.
Growth in spending slowed 
somewhat in the spring, and energy 
prices have risen further.  
Nonetheless, R recent data suggest that 
the solid pace of spending growth has 
slowed somewhat, partly in response to 
the earlier increases in  energy prices  
expansion remains solid and that L 
labor market conditions, however, 
apparently continue to improve 
gradually.
Recent data suggest that the solid underlying 
pace of spending growth has slowed 
somewhat, partly in response to remains 
solid despite elevated the earlier increases 
in energy prices. Labor market conditions, 
however, apparently continue to improve 
gradually.
Pressures Readings on inflation have 
picked up been subdued in recent 
months, and pricing power is more 
evident. L longer-term inflation 
expectations remain well contained have 
declined.
Pressures on inflation have picked up in 
recent months and pricing power is 
more evident. L stayed elevated, but 
longer-term inflation expectations 
remain well contained.
Pressures on inflation have picked up further 
in recent months and pricing power is more 
evident. L, although measures of longer-
term inflation expectations remain well 
contained.
The Committee perceives that, with 
appropriate monetary policy action, the 
upside and downside risks to the 
attainment of both sustainable growth 
and price stability should be kept 
roughly equal.
[no change]
The Committee perceives that, with 
appropriate monetary policy action, the 
upside and downside risks to the attainment 
of both sustainable growth and price stability 
should be kept roughly equal.
Assessment 
of Risk
With underlying inflation expected to be 
contained, the Committee believes that 
remaining policy accommodation can 
be removed at a pace that is likely to be 
measured. Nonetheless, the Committee 
will respond to changes in economic 
prospects as needed to fulfill its 
obligation to maintain price stability.
[no change]
With underlying inflation expected to be 
contained, the Committee believes that policy 
accommodation can be removed at a pace 
that is likely to be measured. Nonetheless, 
The Committee will respond to changes in 
economic prospects as needed to fulfill its 
obligation to foster the attainment of both 
sustainable economic growth and 
maintain price stability.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 17 of 42
Chart 7
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Bands
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence band
90 percent confidence band
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 18 of 42
Equilibrium Real Rate Chart: Explanatory Notes
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to return 
output to its potential level over time.  The short-run equilibrium rate is defined as the rate that would 
close the output gap in twelve quarters given a model’s projection of the economy, and the medium-run 
concept is the value of the real funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years under the 
assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and 
then keep them equal thereafter.  The real federal funds rate employs the log difference of the core PCE 
price index over the previous four quarters as a proxy for expected inflation, with the staff projection 
used for the current quarter.  Since TIPS indexation is based on the total CPI, the TIPS-consistent 
measure incorporates an adjustment for the expected difference between CPI inflation and core PCE 
inflation.
Measure Description
Single-Equation 
Model
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and 
its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.  In light of 
this model’s simple structure, the short-run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends 
only on the recent position of output relative to potential, and the medium-run measure is 
virtually constant.
Small Structural 
Model
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, and 
the real bond yield.  Unlike the estimates from the single-equation model, values of the 
equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth, 
fiscal policy, and capital markets.
Large Model 
(FRB/US)
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.  These 
projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the 
three-year horizon relevant for the short-run concept but are less sensible over longer 
horizons.  Thus, we report only the short-run measure for the FRB/US model.
Greenbook-
consistent
Measures of the equilibrium real rate cannot be directly obtained from the Greenbook 
forecast, because the Greenbook is not based on a formal model.  Rather, we use the 
FRB/US model in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook forecast to 
derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that its 
simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is run 
off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output 
gap.  The medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it 
requires a relatively long extension of the Greenbook forecast.
TIPS-consistent Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) incorporate investors’ 
expectations of the future path of real interest rates.  The seven-year instantaneous real 
forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the Bluebook publication date reflects the 
short-term real interest rate expected to prevail in seven years. This forward rate is 
adjusted down for a term premium, assumed to be 70 basis points, and adjusted up for the 
difference between total CPI inflation and core PCE inflation, projected to be 40 basis 
points in the medium run.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 19 of 42
members as posing risks to inflation performance.  With the inflation outlook perhaps
slightly worse than previously anticipated and solid economic expansion seemingly on
track, the Committee may well be inclined to continue its measured pace of firming at
this meeting.  In favoring this over a larger move, members might interpret some
market indicators, including inflation compensation read from TIPS and the
considerable flattening of the nominal yield curve, as suggesting that an aggressive
tightening of policy at this time is not warranted.
(14) The announcement associated with Alternative B would update the wording
of the May statement in view of incoming data on spending, output, and employment
but would leave the rest of the statement unchanged.  As shown in Table 1, the
statement would indicate that “Growth in spending slowed somewhat in the spring,
and energy prices have risen further.  Nonetheless, recent data suggest that the
expansion remains solid and that labor market conditions continue to improve
gradually.”  Regarding inflation, it would modify slightly the wording used in May to
say that “Pressures on inflation have stayed elevated”—an indirect reference to even
higher energy prices and slightly reduced economic slack—and delete the mention of
pricing power, a phenomenon that appears to have received less attention of late.
The recent evidence on long-term inflation expectations has been good, with readings
from TIPS down appreciably over the intermeeting period and survey-based measures
ticking down after rising a bit earlier in the spring.  These circumstances might be seen
as consistent with a reiteration of the view that “longer-term inflation expectations
remain well contained.”  With events thus far unfolding broadly in line with the
Committee’s expectations, it might again indicate that “. . . with appropriate monetary
policy action, the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both sustainable
growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.”  On the same logic, the
Committee might again be comfortable expressing an expectation that the removal of
policy accommodation could likely proceed at a measured pace.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 20 of 42
(15) Financial market participants unanimously expect the FOMC to increase the
target federal funds rate 25 basis points at Thursday’s meeting.  Also, most if not all
expect relatively minor changes to the language, with nearly unanimous anticipation
that the Committee will both retain an assessment that the risks to sustainable growth
and price stability are balanced and reiterate the “measured pace” language.  Investors,
however, would likely view the lack of any signal that the Committee intends to pause
sometime soon, as well as the absence of an acknowledgment of a decline in inflation
expectations, as a reason to build in a bit more firming.
(16) The Committee may believe that the 2¼-percentage-point cumulative
tightening over the past year implied by a 25-basis-point move at this meeting would
amount to a substantial reduction in the degree of monetary policy accommodation
and that, after Thursday, the real federal funds rate may be within a notch or two of
its sustainable level.  As can be seen in Chart 7, a 25-basis-point step next week plus
one more such action would bring the real funds rate close to the lower edge of the
range of model-based estimates of the equilibrium real funds rate.  Particularly if the
Committee is averse to quick reversals in the direction of policy adjustment, it may be
inclined to move relatively slowly after this meeting in order to allow more time to
gauge the effects of recent policy actions and to avoid overshooting with its policy
instrument.  In this case, the FOMC may be attracted to Alternative A’s combination
of a 25-basis-point hike in the funds rate at this meeting and statement wording that
hints that the Committee could soon pause, at least for a time, in its process of policy
firming.  Members might view such an indication as allowing for a smoother
transition toward a reasonably sustainable policy stance.  And with economic growth
having slowed somewhat in the second quarter and investors’ concerns about
inflation apparently having diminished significantly in recent weeks, the Committee
may see little risk that such a signal would compromise its credibility regarding the
pursuit of its price stability objective.  If the Committee saw a 2 percent inflation
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 21 of 42
target as appropriate, then, as shown in Chart 5 of the previous section of the
Bluebook, monetary tightening going forward can be considerably more gradual than
it has been over the past year.  Winding down the process of tightening, at least for
now, would also presumably be favored to the extent that members read the net
reduction in, and low level of, long-term yields as a signal that market participants
harbored doubts about the continued robustness of economic expansion.
(17) The draft statement associated with Alternative A could be explicit that
“The Committee believes that the degree of monetary policy accommodation has
been substantially reduced.”  Presuming that the FOMC would again wish to indicate
that robust underlying productivity growth was supporting the economic expansion,
the announcement could follow that indication with “Nonetheless, growth in
spending slowed somewhat in the spring” while again acknowledging that labor
market conditions apparently continue to improve gradually.  With regard to prices,
the statement could accentuate the positive by indicating that “Readings on inflation
have been subdued in recent months, and longer-term inflation expectations have
declined.”  Finally, the FOMC could indicate that remaining policy accommodation
can likely be removed at a measured pace.
(18) Market participants continue to expect that the path of the intended federal
funds rate will flatten out somewhat in the second half of the year, but market
commentary and survey evidence suggest that investors do not anticipate that the
FOMC will overtly signal any such development next week.  Accordingly, a statement
employing the draft wording shown in Alternative A would likely produce a
noticeable downward shift in money market futures quotes, a rally in bond and equity
markets, and some depreciation in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.  The
extent of the rally, however, would likely be limited by the clear implication that some
further tightening was still likely in prospect.  Policy uncertainty arguably could
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 22 of 42
increase a little, as market participants might become a little less sure as to the timing
and magnitude of remaining policy actions.
(19) If the Committee, by contrast, has become more concerned about the
potential for an upcreep in inflation in response to developments over the
intermeeting period, then it may favor the 50-basis-point increase in the federal funds
rate of Alternative C.  The staff forecast for inflation has been revised up since the
April Greenbook in response to data pointing to a narrower output gap, higher labor
costs, a narrower price markup, and—most importantly—substantial further increases
in crude oil prices.  Indeed, far-futures oil prices, having risen even more steeply than
spot prices in recent months, currently suggest that significant relief from elevated
energy prices is unlikely.  The Committee may now see greater inflation risks than
does the staff or find the inflation outcome in the Greenbook to be unsatisfactory.  If
so, somewhat tighter money market conditions than assumed by the staff would seem
to be in order.  Indeed, the policy rules presented in Chart 8, especially those based on
an inflation target of 1½ percent, recommend substantial further tightening in coming
months.8  And, as indicated in Charts 5 and 6, the projection-based optimal control
exercises presented in the previous section suggest that, should the FOMC wish to
pursue an inflation rate of 1 percent, or to make more rapid progress in achieving a
would need to be boosted considerably by the middle of next year.  Given the
resilience that spending and output have shown to date in the face of higher energy
prices, the Committee might wish to pick up the pace of tightening, especially if it
believes that the low level of long-term interest rates represents financial
accommodation that has to be offset.  The Committee may also see an advantage in
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 23 of 42
Chart 8
Actual and Assumed Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Values from Policy Rules and Futures Markets
Shaded region is the range of values from rules 1a, 2a, 4, 5, and 6 below
Actual federal funds rate and Greenbook assumption
Market expectations estimated from futures quotes
Values of the Federal Funds Rate from Policy Rules and Futures Markets
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 24 of 42
Policy Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes 
       
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, πt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt-yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, π* policymakers’ long-
run objective for inflation, it-1 the lagged federal funds rate, gt-1  the residual from the rule’s prescription 
the previous quarter, (yt+3|t-yt+3|t*) the staff’s three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap, (∆ yt+3|t-
∆yt+3|t*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less potential output growth three quarters ahead, πt+3|t a 
three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t-ut+3|t*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast of the 
unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from the Greenbook and staff memoranda closest 
to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Root-mean-
square error
Rule Specification 
1988:1-
2005:1
Rules with Imposed Coefficients
a 1.08a
a .64a
it = it-1 + 0.5(∆ yt+3|t-∆ yt+3|t*) 
        + 0.5(πt+3|t-π*)
.97a .43a
Rules with Estimated Coefficients
it = .52it-1 + 0.48 [1.23 + 0.96(yt-yt*) 
        + 1.47πt]+ 0.51gt-1
.23 .26
it = .71it-1 + 0.29 [0.66 + 1.05(yt+3|t-yt+3|t*) 
+ 1.61πt+3|t] + 0.35gt-1
.25 .27
it = 0.47it-2 + 0.53 [0.40 
        ! 2.05(ut+3|t-ut+3|t*) + 1.57πt+3|t]
it = 0.97it-1+ [-1.23 + 0.68πcomp5|t]
.41b .43
a RMSE for rules with imposed coefficients is calculated setting π*=1.5. 
b RMSE for TIPS-based rule is calculated for 1999:1-2005:1.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 25 of 42
tightening policy in a relatively large, ½-percentage-point increment at this meeting if
it is worried that the measured tightening of policy to date, and especially the FOMC’s
repeated indications that measured tightening can likely continue, may be fostering a
degree of complacency among investors about risks—including the risks of investing
in housing.
(20) A number of modifications to the Committee’s statement would be required
to accommodate the selection of Alternative C.  For instance, the FOMC might wish
to delete the reference to “robust underlying growth in productivity,” given that actual
productivity growth appears to have dropped sharply in the second quarter.  Although
the staff believes that trend productivity continues to expand briskly, the Committee
might be sufficiently uncertain about that assessment to be uncomfortable continuing
to assert strength in underlying productivity.  As for aggregate demand, the
Committee could summarize recent developments by saying that “Recent data suggest
that the underlying pace of spending growth remains solid despite elevated energy
prices”—striking the prior reference to the slowing of growth in the spring—and
could go on to mention that “Labor market conditions continue to improve,”
eliminating both “apparently” and “gradually.”  The FOMC could implicitly
acknowledge the further run-up in energy prices and reduction in labor market slack
by noting that “Pressures on inflation have picked up further in recent months,
although measures of longer-term inflation expectations remain well contained.”  As
discussed in the April Bluebook, the Committee might also take this opportunity to
eliminate the forward-looking language from the statement, dropping both the risk
assessment and the reference to the measured pace of tightening.
(21) With nary a hint heretofore of an upshift in the pace of policy tightening,
market participants would be shocked by the combination of a 50-basis-point increase
in the funds rate at this meeting and the announcement suggested for Alternative C.
The statement would likely lead investors to conclude that the FOMC expected to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 26 of 42
continue to tighten policy for some time—and, with the elimination of the measured
pace language, to anticipate that at least some future policy moves could come in
additional 50-basis-point increments.  Such a revision to policy expectations would
likely trigger a sharp sell-off in fixed-income and equity markets and a rise in the
foreign-exchange value of the dollar, although the increase in long-term yields could
be limited should investors foresee that policy tightening might well lead to weakness
in the economy and subdued inflationary pressures.  The pairing of the language of
Alternative C with a 25-basis-point move would also catch investors unawares,
probably leading them to ratchet up their expectations of policy firming considerably
and prompting a sell-off in fixed-income markets.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(22) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 growth is projected to remain quite
damped at just a 2 percent annual rate from May through December, as the rising
opportunity costs associated with further increases in the federal funds rate restrain
money demand.  For 2005 as a whole, M2 growth would also be about 2 percent, a
good deal slower than the 5¼ percent pace of 2004, and M2 velocity would climb 3¾
percent.  M2 is projected to accelerate somewhat in 2006, as the pace of monetary
tightening slows and deposit rates begin to catch up to market interest rates, but
velocity would still increase appreciably.  Domestic nonfinancial sector debt growth is
forecast to decelerate somewhat this year and to slow further in 2006.  Household
sector borrowing is expected to drop off considerably over the next six quarters,
reflecting a moderation in increases in house prices and a slight rebound in the saving
rate.  Federal borrowing is also likely to slow a little as the budget deficit narrows a bit.
Despite rising capital expenditures, business borrowing is projected to remain
moderate this year and next, owing in part to slower accumulation of liquid assets.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 27 of 42
Overall, domestic nonfinancial sector debt is expected to expand 7¾ percent in 2005
and 6½ percent in 2006, down from about 8½ percent in 2004.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 28 of 42
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
               (percent, annual rate)
Raise 25 bp* Raise 50 bp ** Greenbook ***
Monthly Growth Rates
* Increase of 25 basis points in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter
** Increase of 50 basis points in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter
*** This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 29 of 42
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
(23) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around ____________ 3 percent.
Risk Assessments
A. The Committee perceives that, with appropriate monetary policy, the
upside and downside risks to the attainment of both sustainable
growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.  With
underlying inflation expected to be contained, the Committee believes
that remaining policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is
likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to
changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to
maintain price stability.
B. The Committee perceives that, with appropriate monetary policy
action, the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both
sustainable growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.
With underlying inflation expected to be contained, the Committee
believes that policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is
likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 30 of 42
changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to
maintain price stability.
C. The Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as
needed to fulfill its obligation to foster the attainment of both
sustainable economic growth and price stability.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 31 of 42
Appendix Chart 1
Treasury Yield Curve
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
June 23, 2005   
May 2, 2005
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 32 of 42
Appendix Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 33 of 42
Appendix Chart 3
Stock Indexes
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
S&P 500*
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 34 of 42
Appendix Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 35 of 42
Appendix Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
+
+
+
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
+
+
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
                Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 36 of 42
Appendix Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
Ratio scale, index (1980=100)
Journal of Commerce Index
Ratio scale, index (1967=100)
CRB Spot Industrials
CRB Futures
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 37 of 42
Appendix Chart 7
Growth of Real M2 and M3
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 38 of 42
Appendix Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2 and Two
Estimates of V*
GDP implicit
price deflator (P)
Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*), given
current M2 and constant V*
Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*) given
current M2 and V* with shift
Constant V*
V* with shift
* Change in GDP implicit price deflator over the previous four quarters.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 39 of 42
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
June 23, 2005
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5
Agency total
Net Redemptions Net Net Purchases 3 Redemptions Net Redemptions outright Short- Long- Net
Jun 8 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- -3,432 --- -3,432
Intermeeting Period
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
acquired in exchange for maturing bills.  Excludes maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing issues,
except the rollover of inflation compensation.
