Content last modified 03/31/2011.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
APRIL 28, 2005
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC       April 28, 2005 
Restricted Controlled (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The Committee’s decision at its March meeting to increase the target
federal funds rate 25 basis points to 2¾ percent was widely anticipated by market
participants, as were the retention of the “measured pace” language and the
assessment that the risks to sustainable growth and price stability were balanced.1
However, the references in the statement to increased inflation pressures and to
more evident pricing power, as well as the explicit conditioning of the balance of
risks on “appropriate monetary policy action,” were apparently read by investors as
indicating that the Committee might tighten policy more rapidly than previously
thought.  In consequence, policy expectations firmed somewhat after the
announcement and rose further on the heels of a larger-than-expected increase in
consumer prices for February released on the next day.
(2) In the weeks that followed, however, readings on spending, employment,
and production came in weaker than expected, on balance, and equity markets sold
off significantly.  In addition, the minutes of the March FOMC meeting were viewed
as suggesting that the Committee perceived less upside risk to inflation than
investors had earlier surmised.  Market participants took particular note of the
statement in those minutes that members believed that an accelerated path of policy
tightening did not appear necessary at the time.  Despite the subsequent publication
1 The effective federal funds rate averaged 2.77 percent over the intermeeting period amid 
pressures from quarter-end flows and the April tax date.  Late in the period, participants again bid 
up the funds rate in anticipation of tightening at this meeting.  The Desk purchased $1.9 billion of 
Treasury coupon securities in the market and redeemed $211 million of two-year notes at an 
auction to comply with its per-issue portfolio guidelines.  The volume of outstanding long-term 
RPs remained unchanged on balance at $17 billion.
of higher-than-expected consumer prices for March, the expected policy path
rotated down on net over the intermeeting period (Chart 1).  Options on federal
funds futures indicate that investors are certain of a 25 basis point tightening at this
meeting and have considerably scaled back the odds placed on a larger move in June
(see box).  Current futures prices also indicate a mean expectation for the federal
funds rate a bit below 4 percent at the end of 2006, about 30 basis points lower than
Probability of a Pause or a Half-Point Increase
Money market futures prices indicate that the federal funds rate is expected to be raised to    
3 percent at this meeting and to reach 3½ percent by the end of this year.  Such a 
configuration is consistent with two more quarter-point increases in the funds rate target 
after this meeting spread over the five remaining FOMC meetings of the year.  Thus, 
financial markets appear to be betting that the process of policy firming will be put on pause 
at some point in 2005.
Given the relatively deep market in options on July federal funds futures, we can infer 
probabilities associated with various policy actions at the June FOMC meeting.  As shown in 
the chart below, which takes a quarter-point tightening at the May meeting as a fait accompli, 
the implied probability of a half-point rate hike at the June meeting has declined over the 
intermeeting period from nearly even odds to below 10 percent.  Much of this drop occurred 
after the February PCE price index release and in mid-April as equity prices turned down.  In 
contrast, the probability of a pause at the June meeting has roughly doubled to about 
25 percent over the same period.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 40
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
Apr. June Aug. Oct. Dec. Feb. Apr.
2005 2006
4.5
Percent
April 28, 2005
March 21, 2005
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premia and other adjustments.
Probability Density for Target Funds Rate after
June FOMC Meeting
4/28/2005
3/21/2005
70
Percent
Target Rate
     Note. Derived from options on July federal funds futures.
Jan. May Sept. Jan. May Sept. Jan.
2003 2004 2005
7
Percent
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Jan. May Sept. Jan. May Sept. Jan.
2003 2004 2005
4.0
Percent
5 to 10 Years Ahead
Next 5 Years
Inflation Compensation*
*Based on a comparison of an estimated TIPS yield curve to an estimated
nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Changes in Forward Rates of Inflation Compensation*
0-2 2-3 3-4 4-5
Basis Points
*Changes since March 21, 2005, based on inflation swap quotes.
Adjusted for indexation lag and seasonality effects.
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2003 2004 2005
120
Basis Points
Ten-Year Treasury
Long Bond
Implied Volatilities*
*Based on options on long-term Treasury futures.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 40
at the time of the last meeting.  According to a recent survey by the Desk, primary
dealers do not expect changes to the balance-of-risk sentence at this meeting,
although some predict that the “measured pace” language will be dropped.
(3) The downward revision in policy expectations showed through to a
15 basis point decline in two-year nominal Treasury yields over the intermeeting
period, while longer-term nominal yields moved down about 35 basis points.
Judging from TIPS, a drop in real yields accounted for about half of the decline in
longer-term nominal interest rates, implying that inflation compensation fell about
15 basis points.  Model-based estimates of term premiums have fallen further over
the intermeeting period, consistent with the decline in the volatility of long-term
Treasury securities inferred from options prices and perhaps indicative of
heightened safe-haven demands prompted by the downturn in equity markets.
(4) Despite generally favorable earnings reports for the first quarter, broad
equity indexes fell 3 to 5 percent over the intermeeting period, apparently
responding to the softer economic outlook (Chart 2).  In addition, investors’
appetite for risk was diminished by downbeat news from Ford, General Motors, and
a few other prominent firms and by additional reports of accounting irregularities in
the insurance industry.  A rough measure of the equity premium increased
somewhat over the period, and implied volatilities on equities turned up, albeit from
very low levels.  Corporate bond spreads, while still modest compared with recent
years, climbed over the intermeeting period:  Those on investment-grade corporate
securities widened about 10 to 20 basis points, and those on speculative-grade
securities rose about 90 basis points (see box).   Meanwhile, most other indicators of
corporate credit quality have remained strong on balance. Although General Motors’
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 40
Chart 2
Capital Market Developments
130
Index(09/21/04=100)
Wilshire
Nasdaq
Stock Prices
E/P ratio
Real Long-term Treasury yield*
* Perpetuity Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year expected inflation.
Note. + Denotes the latest observation using daily interest rates and stock 
prices and latest earnings data from I/B/E/S.
12-Month Forward Trend Earnings-Price Ratio for
S&P 500 and Perpetuity Treasury Yield
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2003 2004 2005
60
Percent
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatility
Daily
FOMC
Jan. May Sept. Jan. May Sept. Jan.
2003 2004 2005
70
Basis Points Dollars
GM Credit Default Swap Spread (left scale)
GM Stock Price (right scale)
GM Stock Price and Credit Default Swap Spread
Basis Points Basis Points
Ten-Year AA (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
0
 1
 2
3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
9
10
11
Decomposition of High-Yield Bond Spread
Percentage points
Compensation for Expected Loss
Compensation
for Risk
0
 1
 2
3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
9
10
11
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 40
Credit Market Conditions
The softer economic outlook, concerns about the 
prospects of automobile manufacturers, and 
further reports of accounting irregularities in the 
insurance industry apparently made investors 
charier of risk.  Negative corporate news mostly 
concerned investment-grade firms, but the 
associated widening in spreads was larger and 
more pervasive in the speculative-grade sector.  
As shown in the top panel at the right, the cross-
sectional distribution of high-yield credit spreads 
shifted to the right and became more dispersed.  
Consistent with a somewhat diminished appetite 
for risk among investors, a staff estimate of the 
corporate bond risk premium rose a good bit 
from the very low levels it had reached in the first 
part of the year.
Signs of heightened risk awareness were also 
visible in the credit default swaps (CDS) market.  
Indexes of investment-grade and speculative-
grade CDS have gained favor as vehicles to trade 
credit risk.  Trading of tranches of those indexes, 
which insure against losses within a specific 
percentile range, has also grown rapidly in recent 
years.  As was the case with bond and CDS index 
spreads, tranche spreads, including those on the 
super-senior slice of the investment-grade index, 
widened over the intermeeting period (the middle 
panel).  This particular tranche would absorb 
losses only if they exceeded 15 percent of the 
value of the whole index, and its spread can thus 
be interpreted as a measure of investors’ 
perception of the likelihood of extreme 
outcomes.
Options on CDS indexes also began trading 
recently.  As shown in the bottom panel, the 
implied volatility computed from those options 
has climbed substantially since mid-March, 
indicating a greater sense of uncertainty among 
investors about movements in credit spreads 
going forward.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 40
debt remains investment grade, credit default swap (CDS) spreads on the firm’s
obligations gapped 250 basis points higher over the period to levels similar to those
for poor-quality speculative-grade issuers.  CDS spreads for Ford also rose, but by
considerably less.
(5) Over the intermeeting period, the trade-weighted value of the dollar
increased 2¼ percent on balance against a basket of major foreign currencies
(Chart 3).  The dollar rose steeply in late March on the heels of the FOMC
announcement and indications of less robust growth abroad.  Against most
currencies, however, some of that gain has been erased this month, prompted in
part by disappointing U.S. data and the release of the FOMC minutes.  Even so, the
dollar has continued to move higher versus the Canadian dollar as weaker-than-
expected Canadian output and employment data, political uncertainties, and a
decline of oil prices from their recent peak weighed on that currency.  Euro-area
data were also disappointing and suggested to market participants a less-robust
outlook for growth there.  For the period as a whole, the dollar has appreciated
4 percent versus the Canadian dollar, 2¼ percent versus the euro, and about
1 percent versus the yen.2  Ten-year sovereign yields in most major foreign industrial
countries declined 15 to 30 basis points, a bit less than comparable U.S. yields.
Declines in foreign share prices outstripped those in the United States amid
concerns about the strength of the global recovery.  Turmoil in Chinese-Japanese
political relations likely added to the downward pressure on Japanese equity prices,
which fell 6 percent over the intermeeting period, and may have affected share
prices more broadly in the region.
(6) The dollar declined slightly on average against the currencies of our other
important trading partners over the intermeeting period.  Movements against most
currencies were modest, with the notable exception of the Brazilian real, against
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 40
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2003 2004 2005
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Index(12/31/02=100)
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
FOMC Daily
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2003 2004 2005
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields
Percent
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2003 2004 2005
Stock Price Indexes
Index(12/31/02=100)
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
FOMC Daily
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2003 2004 2005
EMBI+ Index
Basis Points
Overall
Brazil
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 40
which the dollar fell almost 7 percent.  Despite signs of slower growth in Brazil, the
central bank ceased its operations in currency swaps in mid-March, which had been
viewed as part of an official effort to weaken the real, and raised its main policy rate
25 basis points in mid-April to counter inflationary pressure.  Brazilian stocks fell
10 percent over the intermeeting period, and stock prices in other Latin American
countries also registered significant declines.  Spreads on dollar-denominated
sovereign bonds widened slightly over the intermeeting period.  Various comments
by G-7 officials emphasizing the need for China to modify its foreign exchange
regime, as well as signs of growing protectionist pressures aimed at Chinese exports,
pushed up the value of the renminbi versus the dollar in non-deliverable forward
(7) Domestic nonfinancial sector debt appears to have grown at a 9½ percent
rate in the first quarter, boosted in part by hefty federal borrowing (Chart 4).
Perhaps in response to rising corporate yields, gross bond issuance by nonfinancial
corporations has remained subdued of late, especially in the high-yield sector, while
retirements of outstanding bonds have stayed near last year’s rapid pace.
Meanwhile, commercial paper issuance and business borrowing from banks
advanced at a brisk rate over the intermeeting period.  Significant fractions of
respondents to the latest Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey reported stronger
demand for commercial and industrial loans and continued easing of both lending
standards and terms over the past three months.  The staff estimates that household
debt growth slowed somewhat in the first quarter from the robust pace recorded last
year.  Household credit quality has remained solid, notwithstanding the recent jump
in personal bankruptcies sparked by the anticipation of bankruptcy reform.
(8) M2 is estimated to have grown at a 2¾ percent annual rate on average in
March and April, about the same pace as earlier in the year.  M2 growth remains
below the estimated expansion of nominal income, although not by as much as
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 40
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Nonfinancial Debt
Percent, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
2002 2003 H1 H2 Jan Feb Mar
  2004   2005
Monthly rate
Growth of Household Debt Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Preliminary.
Q1
p
Q1
p
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of Federal Debt
2002 2003 H1 Q3 Q4 Q1
  2004 2005
Growth of M2
e Estimated.
2003 H1 Q3 Q4 Jan Feb Mar Apr
2004 2005
Velocity
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
Percent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 40
might have been expected given the increases in the opportunity costs of holding
money balances.  Even in the first quarter, when the velocity of M2 rose at a rate of
about 2¾ percent, this monetary aggregate expanded somewhat faster than standard
models would have predicted, perhaps owing to the flattening of the yield curve and
declines in equity prices.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 40
Policy Alternatives
(9) Incoming data over the intermeeting period led the staff to reduce
significantly its projection for near-term growth of real activity, to nudge up its
forecast for inflation, and to mark down its assumption for the path of monetary
policy.  The federal funds rate is now assumed to reach 3¼ percent by mid-year and
to rise another 50 basis points by late 2006, a little less firming than currently built
into markets and 25 basis points less cumulative action than assumed in the March
Greenbook.  In the current forecast, long-term nominal interest rates are projected
to stay near current levels over the projection period, despite the assumed monetary
policy tightening, as investors come to recognize that less firming will be necessary
to contain inflation than they currently expect.  Equity prices are expected to
increase from their recent lower levels at a pace generating risk-adjusted returns in
line with yields on fixed-income instruments, and the nominal trade-weighted index
of the dollar’s value against major foreign currencies is assumed to fall at an
annualized rate of 2 percent.  The price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil is
forecast to be about flat on balance over the projection period and to finish 2006
close to $53 per barrel, approximately $3 above the level forecast in the March
Greenbook.  In these circumstances, real GDP is forecast to grow 3½ percent this
year and next, a bit above the staff’s estimate of the expansion of potential output.
Nonetheless, resource slack persists over the forecast period, with the
unemployment rate holding at 5¼ percent (a little above the staff’s estimate of the
natural rate of unemployment), in part as labor force participation rises in response
to improving job prospects.  With regard to inflation, the staff has read the sharp
jump in the core CPI in March in large measure as the result of factors that are
expected to have a much smaller effect on PCE prices.  With some economic slack
remaining, import prices rising less rapidly, and energy prices falling back somewhat
as margins shrink, core PCE inflation is forecast to slow a little over the next two
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 40
Table 1: Alternative Language for the May FOMC Announcement
March FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by a further 25 basis 
points to 3 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 
3 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the federal 
funds rate by 50 basis points to 3-1/4 
percent.
The Committee believes that, even after 
this action, the stance of monetary policy 
remains somewhat accommodative and, 
coupled with robust underlying growth 
in productivity, is providing ongoing 
support to economic activity.
[no change]
The Committee believes that, even after this 
action, the stance of monetary policy remains 
accommodative and, coupled with robust 
underlying growth in productivity, is 
providing ongoing support to economic 
activity.
Recent data suggest that the solid 
pace of spending growth has slowed, 
partly in response to Output evidently 
continues to grow at a solid pace despite 
the rise in the earlier increases in 
energy prices.  , and labor Labor market 
conditions, however, apparently 
continue to improve gradually.
Recent data suggest that the solid 
pace of spending growth has slowed 
somewhat, partly in response to 
Output evidently continues to grow at a 
solid pace despite the rise in the earlier 
increases in energy prices.  , and labor 
Labor market conditions, however, 
apparently continue to improve 
gradually.
Output evidently continues to grow at a solid 
pace despite the rise in energy prices, and 
labor market conditions continue to improve 
gradually. sufficient to eliminate any 
remaining resource slack.
Though longer-term inflation 
expectations remain well contained, 
pressures While pressures on inflation 
have picked up in recent months, and 
pricing power is more evident, longer-
term inflation expectations remain 
well contained.  The rise in energy 
prices, however, has not notably fed 
through to core consumer prices.
Though longer-term inflation 
expectations remain well contained, 
pressures Pressures on inflation have 
picked up in recent months, and pricing 
power is more evident.  Longer-term 
inflation expectations remain well 
contained.  The rise in energy prices, 
however, has not notably fed through to 
core consumer prices.
Though longer-term inflation expectations 
remain well contained, pressures on inflation 
have picked up in recent months and pricing 
power is more evident.  The rise in energy 
prices, however, has not notably fed through 
to core consumer prices.
The Committee perceives that, with 
appropriate monetary policy action, the 
upside and downside risks to the 
attainment of both sustainable growth 
and price stability should be kept 
roughly equal.
[no change]
The Committee perceives that, with 
appropriate monetary policy action, the 
upside and downside risks to the attainment 
of both sustainable growth and price stability 
should be kept roughly equal.
Assessment 
of Risk
With underlying inflation expected to be 
contained relatively low, the Committee 
believes that remaining policy 
accommodation can be removed at a 
pace that is likely to be measured. 
Nonetheless, the Committee will 
respond to changes in economic 
prospects as needed to fulfill its 
obligation to maintain price stability.
[no change]
With underlying inflation expected to be 
contained, the Committee believes that policy 
accommodation can be removed at a pace 
that is likely to be measured. Nonetheless, 
The Committee will respond to changes in 
economic prospects as needed to fulfill its 
obligation to foster the attainment of both 
sustainable economic growth and 
maintain price stability.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 40
years.  After a bulge in the first half of this year, overall PCE inflation is forecast to
drop to a rate of about 1½ percent in the second half of 2005 and in 2006, and core
PCE inflation is forecast to move down to around 1¾ percent late this year and to
remain there in 2006.
(10) This Bluebook presents three policy alternatives for Committee
consideration that are listed in Table 1.  Under Alternatives A and B, the target
federal funds rate would be increased 25 basis points at this meeting.  Apart from
updating the description of recent economic conditions, the statement under
Alternative B could be quite similar to that issued following the March FOMC
meeting.  Alternative A would suggest that a near-term pause in the process of
tightening could be in the cards.  Under Alternative C, the federal funds rate would
be boosted 50 basis points, and the language would be modified substantially.  Some
variant of the wording of this alternative might be appealing even if the Committee
wished to tighten 25 basis points at this meeting if it also wanted to signal that its
future actions spanned a wider range of outcomes than currently envisioned by
market participants.  More generally, the Committee could use constituent elements
from more than one of these alternatives in constructing its statement.
(11) Although recent economic data have pointed to noticeably less strength in
spending and output in the first half of 2005 than anticipated at the time of the
March meeting, the Committee may still be inclined to tighten policy another
25-basis-point notch at this meeting, as in Alternative B.  The Committee might
share the view of the staff that, even after additional policy firming, growth in
economic activity will exceed, albeit only slightly, the rate of expansion of potential
output in coming quarters.  Such an outlook accords with staff estimates of the
equilibrium real rate of interest, which remain above the current level of the real
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 40
federal funds rate (Chart 5).3  Indeed, some relatively immediate increase in the
nominal funds rate may be seen as necessary to prevent the real funds rate from
declining as the result of the recent uptick in inflation.  While the absence of much
further progress in working down resource slack in this forecast may not be
particularly attractive, policymakers might believe that the current situation is best
described as one in which the economy has been hit by an adverse supply shock
emanating from the ratcheting higher of oil prices.  In such a circumstance, fate
deals monetary policymakers an unappealing hand, in that pursuing greater resource
utilization more aggressively could put price stability at risk and ensuring that
inflation is kept in check could require a worsening of resource slack.
(12) The draft statement associated with Alternative B updates the wording of
the March release in light of recent information on spending, employment, and
inflation.  As shown in Table 1, the Committee could indicate that “Recent data
suggest that the solid pace of spending growth has slowed somewhat, partly in
response to the earlier increases in energy prices.  Labor market conditions,
however, apparently continue to improve gradually.”  In view of the elevated CPI
figures for the past couple of months, and more generally in recognition of
increased uncertainty about the interpretation of recent inflation news, the draft
wording for Alternative B also suggests that the Committee omit the view expressed
in March that “the rise in energy prices, however, has not notably fed through to
core consumer prices.”  (The Committee’s consideration of such a change, however,
could depend on the March reading on PCE prices, which will be released on the
Friday before the meeting.)  If the Committee drops that sentence, it might wish to
reverse the order of the thoughts in the first sentence on inflation that appeared in
3 Starting with this Bluebook, the TIPS-based measure of the equilibrium real interest rate 
incorporates an upward adjustment of 40 basis points to account for the anticipated average 
difference between total CPI inflation (the basis for TIPS indexation) and core PCE inflation (the 
basis for computing inflation expectations in the other measures).
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 40
Chart 5
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
8
Percent
50 b.p. Tightening
25 b.p. Tightening
Current Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Bands
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence band
90 percent confidence band
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
   Greenbook-consistent measure 1.5 2.2
   Single-equation model 1.7 1.9
   Small structural model 2.9 3.0
   Large model (FRB/US) 2.0 2.1
   Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (0.6 - 3.7(
      90 percent confidence interval -0.3 - 4.6(
Medium-Run Measures
   TIPS-consistent measure *1.8* *2.0*
   Single-equation model 2.2 2.2
   Small structural model 2.8 2.9
   Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.5 - 3.4(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.7 - 3.9(
Memo
   Actual real federal funds rate 1.09 0.94
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 40
Equilibrium Real Rate Chart: Explanatory Notes
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to return 
output to its potential level over time.  The short-run equilibrium rate is defined as the rate that would 
close the output gap in twelve quarters given a model’s projection of the economy, and the medium-run 
concept is the value of the real funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years under the 
assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and 
then keep them equal thereafter.  The real federal funds rate employs the log difference of the core PCE 
price index over the previous four quarters as a proxy for expected inflation, with the staff projection 
used for the current quarter.  Since TIPS indexation is based on the total CPI, the TIPS-consistent 
measure incorporates an adjustment for the expected difference between CPI inflation and core PCE 
inflation.
Measure Description
Single-Equation 
Model
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and 
its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.  In light of 
this model’s simple structure, the short-run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends 
only on the recent position of output relative to potential, and the medium-run measure is 
virtually constant.
Small Structural 
Model
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, and 
the real bond yield.  Unlike the estimates from the single-equation model, values of the 
equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth, 
fiscal policy, and capital markets.
Large Model 
(FRB/US)
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.  These 
projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the 
three-year horizon relevant for the short-run concept but are less sensible over longer 
horizons.  Thus, we report only the short-run measure for the FRB/US model.
Greenbook-
consistent
Measures of the equilibrium real rate cannot be directly obtained from the Greenbook 
forecast, because the Greenbook is not based on a formal model.  Rather, we use the 
FRB/US model in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook forecast to 
derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that its 
simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is run 
off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output 
gap.  The medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it 
requires a relatively long extension of the Greenbook forecast.
TIPS-consistent Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) incorporate investors’ 
expectations of the future path of real interest rates.  The seven-year instantaneous real 
forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the Bluebook publication date reflects the 
short-term real interest rate expected to prevail in seven years. This forward rate is 
adjusted down for a term premium, assumed to be 70 basis points, and adjusted up for the 
difference between total CPI inflation and core PCE inflation, projected to be 40 basis 
points in the medium run.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 40
the March announcement to avoid communicating an excessively pessimistic view
of inflation prospects.  Apart from such updating, the announcement could be
similar to the one issued after the March meeting.  In particular, it would seem—
assuming that members share an economic outlook broadly in line with that of the
staff—that the Committee could retain its assessment of balanced risks to both
sustainable growth and price stability under the assumption of “appropriate
monetary policy action” that it adopted in March as well as its judgment that
removal of policy accommodation can proceed at a measured pace.4
(13) Investors appear certain that the Committee will boost the target federal
funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting.  Also, most expect that the FOMC will
not make major changes to its announcement, apart from those necessary to align
the description of economic conditions with newly available information.  While a
growing minority of market participants in recent days have come to expect the
“measured pace” language to be shed, it is hard to tell whether they would view such
an outcome as a signal of a stepped-up pace of firming or of a pause.  Assuming that
those differing interpretations about offset each other, there is little reason to
suspect that the market reaction to the adoption of Alternative B would be
(14) If the Committee is reasonably sure that inflation will be well contained
but is concerned that spending and output growth may have lost significant
momentum of late and that progress in reducing resource slack may have stalled, it
4 Members might interpret the adverse news over the intermeeting period as raising the 
probabilities of outsized deviations of spending growth below that which is sustainable and 
inflation above that consistent with price stability.  Such skewed risks might be expected to remain 
even after policy is set appropriately, implying that the Committee would view the risks to its two 
objectives individually as unbalanced—and in a manner that has offsetting implications for policy.  
However, much was made in markets of the Committee’s explicit conditioning of the risk 
assessment on appropriate policy and the conclusion generally drawn was that it was close to 
tautological.  While the selection of unbalanced risks is logically possible in the presence of 
significantly skewed probabilities, another change on the heels of the introduction of an explicit 
reference to appropriate policy would likely bewilder market participants.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 40
may wish to combine a 25-basis-point firming of policy at this meeting with
statement language that strongly suggests the possibility of a pause in firming at the
June meeting, as in Alternative A.  True, the Committee has repeatedly conveyed in
its minutes that the “measured pace” language is consistent with a pause in the
process of tightening, and market participants have priced in high odds of such a
possibility later this year.  But it cannot be ruled out that the present configuration
of market prices is conditioned on the expectation that the statement will be used to
signal the possibility of a pause in policy tightening.  If so, the Committee might see
merit in being more explicit.  A more gradual elimination of accommodation might
be appealing in light of the downward revision of nearly ¾ percentage point in the
short-run measure of the equilibrium real interest rate consistent with the
Greenbook forecast (the first line in the table in Chart 5); by that index, the real
funds rate would be less than ¼ percentage point below its estimated equilibrium
value after implementation of this alternative.  In addition, a 3 percent nominal
federal funds rate would sit high in the range of policy recommendations from
simple policy rules provided in Chart 6—and especially so if members viewed
2 percent inflation in the core PCE index as an acceptable outcome.  A gloomy view
of the risks to the outlook for spending would presumably also incline the
Committee to signal a pause.  For instance, economic activity could be weaker in
coming quarters than in the staff forecast for the reasons explored in the “sentiment
slump” and “sentiment slump with financial spillover” scenarios in the Greenbook.
As another possibility, members may be of the view that the slowing in spending
and activity of late owes less to elevated energy prices and more to the cumulative
monetary policy restraint put in place since June of last year than is implicit in the
Greenbook. 5   Pausing to assess the effects already in the pipeline from cumulative
5 While most longer-term yields remain below their levels just before tightening commenced, 
short- and intermediate-term yields are now much higher.  Those latter increases may be crimping 
spending more than the staff has allowed for, either because the economy is now more sensitive to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 40
Chart 6
Actual and Assumed Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Values from Policy Rules and Futures Markets
10
Percent
Shaded region is the range of values from rules 1a, 2a, 4, 5, and 6 below
Actual federal funds rate and Greenbook assumption
Market expectations estimated from futures quotes
Values of the Federal Funds Rate from Policy Rules and Futures Markets
2005 2006
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 40
Policy Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes 
       
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, πt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt-yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, π* policymakers’ long-
run objective for inflation, it-1 the lagged federal funds rate, gt-1  the residual from the rule’s prescription 
the previous quarter, (yt+3|t-yt+3|t*) the staff’s three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap, (∆ yt+3|t-
∆yt+3|t*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less potential output growth three quarters ahead, πt+3|t a 
three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t-ut+3|t*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast of the 
unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from the Greenbook and staff memoranda closest 
to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Root-mean-
square error
Rule Specification 
1988:1-
2005:1
2001:1-
2005:1
Rules with Imposed Coefficients
a 1.08a
a .64a
it = it-1 + 0.5(∆ yt+3|t-∆ yt+3|t*) 
        + 0.5(πt+3|t-π*)
.97a .43a
Rules with Estimated Coefficients
it = .52it-1 + 0.48 [1.23 + 0.96(yt-yt*) 
        + 1.47πt]+ 0.51gt-1
.23 .26
it = .71it-1 + 0.29 [0.66 + 1.05(yt+3|t-yt+3|t*) 
+ 1.61πt+3|t] + 0.35gt-1
.25 .27
it = 0.47it-2 + 0.53 [0.40 
        ! 2.05(ut+3|t-ut+3|t*) + 1.57πt+3|t]
it = 0.97it-1+ [-1.23 + 0.68πcomp5|t]
.41b .43
a RMSE for rules with imposed coefficients is calculated setting π*=1.5. 
b RMSE for TIPS-based rule is calculated for 1999:1-2005:1.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 40
policy restraint might therefore be in order, especially in light of the recent behavior
of the stock market, bond spreads, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
(15) The statement accompanying selection of Alternative A could employ
virtually the same text on aggregate spending and labor market conditions suggested
for Alternative B—but omitting the word “somewhat”—as follows:  “Recent data
suggest that the solid pace of spending growth has slowed, partly in response to the
earlier increases in energy prices.  Labor market conditions, however, apparently
continue to improve gradually.”  Regarding inflation, the sentence offered under
Alternative B could be modified under this alternative by saying, “While pressures
on inflation have picked up in recent months and pricing power is more evident,
longer-term inflation expectations remain well contained.”  Also, consistent with a
relatively benign view of inflation, the penultimate sentence could be changed to
begin “With underlying inflation expected to be relatively low…”  The second
sentence of the announcement could be altered to indicate that “the stance of
monetary policy remains somewhat accommodative,” implying that the amount of
policy accommodation still to be removed had been reduced.  Correspondingly, in
the second-to-last sentence, the Committee could refer to “remaining policy
accommodation” instead of just to “policy accommodation.”  Finally, to reinforce
that the trajectory for policy could involve a near-term pause, the statement could
refer to “appropriate monetary policy” instead of “appropriate monetary policy
action” in the assessment of risks.
(16) Market participants would not likely miss the hints in the announcement
of Alternative A of a higher likelihood of a pause in June.  Intermediate- and longer-
term interest rates probably would drop appreciably, and equity markets would rally.
The value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets would decrease along with the
drop in U.S. yields.  These market moves might be more sizable if investors read the
short rates or the relative importance of longer-term yields has been overstated historically because 
in prior episodes they covaried closely with short rates.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 40
statement as evidence that inflation pressures could be less intense than previously
perceived.  In any event, market participants would likely be especially sensitive to
readings on inflation over the upcoming intermeeting period.
(17) Should the Committee be particularly concerned that underlying inflation
pressures may be intensifying, it might be attracted to the 50-basis-point increase in
the federal funds rate of Alternative C.  Members may be more inclined than the
staff to assign signal, rather than noise, to the jump in the March CPI.  Also, prices
of far-dated crude oil futures contracts have remained elevated over the period since
the last Greenbook, which could be seen as implying little likelihood of a significant
unwinding of the previous run-up in energy costs.  As discussed in an alternative
scenario in the Greenbook, firms might pass on to their customers more of the
higher energy costs than in the baseline forecast.  Moreover, actual productivity
growth appears to have slowed over recent quarters, and Committee members
might be concerned that structural labor productivity will decelerate by more than
incorporated in the staff projection.  Taken together, higher energy prices and
slower underlying productivity growth may be viewed as an especially adverse supply
shock that lowers output in a manner that should be accepted rather than resisted.
Abstracting from such gloom about aggregate supply, last summer’s episode, as well
as broader economic experience, suggests that “soft patches” crop up from time to
time and do not necessarily threaten robust expansion of aggregate demand over a
longer period.  If the Committee believes that economic growth is likely to remain
solid, it could move to check elevated inflation pressures by more vigorous policy
action at this meeting.  The words of Alternative C (from row 2 down) might have
an appeal even if the Committee chose to firm 25 basis points at this meeting.  A
“C-lite” approach would convey a sense that the Committee wished to ensure that
the market understood that future policy options spanned a wider range than the
current statement might appear to some to allow.  As long as references to the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 40
accommodative stance of policy remain elsewhere in the statement, market
participants would interpret that flexibility as introducing a tilt toward a firmer,
rather than an easier, funds rate.  Removing all forward-looking guidance would
require excising characterizations of the degree of accommodation as well as the
“measured pace” language.
(18) As indicated in Table 1, the Committee could consider a number of
alterations to its statement in association with the selection of Alternative C to
convey a heightened concern about inflation prospects.  For example, the
Committee could strike the reference to “robust underlying growth in productivity”
in the second sentence.  In addition, it could choose not to focus on the apparent
recent slowing in output growth and simply note that “output continues to grow at a
pace sufficient to eliminate any remaining resource slack.”  With regard to inflation,
the Committee would probably wish to delete the sentence in the previous
announcement that “The rise in energy prices, however, has not notably fed through
to core consumer prices.”  Given the conditioning assumption of “appropriate
monetary policy,” the Committee could retain its assessment that the risks to
attainment of sustainable growth and price stability are balanced.  However, if the
Committee wanted to gain flexibility to tighten policy at a faster pace in the future, it
presumably would delete the risk assessment and the sentence expressing its belief
that policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.
(The characterization that policy is accommodative elsewhere in the statement
would remain as the sole signal of the direction of future action.)  Even after these
deletions, the Committee might wish to underscore that its future actions would
depend on evolving economic outcomes by indicating, with a nod to its dual
objectives, that “The Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as
needed to fulfill its obligation to foster the attainment of both sustainable economic
growth and price stability.”
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 40
(19) The selection of the 50-basis-point increase in the federal funds rate of
Alternative C would come as a considerable surprise to market participants.  That
hike, coupled with some or all of the changes in announcement wording discussed
in the previous paragraph, would prompt investors to revise sharply upward their
expectations for the path of monetary policy in the near term and likely beyond, and
thus would have a pronounced effect on financial markets more generally.  Interest
rates would rise substantially across the yield curve, equity prices would probably
decline, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar could increase significantly.
The same language associated with a quarter-point increase in the funds rate would
also send markets in the same direction, but to a lesser extent.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(20) Under the Greenbook forecast, rising short-term interest rates are
expected to be accompanied by increasing opportunity costs of holding monetary
assets as deposit interest rates, particularly those on liquid deposits, lag increases in
market yields.  As a result, growth of M2 is projected to remain weak, averaging just
2¾ percent for 2005 as a whole and 4 percent in 2006.  Over the forecast period,
the debt of nonfinancial corporations is projected to expand at a moderate rate.
External financing needs are expected to be held down this year by inflows from
abroad in response to temporary favorable tax treatment of repatriated earnings and
high levels of liquid assets.  In 2006, nonfinancial corporations are expected to tap
credit markets to a somewhat greater extent, and net equity runoffs are projected to
diminish.  Household sector borrowing is anticipated to decelerate in coming
quarters as house price increases slow and households begin to reverse the sharp
decline in the saving rate that has occurred in recent years.  In 2005 and 2006,
federal debt is expected to grow at a pace a little below the 9 percent rate of increase
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 40
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
                    (percent, annual rate)
Raise 25 bp* Raise 50 bp** Greenbook***
Monthly Growth Rates
* Increase of 25 basis points in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter.
  ** Increase of 50 basis points in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter.
*** This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 40
of 2004.  Overall, the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to expand
7½ percent in 2005 and 6½ percent in 2006.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 40
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
(21) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to
those presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around ____________ 2-3/4 percent.
Risk Assessments
A. The Committee perceives that, with appropriate monetary policy, the
upside and downside risks to the attainment of both sustainable growth
and price stability should be kept roughly equal.  With underlying
inflation expected to be relatively low, the Committee believes that
remaining policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely
to be measured.  Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to changes in
economic prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to maintain price
B. The Committee perceives that, with appropriate monetary policy action,
the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both sustainable
growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.  With underlying
inflation expected to be contained, the Committee believes that policy
accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.
Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to changes in economic
prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 40
C. The Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as
needed to fulfill its obligation to foster the attainment of both
sustainable economic growth and price stability.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 40
Appendix Chart 1
Treasury Yield Curve
4
Percentage Points
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
7
Percent
April 28, 2005   
March 21, 2005
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 40
Appendix Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 40
Appendix Chart 3
Stock Indexes
45
Ratio
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
140
160
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
S&P 500*
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 40
Appendix Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
8
Percent
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
8
Percent
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
8
Percent
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 40
Appendix Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
10
Percent
+
+
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
14
Percent
+
+
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
                Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 40
Appendix Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
130
140
Ratio scale, index (1980=100)
Journal of Commerce Index
340
360
380
Ratio scale, index (1967=100)
CRB Spot Industrials
340
Ratio scale, index (1967=100)
CRB Futures
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 40
Appendix Chart 7
Growth of Real M2 and M3
10
Percent
10
Percent
15
Percent
15
Percent
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 40
Appendix Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2 and Two
Estimates of V*
140
Ratio ScalePrice Level
GDP implicit
price deflator (P)
Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*), given
current M2 and constant V*
Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*) given
current M2 and V* with shift
140
Ratio Scale
12
PercentInflation*
Constant V*
V* with shift
12
Percent
* Change in GDP implicit price deflator over the previous four quarters.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 37 of 40
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
4-week 3-month 6-month 3-month 1-month 2-year 5-year 10-year 20-year 5-year 10-year Fixed-rate ARM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 40 of 40
