Content last modified 03/31/2011.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
DECEMBER 9, 2005
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 9, 2005
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1)  Investors had largely anticipated the FOMC’s decision at the November
meeting to raise the target federal funds rate 25 basis points to 4 percent, to maintain
its assessment that the risks to price stability and sustainable growth were balanced,
and to retain the “policy accommodation” and “measured pace” references.  As a
result, financial asset prices changed relatively little immediately after the
announcement.1  However, expectations for the path of monetary policy dropped in
response to the release of the minutes on November 22, which cited the potential
risks of excessive policy tightening and suggested the possibility of changes to the
statement in the near future.  Inflation data were benign over the intermeeting period,
while the news on spending and output was generally a little stronger, on balance,
than investors had expected.  On net over the intermeeting period, market
participants marked up slightly their path for the funds rate through the middle of
next year, but policy expectations beyond that horizon fell somewhat (Chart 1).2
Futures quotes indicate that investors currently expect a 25-basis-point hike in the
target at the upcoming meeting, attach a high probability to a similar increase in
January, and place some odds on a quarter-point move at the March meeting.  Half of
the respondents to the Desk’s latest dealer survey expect the Committee to change the
“measured pace” language in the upcoming statement, and most anticipate some
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
Dec. Mar. May July Oct. Jan. Apr.
2005 2006 2007
December 8, 2005
October 31, 2005
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premia and other adjustments.
Dec. Jan. Mar. May
Probability of a 25 Basis Point Tightening
at Upcoming FOMC Meetings*
*Estimated from federal funds futures.
October 31, 2005
December 8, 2005
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
Spot WTI (left scale) 
Spot Unleaded Gasoline* (right scale)
*Spot wholesale price of gasoline.
Energy Prices
Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
Five-to-Ten Years Ahead
Next Five Years
Inflation Compensation*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves, and are adjusted for the indexation-lag effect.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 42
modification to the characterization of policy as “accommodative.”  Option-implied
uncertainty about the expected path for policy over the next six months edged a bit
higher over the period.
(2) Yields on two-year nominal Treasury securities fell about 5 basis points over
the intermeeting period, while those on ten-year nominal Treasury issues declined
around 10 basis points, on net.3  Thus, the yield curve flattened slightly, leaving its
slope considerably lower than in recent years (see box entitled “Possible
Interpretations of the Term Structure of Interest Rates”).  Amid reassuring data on
core inflation and mixed readings on energy prices, TIPS-based inflation
compensation for the next five years fell about 10 basis points after adjusting for carry
effects, while the five-year forward measure moved down a bit further.4  According to
the Michigan survey, the short- and long-term inflation expectations of households
retraced a considerable portion of the increases observed after the hurricanes struck
the Gulf Coast.
(3) Broad stock indexes advanced about 4 to 6 percent over the intermeeting
period, propelled by news suggesting continued robust economic growth with
moderate inflation (Chart 2).  Implied volatility on major equity indexes declined
substantially, on net, to very low levels.  Apart from mounting troubles in the auto
industry, the credit quality of nonfinancial firms generally remained solid, given their
strong balance sheets and profits.  The delinquency rate on C&I loans stayed at a 
                                           
3 The December ten-year Treasury futures contract is the first to trade under the new Chicago Board 
of Trade rule that limits the open interest of any single investor to $5 billion during the last ten days 
of trading, an interval that in this cycle began on December 7.  Unlike during the September cycle, 
trading conditions in the security that is the cheapest to deliver into that contract, the August 2012 
note, have reportedly remained liquid.   
4 Five-year inflation compensation without adjusting for carry effects fell about 30 basis points over 
the intermeeting period.  However, the staff estimates that most of this decline can be attributed to 
the effect of the inflation indexation lag in TIPS—that is, the carry effect—as energy prices caused 
the total non-seasonally-adjusted CPI to spike higher in September, and investors expect the CPI to 
fall back in November, judging from surveys and futures quotes.  Estimates of the magnitude of the 
impact are somewhat imprecise, but making an approximation for carry effects seems preferable to 
no adjustment.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 42
Possible Interpretations of the Term Structure of Interest Rates 
 
The shape of the money market and Treasury yield curves contains information about 
investors’ expectations of the trajectory of policy, economic growth, and inflation in 
coming quarters.  The Eurodollar futures curve currently slopes downward after the 
middle of next year, which suggests that investors attach significant odds to a change 
in the direction of monetary policy around that time.  Under our standard assumption 
for the term premium, futures rates imply about a 25-basis-point decline in the target 
funds rate between mid-2006 and the end of 2007.  Generally in line with futures 
quotes, the average expected target funds rate from the Desk’s recent survey declines 
almost 10 basis points from the middle of next year to the end of 2006.  Investors’ 
anticipation of a modest policy easing sometime after the middle of next year is 
consistent with expectations of a moderate slowing in economic growth or a decline 
in inflation.     
 
Researchers have noted that the Treasury yield curve tends to invert shortly before 
business cycle peaks, and a few commentators have argued that the current shape of 
the term structure is a harbinger of a slowdown or even a recession.  However, the 
yield curve has flattened only a touch over the intermeeting period, and its slope 
remains positive and close to its historical average at most horizons.  Based on simple 
regressions that control for the comparatively low level of the estimated term 
premium, the current slope of the term structure – as measured by the difference 
between three-month and ten-year Treasury yields – implies real GDP growth rates 
that are quite comparable to Board staff and private forecasts.  In addition, the slope 
of the term structure now implies only small odds on a contraction in output anytime 
within the next two years.  For details on the staff’s analysis of the implications of the 
shape of the yield curve and GDP growth expectations, see “Some Perspectives on 
Longer-Term Yields,” memo to the Federal Open Market Committee, June 23, 2005, 
pages 49-67.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 42
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec.
2004 2005
Wilshire
Nasdaq
Stock Prices
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Real Long-Term Treasury Yield*
*Perpetuity Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year expected inflation.
Note. + Denotes the latest observation using daily interest rates and stock 
prices and latest earnings data from I/B/E/S.
Equity Valuation
S&P 500 EPS
NIPA, economic
profits before tax
Corporate Earnings Growth Percent
*Change from four quarters earlier.
    Source. I/B/E/S for S&P 500 EPS.
Bond Default and
C&I Loan Delinquency Rates Percent of outstandings
C&I Loan Delinquency Rate
    (Call Report)
Bond Default Rate*
*Six-month moving average, from Moody’s Investors Service.
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec.
2004 2005
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 42
historically low level in the third quarter, and bond defaults increased a bit further in
October, mainly reflecting bankruptcy filings by Delphi and Refco.  Yields on
investment-grade corporate debt moved about in line with those on comparable
Treasury securities, leaving risk spreads about unchanged, and speculative-grade debt
spreads were up only a little, despite intensified credit concerns in the auto sector.
Year-end pressures in money markets have been minimal (see box entitled “Year-end
(4) The major-currency index of the dollar’s foreign exchange value rose about
¾ percent on balance over the intermeeting period (Chart 3).5  The dollar gained more than
to delay transition from its quantitative easing policy.  The dollar also appreciated
about 1½ percent against the euro.  Social unrest in France may have weighed on the
euro early in the period, and market commentary suggested that an additional negative
factor for the euro was continued repatriation of funds from Europe by U.S. firms
prompted by the tax break provided under the Homeland Investment Act.  The
European Central Bank raised its minimum refinancing rate 25 basis points on
December 1—its first policy move in almost two and one-half years—but investors
reportedly interpreted subsequent comments by ECB President Trichet as signaling
less tightening ahead than they had anticipated.  The dollar depreciated 1¾ percent
vis-à-vis the Canadian dollar, as Canadian domestic demand continued to be robust.
The Bank of Canada raised its overnight policy rate 25 basis points on December 6
and indicated that additional tightening likely will be needed.  Yields on long-term
government securities in major foreign industrial countries edged down on balance
over the period.  Stock markets registered substantial gains, led by Japan’s Nikkei
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 42
Year-end Pressures 
 
As in 2003 and 2004, year-end pressures in money markets have been muted so far in 
2005.  As shown in the left-hand panel of the chart below, the spread of yields on 
thirty-day A2/P2 commercial paper over those on A1/P1 paper remained low as the 
maturity date crossed year-end.  Although the volume of outstanding commercial 
paper has increased in 2005, the continued strength in business credit quality has 
likely damped the premium investors require to hold lower-rated paper over the turn 
of the year.  In repo markets, there are some signs of special demand for Treasury as 
opposed to other collateral in contracts that extend over year-end, but the spread of 
one-month term federal funds over comparable Treasury RP rates, as noted in the 
right panel, has stayed low and does not point to any significant concerns about year-
end pressures in the funds market.  Indeed, federal funds futures quotes imply that 
investors do not expect the effective federal funds rate to deviate much from the 
expected target over year-end.  The persistent low volatility of the effective funds rate 
in recent years along with expectations that the Desk will provide ample liquidity at 
year-end has probably reduced pressures in uncollateralized overnight funding 
markets.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 42
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
Overall
Brazil
EMBI+ Index
Basis Points
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 42
index, which moved up nearly 10 percent on signs of improving growth and prospects
for earnings.  Stock prices in the euro area and Canada rose 6 to 7 percent.
(5) The dollar fell about 1 percent over the intermeeting period against an index
of currencies of our other important trading partners.  The dollar depreciated
performance there.  The dollar also fell 1¾ percent versus the Brazilian real.  Stock
prices moved up strongly in both countries, and Mexican and Brazilian sovereign yield
spreads narrowed.  Equity prices also rose substantially in a number of Asian
emerging market economies, including Taiwan and Korea, although exchange rates
versus the dollar generally moved in narrow ranges.
(6) Domestic nonfinancial sector debt grew at a 9 percent annual rate in the
third quarter, similar to its pace over the first half of the year, but is expected to
decelerate somewhat in the current quarter (Chart 4).  Household mortgage debt
expanded at an annual rate of 14 percent in the third quarter, but it is likely to slow
somewhat in the current quarter against the backdrop of increases in mortgage rates.
Bankruptcy filings have remained at very low levels after surging just before the new
bankruptcy reform legislation became effective on October 17.  Although commercial
paper outstanding appears to have been about flat on balance in the fourth quarter,
overall business-sector debt has continued to expand at a fairly brisk pace, reflecting
strong growth in C&I lending and moderate net bond financing.  Federal debt is
projected to advance at about a 7¾ percent annual rate in the current quarter, up
from the 5 percent pace posted in the third quarter, while state and local government
borrowing is expected to moderate as the pace of advance refundings declines.
(7) M2 growth slowed in November, reflecting recent increases in the
opportunity cost of money holdings.  The deceleration was especially apparent in
liquid deposits and retail money market funds.  Waning mortgage prepayment effects
stemming from the rise in mortgage interest rates appeared to more than offset a
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 42
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Nonfinancial Debt
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q3 p
Q4 p
Growth of Household Debt
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Household Bankruptcies
Thousands of filings
Weekly, n.s.a.
*Source. Visa Bankruptcy Notification Service.
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
Monthly rate
e Estimated.
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercentage Points
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
p Projected.
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 42
hurricane-related boost to M2.  An increased relative attractiveness of equity
investments may also have damped M2 growth.  The rise in share prices in November
was accompanied by a strong rebound in net inflows into domestic equity funds.  M2
is expected to expand at about the same pace as nominal GDP in the current quarter.
Appendix B analyzes the growth of money and nonfinancial debt this year.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 42
Economic Outlook
(8) Data on spending and production generally came in on the high side of
expectations over the intermeeting period, leading the staff to trim its assessment of
the impact of the recent hurricanes on the economy and to mark up somewhat its
assessment of the near-term momentum to spending.  In addition, recent data on
productivity prompted the staff to revise up a bit its forecast for structural
productivity growth.  With the economic expansion seen as a little stronger than had
previously been forecast, the staff now assumes that the federal funds rate rises into
early next year before leveling out at 4½ percent, 25 basis points higher than in the
last Greenbook.  Stock prices are projected to rise at a rate sufficient to provide risk-
adjusted returns comparable to those on fixed-income instruments, and the foreign
exchange value of the dollar is expected to decline gradually.  With policy assumed to
be on hold after early next year, longer-term interest rates are about flat over the
forecast period.  Oil prices are projected to remain near current levels over the next
two years.  Against this backdrop, the staff sees output growing near potential over
of this year’s large run-up in energy prices are expected to push core PCE inflation to
about 2 percent next year, but, as those effects wane and productivity growth remains
strong, core inflation is projected to slow to 1¾ percent in 2007.  With energy prices
flattening out, headline inflation roughly matches core inflation over the forecast
Policy Alternatives
(9) This Bluebook breaks with the staff’s usual practice by presenting two
policy alternatives—B and C—that differ only in their statement language; both entail
an increase in the target federal funds rate of 25 basis points (Table 1).  Given the absence
of major surprises in the economic and financial environment during the intermeeting
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 42
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled FR 
Table 1: Alternative Language for the December FOMC Announcement
November FOMC Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to 
raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis 
points to 4¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to 
raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis 
points to 4¼ percent.
Despite E elevated energy prices and hurricane-related 
disruptions, in the expansion in economic activity 
appears solid.  have temporarily depressed output and 
employment.  However, monetary policy 
accommodation, coupled with robust underlying 
growth in productivity, is providing ongoing support 
to economic activity that will likely be augmented by 
planned rebuilding in the hurricane-affected areas.
Despite Eelevated energy prices and hurricane-related 
disruptions, in economic activity the expansion have 
temporarily depressed output and employment. 
remains vigorous, supported by   However, monetary 
policy accommodation, coupled with  and robust 
underlying growth in productivity.  , is providing 
ongoing support to economic activity that will likely be 
augmented by planned rebuilding in the hurricane-
affected areas.
The cumulative rise in energy and other costs has the 
potential to add to inflation pressures; however, c Core 
inflation has been stayed relatively low in recent 
months and longer-term inflation expectations remain 
contained.   Nevertheless, possible increases in 
resource utilization as well as elevated energy prices 
have the potential to add to inflation pressures.
Core inflation has been relatively low in recent months 
and longer-term inflation expectations remain 
contained.  Nevertheless, relatively high levels of 
resource utilization as well as elevated  T the 
cumulative rise in energy prices have and other costs 
has the potential to add to inflation pressures. ; 
however, core inflation has been relatively low in 
recent months and longer-term inflation expectations 
remain contained.
The Committee judges that some further measured 
policy firming is likely to be needed to keep the risks to 
both price stability and sustainable economic growth 
roughly in balance.
Assessment 
of Risks
In any event, the Committee will respond to changes 
in economic prospects as needed to maintain price 
stability and foster sustainable economic growth.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 42
period, the choice of another 25 basis point firming at this meeting would be
consistent with the Committee’s indication in November that policy tightening can
likely proceed at a measured pace.  A policy firming of that dimension would also be
consistent with the staff forecast, in which modest further tightening is projected to
be sufficient to contain inflation and foster sustainable growth.  This Bluebook’s
particular focus on the announcement is motivated by the Committee’s interest in
modifying its statement language before long, as evidenced by the considerable
discussion at the last meeting and the ensuing intermeeting survey of meeting
participants’ preferences for the announcement.  Under Alternative B, the form of the
assessment of risks would be modified notably, with the Committee indicating
explicitly a judgment that some further tightening would be necessary to keep the
risks to both sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance.  By
contrast, Alternative C retains much of the form as well as important elements of the
content of the November FOMC statement, including the characterization of policy
as accommodative and the “measured pace” language.  However, the rationale section
of Alternative C would convey greater concerns about inflation than the comparable
portion of Alternative B.  As always, the Committee could choose to use the rationale
language from one alternative with the assessment of risks language from another, or
it could adopt different language altogether.
(10) The Committee might believe that a 25 basis point firming of policy at this
meeting is appropriate for a number of reasons.  In the staff forecast, output remains
near potential, and core inflation, though boosted for a time by the indirect effects of
higher energy prices, ends the projection period near 1¾ percent—a level that many
members may see as compatible with their price stability objective.  If the Committee
believes the Greenbook forecast is plausible and acceptable, then it would probably
find the 25 basis point policy firming at this meeting assumed in that projection to be
attractive.  Put a bit differently, the Committee may see the current constellation of
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 42
asset prices and interest rates in financial markets as likely to be consistent with output
running near potential and inflation remaining contained.  If so, then it might want to
ratify market expectations of a further 25 basis point tightening at this meeting.  Of
course, should the Committee’s outlook have changed significantly since the
November meeting, it might wish to select a different setting for its policy instrument
than assumed in the alternatives discussed below.
Alternative B
(11) The Committee may favor the statement language of Alternative B if it
thinks that somewhat higher federal funds rates are likely to prove necessary to limit
pressures on resources and promote price stability but also believes that this
tightening phase could be ending fairly soon.  The resilience of the economy in the
face of hurricane-related disruptions, already limited margins of slack in resource
markets, and the pressures on inflation from elevated energy prices may incline the
Committee to believe that additional firming will probably be necessary even after a
policy accommodation now significantly reduced, the appropriate timing and extent
of additional policy firming are becoming more uncertain.  Declines in energy prices
and inflation expectations from their recent peaks may have eased members’ concerns
about the inflation outlook.  And the real federal funds rate (as measured using lagged
inflation to proxy for inflation expectations) is now within the range of staff estimates
of its equilibrium value (Chart 5).  Moreover, with a 25 basis point tightening at this
meeting, the federal funds rate would be above the range of prescriptions from policy
rules based on a target for inflation of 1½ percent (Chart 6), and one more tightening
would bring the rate to the top of the range that the rules would call for even in the
second half of next year.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 42
Chart 5
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Bands
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence band
90 percent confidence band
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.1 1.9
   Small structural model 2.5 2.4
   Large model (FRB/US) 3.5 *2.8*
   Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.1 - 4.2(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.1 - 5.1(
Greenbook-consistent measure 2.4 2.0
Medium-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.2 2.1
   Small structural model 2.5 2.4
   Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.4 - 3.2(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.7 - 3.8(
TIPS-based factor model 2.1 2.1
Memo
   Actual real federal funds rate 2.17 1.85
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 42
Equilibrium Real Rate Chart: Explanatory Notes
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to return 
output to its potential level over time.  For the first three measures listed below, the short-run 
equilibrium rate is defined as the rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the 
corresponding model’s projection of the economy.  For the first two measures, the medium-run concept 
is the value of the real funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years under the 
assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and 
then keep them equal thereafter.  The TIPS-based factor model measure provides an estimate of market 
expectations for the real federal funds rate seven years ahead.  The actual real federal funds rate shown 
in the chart employs the log difference of the core PCE price index over the previous four quarters as a 
proxy for expected inflation, with the staff projection used for the current quarter.
Measure Description
Single-equation 
Model
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and 
its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.  In light of this 
model’s simple structure, the short-run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends only 
on the recent position of output relative to potential, and the medium-run measure is 
virtually constant.
Small Structural 
Model
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, and 
the real bond yield.  Unlike the estimates from the single-equation model, values of the 
equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth, 
fiscal policy, and capital markets.
Large Model 
(FRB/US)
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.  These 
projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the 
three-year horizon relevant for the short-run concept but are less sensible over longer 
horizons.  Thus, we report only the short-run measure for the FRB/US model.
Greenbook-
consistent
Measures of the equilibrium real rate cannot be directly obtained from the Greenbook 
forecast, because the Greenbook is not based on a formal model.  Rather, we use the 
FRB/US model in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook forecast to 
derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that its 
simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is run 
off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output 
gap.  The medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it 
requires a relatively long extension of the Greenbook forecast.
TIPS-based 
Factor Model
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’ expectations of 
the future path of real interest rates, but also include term and liquidity premiums.  The 
TIPS-based measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven-year-ahead 
instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the Bluebook publication 
date.  This forward rate is adjusted to remove estimates of the term and liquidity 
premiums based on a three-factor arbitrage-free term-structure model applied to TIPS 
yields, nominal yields, and inflation.  Because TIPS indexation is based on the total CPI, 
this measure is also adjusted for the medium-term difference—projected at 40 basis 
points—between total CPI inflation and core PCE inflation.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 42
Chart 6
Actual and Assumed Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Values from Policy Rules and Futures Markets
Shaded region is the range of values from rules 1a, 2a, 4, 5, and 6 below
Actual federal funds rate and Greenbook assumption
Market expectations estimated from futures quotes
Values of the Federal Funds Rate from Policy Rules and Futures Markets
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 42
Policy Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes 
 
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, πt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt – yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, π* policymakers’ 
long-run objective for inflation, it-1 the lagged federal funds rate, gt-1  the residual from the rule’s 
prescription the previous quarter, (yt+3|t – yt+3|t*) the staff’s three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output 
gap, (Δ yt+3|t – Δyt+3|t*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less potential output growth three quarters 
ahead, πt+3|t  a three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t – ut+3|t*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast 
of the unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from the Greenbook and staff memoranda 
closest to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Root-mean-
square error
Rule Specification 
1988:1-
2005:3
Rules with Imposed Coefficients
a 1.04a
it = 2 + πt + (yt – yt*) + 0.5(πt – π*) .67a .62a
it = it-1 + 0.5(Δ yt+3|t – Δ yt+3|t*) 
          + 0.5(πt+3|t – π*)
.96a .40a
Rules with Estimated Coefficients
it = .51it-1 + 0.49 [1.29 + 0.95(yt – yt*) 
          + 1.45πt]+ 0.53gt-1
.23 .25
it = .71it-1 + 0.29 [0.75 
          + 1.03(yt+3|t – yt+3|t*) + 1.59πt+3|t] 
          + 0.38gt-1
.25 .27
it = 0.48it-2 + 0.52 [0.43 
          – 2.09(ut+3|t – ut+3|t*) + 1.56πt+3|t]
.47 .64
it = 0.97it-1+ [–1.27 + 0.70πcomp5|t] .40
b .41
a RMSE for rules with imposed coefficients is calculated setting π* = 1.5. 
b RMSE for TIPS-based rule is calculated for 1999:1-2005:3.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 42
(12) The rationale portion of the statement for Alternative B notes that the
expansion in economic activity appears solid despite elevated energy prices and
disruptions related to the hurricanes.  The reference to policy accommodation has
been dropped:  If the federal funds rate is seen as nearing its equilibrium value, the
Committee may no longer wish to suggest that policy accommodation is boosting
growth.  Members may also want to take this opportunity to remove the reference to
the support to economic activity provided by robust underlying growth in
productivity.  In assessing inflation, the Committee may want to acknowledge the
relatively benign core inflation readings in recent months and again indicate that
longer-term inflation expectations remain contained.  However, given the apparent
underlying strength of aggregate demand, members may want to note that “possible
increases in resource utilization as well as elevated energy prices have the potential to
add to inflation pressures.”
(13) The assessment of risks portion of the statement for Alternative B resolves
some of the complications and tensions that have arisen in the current language.  It
starts by removing the arguably tautological statement that “appropriate policy”
should keep the risks to sustainable growth and price stability balanced, and it also
drops the indication that “policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is
likely to be measured.”  Instead, the assessment notes that “some further measured
policy firming is likely to be needed to keep the risks to both price stability and
sustainable economic growth roughly in balance.”  The Committee may find this
formulation attractive because it simplifies the existing wording considerably but does
not greatly change its message regarding the likely near-term path for policy.  If the
Committee continues to expect that policy will be adjusted gradually, almost surely in
increments of 25 basis points, then the retention of the word “measured” would seem
appropriate.  And the use of the word “some” would suggest that the Committee
expects that the necessary amount of additional tightening is not large.  Given the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 42
considerable uncertainty about the level of the equilibrium federal funds rate,
members may no longer be confident that policy is accommodative, and so welcome
the deletion of the reference to the removal of policy accommodation here as well as
in the rationale section.  This deletion might seem even more appropriate if members
see a possibility that the federal funds rate will need to be raised above its equilibrium
value in order to keep inflation contained.  As in recent announcements, the
Committee might want to emphasize that policy actions will depend on evolving
economic conditions.  Along these lines, the last sentence in the statement notes that
“the Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to maintain
price stability and foster sustainable economic growth.”
(14) Market participants uniformly expect a 25 basis point rate hike at this
meeting.  The desk’s survey of primary dealers indicates that most anticipate deletion
or modification of the references to accommodative policy and that about half
anticipate that the Committee will drop or modify the “measured pace” phrase.  But
market participants appear not to foresee a change in the formulation of the
assessment of risks at this meeting.  Given the extent of the changes proposed for
Alternative B, it is difficult to be confident of how the new statement will be
interpreted by investors.  On the one hand, the rationale portion of the statement—by
downplaying the adverse effects on activity of higher energy prices and the hurricanes,
and pointing to increases in resource utilization as a potential source of inflation
pressure—may be seen as somewhat hawkish, leading investors to mark up their path
for policy.  On the other hand, the indication in the risk assessment that “some
further measured tightening is likely to be needed” to keep risks balanced would seem
to be roughly congruent with current market expectations for policy.  And the fact
that the Committee was making substantial changes to the statement might be seen by
investors as a sign that it expected to stop tightening soon.  On balance, policy
expectations could move a little higher, causing modest increases in interest rates,
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 42
declines in stock prices, and strengthening of the dollar.  These market effects could
be somewhat larger if the removal of the reference to “policy accommodation,”
coupled with the concerns expressed about the potential inflationary effects of
increases in resource utilization, led some market participants to conclude that the
Committee’s intent was not merely to bring the real funds rate to a neutral level but
rather to move toward outright policy restraint.
Alternative C
(15) Should the Committee be particularly concerned about the inflation outlook
and still see the stance of policy as accommodative, it may prefer Alternative C.  While
energy prices have eased this fall, they remain much higher than a year ago, and other
commodity prices have increased as well.  And although labor costs have generally
been well-behaved of late, the Committee may believe that labor market slack has
been essentially eliminated.  Aggregate demand has proven quite resilient in the face
of higher interest rates and hurricane-related disruptions, and it will be boosted
further in coming quarters by rebuilding in the Gulf region.  Given this apparent
momentum to economic activity, members may be concerned about the risk that the
short-term equilibrium real federal funds rate could be considerably higher than most
of the staff estimates and aggregate demand could significantly overshoot the
economy’s potential.  Moreover, in current circumstances the Committee may be
concerned that it will need to boost the federal funds rate to a level above its
equilibrium if the temporary boost to inflation caused by the run-up in energy and
other commodity prices begins to be built into expected inflation along the lines of
the “deteriorating inflation expectations” alternative Greenbook scenario.  As a result,
the Committee may believe that it is premature to give a signal that the end of this
policy tightening phase is in sight.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 42
(16)   If the Committee takes this view, then it might be inclined to retain some
of the statement language used at its last meeting.  Such a statement could start by
indicating that the economic expansion remains vigorous.  Given the strength seen in
underlying aggregate demand and the possible upward pressures on inflation, the
statement might continue to characterize the stance of policy as accommodative.  The
inflation discussion could note that “relatively high levels of resource utilization as
well as elevated energy prices have the potential to add to inflation pressures.”  The
reference to the relatively high levels of resource utilization, in contrast to the
concerns about possible increases in resource utilization expressed in Alternative B,
would indicate greater concern about pressures on inflation arising from this source
and might suggest that monetary policy now would be oriented particularly toward
slowing growth in aggregate demand to a pace at or below that of potential output.
The assessment of risks portion of the statement could again indicate that, with
“appropriate policy,” the risks to both of the Committee’s dual objectives should be
kept roughly balanced and that policy accommodation can be removed at a measured
(17) Release of the statement for Alternative C would lead market participants to
boost noticeably their expectations for policy tightening.  As noted previously,
investors appear to have put some odds on the Committee dropping or modifying the
“accommodation” and “measured pace” phrases at this meeting as a prelude to
winding up this tightening phase.  Moreover, the concerns expressed about the
“relatively high levels of resource utilization” would come as a surprise to investors.
Regarding near-term expectations, the retention of the “measured pace” language
could lead investors not only to conclude that a quarter-point move in January was
virtually certain but also to mark up appreciably the odds on a policy tightening in
March.  And, beyond that point, the anticipated path for policy would probably
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 42
steepen as well.  Reflecting the change in policy expectations, short- and intermediate-
term interest rates would rise, stock prices decline, and the dollar appreciate.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(18) In the staff forecast, M2 growth is projected to rise from 4 percent in 2005
to 4¾ percent in 2006 and 5¼ percent in 2007 (Table 2).  With monetary policy on
hold after early next year, the substantial rise in the opportunity cost of M2 seen in
recent years should start to unwind a bit.  Nonetheless, M2 velocity is forecast to rise
a little further next year, reflecting lagged adjustments to higher opportunity costs, but
flatten out in 2007.  Growth of the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is forecast
to slow from 9 percent this year to 7¼ percent next year and 6½ percent in 2007.
The bulk of the slowdown is in the household sector, where a moderation in the pace
of house price appreciation is expected to damp growth in mortgage debt.  With long-
term interest rates staying near current levels, state and local government borrowing is
projected to slow considerably as advance refunding activity tapers off.  By contrast,
federal government debt growth is expected to pick up a bit, reflecting some
deterioration in the budget deficit.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 42
Table 2
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 42
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
(19) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around ____________ 4 percent.
Risk Assessments
B. The Committee judges that some further measured policy firming is
likely to be needed to keep the risks to both price stability and
sustainable economic growth roughly in balance.  In any event, the
Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as
needed to maintain price stability and foster sustainable economic
C. The Committee perceives that, with appropriate monetary policy
action, the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both
sustainable growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.
With underlying inflation expected to be contained, the Committee
believes that policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is
likely to be measured. Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to
changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to
maintain price stability.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 42
Appendix A Chart 1
Treasury Yield Curve
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
December 8, 2005   
October 31, 2005
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 42
Appendix A Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 42
Appendix A Chart 3
Stock Indexes
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
S&P 500*
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 42
Appendix A Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 42
Appendix A Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
+
+
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
                Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 42
Appendix A Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
Journal of Commerce Index
Ratio scale, index (1967=100)
CRB Spot Industrials
CRB Futures
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 42
Appendix A Chart 7
Growth of Real M2 and M3
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 42
Appendix A Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2
Implicit GDP
price deflator (P) Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 42
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
Appendix A Table 1
Selected Interest Rates
p - preliminary data
Dec 
    
Jan 
Feb 
Mar 
Apr  
May  
Jun  
Jul  
Aug  
Sep  
Oct  
Nov
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Dec  
Dec
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 42
Appendix A Table 2
Money Aggregates
Seasonally Adjusted
nontransactions components
in M2 in M3 only
M1 M2 M3
Annual growth rates (%):
Levels ($billions):
Monthly
2005-June 1374.4 6515.6 5141.2 3232.6 9748.2
July 1354.3 6525.1 5170.8 3251.6 9776.8
Aug. 1371.0 6554.4 5183.4 3324.4 9878.8
Sep. 1363.4 6587.9 5224.5 3388.3 9976.2
Oct. 1367.6 6627.2 5259.6 3430.9 10058.1
Weekly
2005-Oct. 3 1396.8 6622.5 5225.7 3408.2 10030.8
Nov. 7 1356.3 6645.5 5289.2 3416.9 10062.4
14 1356.8 6632.3 5275.5 3439.1 10071.4
21p 1387.8 6657.5 5269.7 3459.9 10117.4
28p 1380.5 6651.2 5270.6 3468.3 10119.5
p preliminar y
e estimated
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 42
Appendix A Table 3
Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
December 8, 2005
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5 
Agency total
Net  Redemptions Net Net Purchases 3  Redemptions Net  Redemptions outright Short- Long- Net
Purchases 2 (-) Change < 1 1-5 5-10 Over 10 (-) Change (-) holdings 4 Term 6 Term 7 Change
QIV 4,167 --- 4,167 3,092 7,453 2,018 571 --- 13,134 --- 17,301 -5,956 1,728 -4,227
QII 2,010 --- 2,010 --- 3,495 1,708 1,015 1,305 4,914 --- 6,923 1,082 1,361 2,443
May 1,760 --- 1,760 --- 2,295 898 --- --- 3,193 --- 4,953 -2,453 340 -2,113
Jun 250 --- 250 --- --- 340 785 1,305 -180 --- 70 1,371 -606 764
Jul --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 671 2,413 3,084
Oct 1,023 --- 1,023 500 1,693 --- 902 --- 3,095 --- 4,118 -1,468 -5,369 -6,837
Nov 489 --- 489 1,096 1,096 800 --- 189 2,802 --- 3,292 -627 3,635 3,008
Sep 21 96 --- 96 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 96 4,279 -4,000 279
Sep 28 1,565 --- 1,565 --- 1,104 --- --- --- 1,104 --- 2,669 1,009 -4,000 -2,991
Oct 5 291 --- 291 --- 1,193 --- --- --- 1,193 --- 1,484 -2,432 --- -2,432
Oct 12 54 --- 54 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 54 -1,615 --- -1,615
Oct 19 317 --- 317 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 317 -874 --- -874
Nov 2 132 --- 132 --- --- --- 902 --- 902 --- 1,034 1,336 -1,000 336
Nov 9 237 --- 237 --- --- 800 --- --- 800 --- 1,037 -2,291 --- -2,291
Nov 16 --- --- --- 1,096 --- --- --- --- 1,096 --- 1,096 2,153 5,000 7,153
Nov 23 252 --- 252 --- 1,096 --- --- --- 1,096 --- 1,348 -3,835 3,429 -407
Nov 30 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 189 -189 --- -189 1,825 2,571 4,396
Dec 7 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- -947 -1,000 -1,947
Intermeeting Period
Nov 1-Dec 8 489 --- 489 1,096 1,096 800 --- 189 2,802 --- 3,292 -11,467 9,000 -2,467
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 37 of 42
