Content last modified 03/31/2011.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC – RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MARCH 17, 2005
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 17, 2005
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Market participants universally anticipated the FOMC’s decision at its
February meeting to increase the target federal funds rate 25 basis points to
stability as balanced, and to retain the “measured pace” language.1  As a result, the
market reaction to the announcement was quite muted, as was the case with the
publication three weeks later of the minutes of the meeting.  In the interim, however,
Chairman Greenspan’s monetary policy testimony, which was silent as to whether
policy tightening would continue to be measured, led market participants to mark up
their expected path for policy.  Policy expectations were boosted further by
heightened inflation concerns sparked by increases in the prices of energy and other
commodities and incoming economic data, especially the higher-than-expected core
readings on PPI and PCE inflation.  Judging from federal funds futures quotes and
the Desk’s most recent survey of primary dealers, investors once again are virtually
certain of a 25 basis point increase in the target federal funds rate at the upcoming
meeting and generally expect only minor changes to the statement (Chart 1).  Futures
prices indicate a mean expectation for the federal funds rate of 3¼ percent by July,
about ¼ percentage point higher than expected at the time of the February meeting.
Options prices imply that investors now see a pause as less likely than they did in 
                                           
1 The average effective federal funds rate was very close to the target over most of the 
intermeeting period.  Late in the period, the funds rate averaged somewhat above target in 
response to the anticipation of another tightening move by the FOMC at this meeting.  The 
Desk redeemed $333 million of Treasury coupons and purchased no bills or coupon 
securities.  The volume of outstanding long-term RPs increased $1 billion, to $17 billion.
February and a 50 basis point move at one of the next three meetings as somewhat
more likely.  Current futures quotes suggest an expected federal funds rate of about
(2) Consistent with this upward revision to policy expectations, the two-year
nominal Treasury yield gained 45 basis points over the intermeeting period.  Ten-year
yields rose almost as much—and probably more than can be accounted for solely by
the revision to policy expectations—perhaps as investors reevaluated fixed-income
pricing in light of the Chairman’s characterization of the low level of long-rates
prevailing in mid-February as a “conundrum” and as doubts surfaced about the
continued willingness of foreign investors to add to their holdings of dollar assets.
Concerns about inflation seemed to increase as well, with ten-year inflation
compensation measured from TIPS rising about 25 basis points.  However, the
forward-rate structure of inflation compensation indicates that this increase was
concentrated over the next two years.  Inflation compensation five to ten years ahead
rose only 10 basis points over the intermeeting period, and survey measures of longer-
term expectations were about unchanged.
(3) Investment-grade private yields increased a bit less than comparable-
maturity Treasury yields, leaving spreads a few basis points lower (Chart 2).  Yields on
speculative-grade bonds, in contrast, moved up only a little, implying that their spread
over Treasuries fell about 35 basis points.  Corporate balance sheets are generally
healthy, and indicators of business credit quality are favorable; still, current yield
spreads seem to provide very little compensation for risk relative to historical norms.
In recent days, profit warnings by General Motors and accompanying debt
downgrades pushed up GM credit default swap premiums and sent GM stock prices
lower.  Despite GM’s troubles and increases in bond yields and energy prices, broad
stock indexes edged up over the intermeeting period, although the Nasdaq index
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 37
declined 2½ percent.  Implied volatility of stock prices, as well as of interest rates,
remained low (see box).
(4) The trade-weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar against major
currencies declined 2¼ percent on balance over the intermeeting period (Chart 3).
The dollar appreciated for several days following the Chairman’s speech on the
current account on February 4, which many analysts interpreted as expressing
diminished concern about the adjustment of the U.S. external deficit.  However, that
move proved short-lived; sometimes-contradictory news stories and reports about
possible diversification away from dollar assets—including statements by authorities
in Japan, Taiwan, and Korea—seemed to contribute to the dollar’s subsequent
decline.2  Late in the period, the release of trade data for January renewed investor
concerns about the financing of the U.S. current account deficit and apparently
weighed on the dollar.  On a bilateral basis, the dollar depreciated against most other
major currencies over the period, including a 3 percent decline posted against the
Canadian dollar and a 2¾ percent drop vis-à-vis the euro.  The dollar rose slightly
versus the yen, however, amid signs of continued economic sluggishness in Japan.
Ten-year sovereign yields increased 15 to 20 basis points in most major foreign
industrial countries, reflecting in some cases moves up in expected future inflation,
and major equity indexes registered modest gains.  Both the Reserve Bank of Australia
and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand raised their main policy rates 25 basis points
earlier this month, citing concerns about inflationary pressures.
(5) The dollar was about unchanged on net over the intermeeting period against
the currencies of our other important trading partners.  The dollar depreciated more
than 2½ percent against the Korean won and by smaller amounts versus several other 
                                           
2
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 37
Factors Affecting the Volatility of Financial Variables 
 
As noted by the black line in the chart below, realized volatility for the ten-year Treasury yield has 
fallen over the past year to its lowest point in several years.  In part, FOMC communications may 
have contributed to this decline by providing clearer guidance to market participants about the 
likely future course of monetary policy.  In addition, volatility associated with market reactions to 
macro data releases (the red line) seems to have moved lower over recent months.  (Treasury 
yield volatility associated with reactions to macro data releases is measured here as the moving 
six-month standard deviation of changes in the ten-year Treasury yield over narrow time intervals 
bracketing each economic data release.)  Clearly, many factors other than macro data releases 
influence yields, and the effect of these other factors is especially pronounced during periods of 
market turmoil such as the fall of 1998, the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, and the period 
following major corporate accounting scandals.  Since last June, however, the decline in yield 
volatility seems to be attributable largely to the decline in the volatility associated with market 
reactions to macro data releases.  Following this decline, the latter measure of volatility has 
remained in the middle of its historical range.  The blue line displays the volatility in yields 
attributable to the predicted market reactions to macro data releases based on a simple event study 
regression relating changes in ten-year yields to the unexpected or surprise component of 
economic data releases estimated over the period from 1991 to present.  This volatility series also 
has moved lower over recent months, suggesting that the drop in ten-year yield volatility has been 
associated both with a decline in the average magnitude of economic data surprises and a more 
muted market response to surprises.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 37
Asian currencies.  In contrast, the dollar appreciated about 4½ percent against the
Brazilian real, amid reports of official sales of real by the Brazilian central bank.
During the intermeeting period, Brazil’s main equity index was boosted to record
highs by large capital inflows from foreign private investors.  Although higher dollar
interest rates raised concerns in Latin American financial markets toward the end of
the intermeeting period, equity prices in the region were generally strong, owing in
part to perceptions of improving economic conditions.  Dollar-denominated bond
spreads narrowed to record low levels earlier this month, but they widened abruptly in
the past week.
(6) Growth in nonfinancial sector debt has remained robust of late.  Domestic
nonfinancial business sector debt grew at an 8 percent annual rate in the final quarter
of last year and appears to be rising nearly as fast in the current quarter (Chart 4).
Business borrowing has likely been boosted by faster inventory accumulation and a
pickup in merger and acquisition activity.  With the housing market still hot and
mortgage debt expanding at a double-digit clip, household debt again grew robustly in
the final quarter of 2004 and appears to be on track for another sizable increase this
quarter.  The growth of federal debt remains brisk.
(7) M2 growth slowed to a 2½ percent pace over the first two months of 2005,
evidently in response to widening opportunity costs.  Rates on liquid deposits have
changed little in the face of rising short-term market rates, while those on small time
deposits have kept better pace with market yields.  As a result, liquid deposit growth
was anemic in January and February while small time deposits grew substantially.  In
addition, the attractiveness of M2 assets has apparently dimmed relative to capital
market instruments, as flows into longer-term mutual funds have increased this year.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 37
Policy Alternatives
(8) Incoming information over the intermeeting period led the staff to mark up
its assessments of the underlying strength of aggregate demand and the inflation
outlook as well as its assumption for the path of the federal funds rate.  The staff has
read the smaller-than-expected moderation in spending on capital goods thus far this
year as implying that the strength in capital spending over the latter half of 2004 did
not owe materially to a pulling forward of spending to take advantage of the partial-
expensing tax provision that expired at the end of the year.  As a consequence, the
staff now interprets a larger portion of last year’s pickup in investment as the product
of factors that are likely to support such spending into this year.  The drag associated
with an upward revision to the projected path of oil prices in light of the sharp and
unexpected rise in spot and future oil prices over the intermeeting period only
partially offsets this additional strength in aggregate demand.  Real GDP is now
projected to expand 4 and 3½ percent, respectively, in 2005 and 2006, placing the
level of output only a touch below that of its potential at the end of the forecast.
Recent readings on inflation, higher prices for oil and other commodities, and some
further depreciation in the exchange value of the dollar induced the staff to raise its
inflation projection a bit.  Core PCE inflation is now anticipated to tick up this year to
about 1¾ percent before falling back to about 1½ percent in 2006.  Total consumer
price inflation is projected to slow appreciably this year and next as oil prices retrace
some of their recent gains, non-oil import prices decelerate, and productivity growth
remains solid.  The Greenbook forecast is now conditioned on an assumption that the
target federal funds rate will reach 3½ percent by the end of this year and 4 percent by
the end of 2006—a trajectory that is 50 basis points higher than assumed in January
and only a bit below the market’s anticipated path for the funds rate.  Longer-term
yields are expected to change little over the forecast period:  The effects of rising
short-term rates are counterbalanced by some marking down of forward rates at
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 37
longer horizons as market participants’ policy expectations come into better alignment
with the staff outlook.  Equity prices are projected to rise at a pace sufficient to yield
risk-adjusted returns in line with those on fixed-income securities, and the foreign
exchange value of the dollar is anticipated to edge lower over the forecast period.
(9) This Bluebook presents three alternatives for the Committee’s consideration
that are summarized in Table 1, together with associated wording.  Under Alternative
B, the funds rate would be raised 25 basis points at this meeting.  The accompanying
statement would be quite similar to that issued following the February meeting but
would note that output continues to grow at a solid pace, that inflation pressures had
picked up, and that the rise in energy prices had not notably fed through to wages or
core consumer prices.  Alternative B makes the balance-of-risks assessment explicitly
conditional on “appropriate policy” and uses a more forceful verb phrase, “should be
kept,” to underscore that it may take policy action to preserve balance.3  As explained
in the box on the next page, several of the characterizations in that statement may
now or in the not-too-distant future be seen as needing revision in light of economic
developments.  As a case in point, the Committee may regard the current measured-
pace language as limiting its flexibility at this and subsequent meetings.  To allow for a
broader range of policy options, under Alternatives A and C, the measured-pace
language is replaced with a sentence emphasizing economic prospects as the principal
factor that will determine the pace at which policy accommodation is removed.  The
statement could point to upside risks to sustainable growth and price stability
conditional on an unchanged target federal funds rate for the next few quarters as an
additional way of signaling the likely direction of the path for policy.  Under
Alternative A, the funds rate also would be raised 25 basis points, but the 
                                           
3 The Committee has accompanied its six prior tightenings with assessments that the risks to 
both of its goals were balanced, which indicates that those assessments have implicitly been 
conditioned on an appropriate path of policy.  However, explicitly stating that conditionality, 
as in Alternative B, will probably limit the usefulness of this form of the risk assessment in 
signaling the likely direction of future policy moves.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 37
Table 1: Alternative Language for the March FOMC Announcement
February FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee decided 
today to raise its target for the federal funds rate 
by 25 basis points to 2-3/4 percent.  This 
action brings the cumulative increase since 
June 2004 to 1-3/4 percentage points.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise 
its target for the federal funds rate 
by 25 basis points to 2-3/4 
percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee decided 
today to raise its target for the federal funds rate 
by 50 basis points to 3 percent.
The Committee believes that, even after this 
action, the stance of monetary policy remains 
somewhat accommodative and, coupled with 
robust underlying growth in productivity, is 
providing ongoing support to economic activity.
[no change]
[no change]
[no change]
Output appears to continue to be 
growing at a solid moderate pace 
despite the rise in energy prices, 
and labor market conditions 
continue to improve gradually.
Output appears to be growing at a moderate 
pace despite the rise in energy prices, and labor 
market conditions continue to improve 
gradually. continues to grow at a pace 
sufficient to eliminate any remaining 
resource slack.
Although month-to-month movements in 
inflation have been volatile of late, 
underlying inflation and longer-term inflation 
expectations remain well contained.
Inflation and Longer-term inflation 
expectations remain well 
contained, though pressures on 
inflation have picked up 
modestly in recent months.  The 
rise in energy prices, however, 
has not notably fed through to 
wages or core consumer prices.
While Inflation and longer-term inflation 
expectations remain well contained, pressures 
on inflation have intensified in recent 
months.
The Committee perceives the upside and 
downside risks to the attainment of both 
sustainable growth and price stability for the 
next few quarters to be roughly equal that, if 
the current target for the federal funds rate 
were maintained for the next few quarters, it 
is more likely than not that output would 
grow at a pace faster than is sustainable and 
that inflation pressures would pick up.
The Committee perceives that, 
with appropriate policy action, 
the upside and downside risks to 
the attainment of both sustainable 
growth and price stability for the 
next few quarters to be should be 
kept roughly equal.
The Committee perceives the upside and 
downside risks to the attainment of both 
sustainable growth and price stability for the 
next few quarters to be roughly equal that, if 
the current target for the federal funds rate 
were maintained for the next few quarters, it 
is more likely than not that output would 
grow at a pace faster than is sustainable and 
that inflation pressures would pick up.
Assessment 
of Risk 6. With underlying inflation expected
to be relatively low, the Committee 
believes that policy 
accommodation can be removed at 
a pace that is likely to be measured. 
Nonetheless, the Committee will 
respond to changes in economic 
prospects as needed to fulfill its 
obligation to maintain price 
stability.
With underlying inflation expected to be 
relatively low, the Committee believes that 
policy accommodation can be removed at a 
pace that is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, 
the Committee will respond to changes in 
economic prospects as needed to fulfill its 
obligation to maintain price stability.  However, 
the pace at which policy accommodation 
will be removed to contain those risks will 
depend on economic prospects.
With underlying inflation expected 
to be relatively low, the Committee 
believes that policy 
accommodation can be removed at 
a pace that is likely to be 
measured.; nonetheless, the 
Committee will respond to changes 
in economic prospects as needed 
to fulfill its obligation to maintain 
price stability.
With underlying inflation expected to be 
relatively low, the Committee believes that 
policy accommodation can be removed at a 
pace that is likely to be measured. Nonetheless, 
the Committee will respond to changes in 
economic prospects as needed to fulfill its 
obligation to maintain price stability. However, 
the pace at which policy accommodation 
will be removed to contain those risks will 
depend on economic prospects.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 37
Issues Associated with the 
FOMC Statement Language
The Committee will likely face five key issues 
concerning its statement language over upcoming 
meetings.  First, as noted in the markup of the February 
FOMC statement at the right, the Committee will need 
to determine whether its characterization of the stance 
of policy—marked in red—should be modified in some 
way.  Second, as noted in blue, the FOMC may need to 
revise its assessment of the pace of underlying 
productivity growth in light of the realized and 
anticipated slowing in actual productivity growth.  
Third, the assessment of inflation and inflation 
expectations—noted in green—may need to be 
revisited.  Fourth, as marked in purple, the Committee 
may wish to alter the “measured pace” language.  This 
might be the case if the Committee judged that a pause 
in the process of removing policy accommodation 
might be called for or, alternatively, if it determined 
that economic circumstances warranted a more rapid 
policy adjustment.  However, eliminating the measured-
pace language without a replacement would leave the 
risk assessment paragraph without a signal about the 
future direction of policy.  That omission raises the 
fifth issue—noted in orange—regarding the balance-of-
risks assessment.
February 2005 FOMC Statement
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today 
to raise its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis 
points to 2-1/2 percent.
The Committee believes that, even after this action, 
the stance of monetary policy remains
accommodative and, coupled with robust 
underlying growth in productivity, is providing 
ongoing support to economic activity.  Output 
appears to be growing at a moderate pace despite the 
rise in energy prices, and labor market conditions 
continue to improve gradually. Inflation and 
longer-term inflation expectations remain well
The Committee perceives the upside and
downside risks to the attainment of both
sustainable growth and price stability for the
next few quarters to be roughly equal. With 
underlying inflation expected to be relatively low, 
the Committee believes that policy accommodation 
can be removed at a pace that is likely to be 
measured. Nonetheless, the Committee will respond 
to changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill 
its obligation to maintain price stability.
Is productivity 
growth still 
robust?
Is policy still 
accommodative?
Is inflation well-
contained and 
expected to be 
relatively low?
Are the risks still 
balanced?
Will the pace of 
firming remain 
‘measured’?
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 37
accompanying statement would suggest less concern about underlying inflation
prospects.  Under Alternative C, the funds rate would be boosted 50 basis points, and
the accompanying statement would give more emphasis to the perception of upside
inflation risks.  These alternatives may contain elements of statement language that
the Committee might find more appealing than the wording of Alternative B or may
be helpful in informing potential changes in the policy announcement over the next
few meetings.
(10) All three alternatives envisage some policy tightening at this meeting, which
might be seen as necessary to contain the apparent momentum of spending and
heightened inflation pressures.  During the discussion in February, members
universally viewed themselves as likely to favor firming in March, and the data
released since then would not seem likely to have discouraged that sentiment.  In that
regard, investors appear unanimous in their expectation of a quarter-point hike at this
meeting.  While considerable uncertainty surrounds estimates of the equilibrium real
rate, standard models put it well above the current level of the real federal funds rate
(Chart 5).  Additional tightening would also be called for by a range of standard policy
prescriptions (Chart 6).
(11) If the Committee found the Greenbook forecast for output and inflation
conditional on continued gradual removal of policy accommodation both plausible
and acceptable, it might choose to raise the target federal funds rate ¼ percentage
point at this meeting and issue a statement like that shown for Alternative B in Table
language of the February statement and appropriately validating current market
expectations of continued gradual firming.  While there are some signs of greater
pressures on inflation—as evidenced by more rapid growth in producer and
commodity prices and a possible further increase in near-term inflation
expectations—resource slack lingers, labor costs have only edged up, and firms
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 37
Equilibrium Real Rate Chart: Explanatory Notes
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to return 
output to its potential level over time.  The short-run equilibrium rate is defined as the rate that would 
close the output gap in twelve quarters given a model’s projection of the economy, and the medium-run 
concept is the value of the real funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years under the 
assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and 
then keep them equal thereafter.  With the exception of the TIPS-consistent measure, the real federal 
funds rates employ the log difference of the core PCE price index over the previous four quarters as a 
proxy for expected inflation, with the staff projection used for the current quarter.  TIPS indexation is 
based on the total CPI.
Measure Description
Single-Equation 
Model
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and 
its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.  In light of 
this model’s simple structure, the short-run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends 
only on the recent position of output relative to potential, and the medium-run measure is 
virtually constant.
Small Structural 
Model
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, and 
the real bond yield.  Unlike the estimates from the single-equation model, values of the 
equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth, 
fiscal policy, and capital markets.
Large Model 
(FRB/US)
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.  These 
projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the 
three-year horizon relevant for the short-run concept but are less sensible over longer 
horizons.  Thus, we report only the short-run measure for the FRB/US model.
Greenbook-
consistent
Measures of the equilibrium real rate cannot be directly obtained from the Greenbook 
forecast, because the Greenbook is not based on a formal model.  Rather, we use the 
FRB/US model in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook forecast to 
derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that its 
simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is run 
off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output 
gap.  The medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it 
requires a relatively long extension of the Greenbook forecast.
TIPS-consistent Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) incorporate investors’ 
expectations of the future path of real interest rates.  The seven-year instantaneous real 
forward rate derived from TIPS yields reflects the short-term real interest rate expected to 
prevail in seven years as well as any applicable term premium on the Bluebook 
publication date.  The term premium is assumed to be 70 basis points.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 37
Policy Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, Bt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt-yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, B* policymakers’
long-run objective for inflation, it-1 the lagged federal funds rate, gt-1  the residual from the rule’s
prescription the previous quarter, (yt+3|t-yt+3|t
*) the staff’s three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap,
() yt+3|t-) yt+3|t
*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less potential output growth three quarters ahead,
Bt+3|t a three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t-ut+3|t
*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast of the
unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from the Greenbook and staff memoranda
closest to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Rule Specification
Root-mean-
square error
Rules with Imposed Coefficients
*) + 0.5(Bt-B*) .98
a 1.11a
*) + 0.5(Bt-B*) .68
a .65a
+ 0.5(Bt+3|t-B*)
.98a .44a
Rules with Estimated Coefficients
Rule includes both lagged interest rate and
serial correlation in residual.
it = .52it-1 + 0.48 [1.14 + 0.96(yt-yt
*)
+ 1.49Bt]+ 0.49gt-1
.23 .24
Rule includes both lagged interest rate and
serial correlation in residual.
it = .71it-1 + 0.29 [0.59 + 1.06(yt+3|t-yt+3|t
*)
+ 1.62Bt+3|t] + 0.33gt-1
.25 .27
Unemployment and inflation forecasts are
from semiannual “central tendency” of FOMC
forecasts, interpolated if necessary to yield 3-
qtr-ahead values; u t* forecast is from staff
memoranda.  Inflation forecasts are adjusted
to core PCE deflator basis.  Rule is estimated
at semiannual frequency, and projected
forward using G reenbook forecasts.
it = 0.49it-2 + 0.51 [0.27
        ! 2.10(ut+3|t-ut+3|t
*) + 1.60Bt+3|t] .45 .61
Bcomp5|t denotes the time-t difference between
5-yr nominal T reasury yields and TIPS.
Sample begins in 1999  due to  TIPS volatility
in 1997-8.
it = 0.97it-1+ [-1.24 + 0.68Bcomp5|t] .42b .44
a RMSE for rules with imposed coefficients is calculated setting B*=1.5.
b RMSE for TIPS-based rule is calculated for 1999:1-2004:4.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 37
probably have scope to absorb some increase in costs by reducing profit margins.  A
quarter-point firming at this meeting presumably to be followed by further increases
over time could be seen as sufficient to cut off the inflation pressures already in the
pipeline, especially so if the Committee harbors doubts about the continued vigor of
the expansion given the sharp rise in oil prices and the backup in long-term rates.
(12) According to the Desk’s survey of primary dealers and anecdotal reports,
market participants universally anticipate a quarter-point firming in policy at this
meeting and generally expect only relatively minor changes to the statement language.
As a result, it seems likely that the market reaction to Alternative B would be fairly
muted.  However, investors would take note of the reference to the pickup of
inflation pressures and would conclude that the Committee believed that “appropriate
policy” would most likely entail more policy firming than previously expected.
Consequently, yields would probably tick up a few basis points following the
announcement while stock prices could fall back a bit.
(13) The Committee might view recent elevated readings on some price
measures as providing a stronger signal of heightened inflation pressures than does
the staff.  In this case, the Committee may wish to raise the target federal funds rate
by 50 basis points and issue a statement like that described for Alternative C.  This
option might be viewed as particularly appealing if the Committee thought that
underlying productivity growth had slowed substantially or that output was already
approaching, or had even outstripped, potential.  Even if the Committee generally
believes that inflation and inflation expectations are likely to remain well-contained
under the gradual trajectory of policy tightening assumed in the Greenbook, it may
view the upside risks to that forecast—which are explored in the “spending boom
with rising inflation expectations” scenario in the Greenbook—as sufficiently
worrisome to justify a half-point move at this meeting.  In light of the apparent
momentum of aggregate demand, the Committee may perceive the risk that market
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 37
participants come to view it as wavering in its commitment to keep inflation in check
as more serious than the risk that market participants begin to build in an
inappropriately tight path for monetary policy.
(14) If the Committee instead views recent higher inflation readings as largely
transitory, it may wish to firm policy by a quarter point at this meeting and issue a
statement like that described under Alternative A.  With longer-term inflation
expectations well-contained and resource slack apparently being worked down slowly,
the Committee may see relatively little cost in continuing along a path of gradual
removal of policy accommodation.  Indeed, the Committee may want to choose the
words of its statement so as to keep market participants from marking up their
expected path of tightening.  This might be so even if the Committee anticipates that
resource slack is likely to be eliminated fairly soon, if it also saw downside risks to that
forecast—such as are discussed in the “higher bond premiums” scenario in the
Greenbook—as significant given the recent run-up in interest rates and rise in oil
(15) Under either Alternative A or C, the Committee may judge that the
measured-pace language is no longer consistent with the likely future course of policy.
Some might view this wording—at least as it has come to be interpreted in the
markets after six quarter-point firmings with unchanged language—as ruling out a
potential pause in policy at upcoming meetings.  At the same time, that wording might
be regarded as potentially constraining on the upside if the Committee saw a
significant likelihood that it might need to accelerate the process of removing policy
accommodation.  Indeed, members might not choose to firm 50 basis points at this
meeting because of the force of such a constraint.  As a result, the Committee might
wish to strike the measured-pace language from its statement at this meeting.  To
accomplish this while still providing a general signal about the probable future
direction of policy, the Committee could make its risk assessments conditional on an
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 37
unchanged target federal funds rate for the next few quarters.  For Alternatives A and
C, the Committee could then indicate that it is “more likely than not” that the growth
of output would exceed its sustainable pace and that inflation pressures would pick
up.  The last sentence of the paragraph could underscore the importance of
“economic prospects” as a guide for policymakers in judging the pace at which policy
accommodation should be removed.
(16) Although the risk assessment paragraphs in Alternatives A and C are similar,
the characterizations of the economy and prices in the rationale paragraphs are quite
different.  Under Alternative A, the rationale paragraph would suggest that the
Committee sees the stance of monetary policy as “somewhat” accommodative and
regards the recent uptick in inflation readings as transitory, with underlying inflation
and inflation expectations remaining well-contained.  Such sentiments, along with the
observation that the firming of policy had cumulated to 175 basis points, would seem
to signal a pause sometime soon.  In contrast, the language for Alternative C would
suggest that output growth is proceeding at a pace that seems likely to eliminate
resource slack in the near term and would note that inflation pressures have
intensified, signaling a pickup in the pace of firming.  Such language may be favored
in order to indicate that the Committee could begin to tighten more forcefully
sometime soon even if it moves 25 basis points at this meeting.
(17) Market participants would be caught off guard by the 50 basis point
tightening of Alternative C.   Moreover, investors could infer from the concerns
expressed about inflation and the removal of the measured-pace language that further
half-point policy tightenings could well be forthcoming.  Interest rates would likely
rise sharply across the yield curve, while stock prices would decline in response to
both the rise in rates and an associated marking down of prospects for earnings
growth.  The rise in longer-term yields would be tempered to the extent that investors
scaled down their longer-term inflation expectations.  The market reaction to the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 37
language of Alternative C would be somewhat attenuated if the Committee boosted
rates at this meeting by only a quarter point.  Even in this case, however, the language
would presumably be read as suggesting that a more rapid removal of policy
accommodation was likely in the future—that is, 50 basis point moves could well be
in the cards.  The market reaction to adoption of Alternative A is more difficult to
gauge, but the mention of cumulative firming, upbeat assessment of inflation
prospects, and the characterization of the stance of policy as only “somewhat”
accommodative in the rationale paragraph should tend to put some downward
pressure on yields.  Some observers might interpret the absence of the measured-pace
language as an indication of increased odds of a pause at upcoming meetings.  On net,
interest rates would probably drop and stock prices would likely move up following
the announcement.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(18) Widening opportunity costs and perceptions of favorable returns in bond
and equity markets are expected to damp money growth this year and next.  With
short-term money market rates increasing, the composition of M2 is expected to
continue to shift toward components such as small time deposits that offer more
competitive yields.  M2 is projected to rise 3 and 4 percent, respectively, in 2005 and
opportunity costs.  Borrowing by domestic nonfinancial corporations is anticipated to
pick up over the forecast horizon as rising capital expenditures and mergers and
acquisition activity spur financing needs, which increasingly exceed internal funds.  By
contrast, the pace of borrowing in other sectors, while still brisk, is projected to step
down from that of last year.  In the household sector, consumers are expected to take
steps to reverse some of the decline in the saving rate registered in recent years.
Moreover, mortgage debt is projected to decelerate appreciably in response to higher
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 37
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
Raise 25 bp* Raise 50 bp** Greenbook***
Monthly Growth Rates
* Increase of 25 basis points in the targeted federal funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter.
 **  Increase of 50 basis points in the targeted federal funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter.
*** This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 37
mortgage rates and a leveling out in home prices.  Federal debt growth is forecast to
moderate as Congress and the Administration act to restore a measure of fiscal
restraint.  All told, total domestic nonfinancial debt growth is expected to slow to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 37
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
(19) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around ____________ 2-1/2 percent.
Risk Assessments
A. The Committee perceives that, if the current target for the federal funds
rate were maintained for the next few quarters, it is more likely than not
that output would grow at a pace faster than is sustainable and inflation
pressures would pick up.  However, the pace at which policy
accommodation will be removed to contain those risks will depend on
economic prospects.
B. The Committee perceives that, with appropriate policy action, the upside
and downside risks to the attainment of both sustainable growth and
price stability should be kept roughly equal.  With underlying inflation
expected to be relatively low, the Committee believes that policy
accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured;
nonetheless, the Committee will respond to changes in economic
prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.
C. The Committee perceives that, if the current target for the federal funds
rate were maintained for the next few quarters, it is more likely than not
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 37
that output would grow at a pace faster than is sustainable and inflation
pressures would pick up.  However, the pace at which policy
accommodation will be removed to contain those risks will depend on
economic prospects.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 37
Appendix Chart 1
Treasury Yield Curve
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
March 17, 2005   
February 1, 2005
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 37
Appendix Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 37
Appendix Chart 3
Stock Indexes
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
S&P 500*
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 37
Appendix Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 37
Appendix Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
+
+
+
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
+
+
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
                Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 37
Appendix Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
Ratio scale, index (1980=100)
Journal of Commerce Index
Ratio scale, index (1967=100)
CRB Spot Industrials
CRB Futures
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 37
Appendix Chart 7
Growth of Real M2 and M3
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 37
Appendix Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2 and Two
Estimates of V*
GDP implicit
price deflator (P)
Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*), given
current M2 and constant V*
Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*) given
current M2 and V* with shift
Constant V*
V* with shift
* Change in GDP implicit price deflator over the previous four quarters.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 37
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
Appendix Table 1
Selected Interest Rates
(Percent)
p - preliminary data
Mar 
Apr 
May 
Jun 
Jul 
Aug  
Sep  
Oct  
Nov  
Dec  
     
Jan  
Feb
Jan  
Jan  
Jan  
Feb  
Feb  
Feb  
Feb  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar  
Mar
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 37
Appendix Table 2
Money Aggregates
Seasonally Adjusted
nontransactions components
in M2 in M3 only
M1 M2 M3
Annual growth rates (%):
Levels ($billions):
p preliminar y
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 37
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 37 of 37
