Content last modified 03/31/2011.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
SEPTEMBER 15, 2005
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2005
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The Committee’s decision at the August meeting to tighten policy a quarter
point, to maintain an assessment that the risks to both price stability and sustainable
growth were balanced, and to retain the “measured pace” language evoked little
market reaction.1  Over the subsequent few weeks, expectations for the path of the
nominal federal funds rate edged lower in response to rising energy prices and
economic data releases suggesting somewhat softer spending and more subdued
inflation.  As the extent of Hurricane Katrina’s devastation became apparent, energy
prices spiked higher and investors marked down their outlook for policy further.  The
revision to the outlook was reinforced by the mention in the minutes of the August
FOMC meeting of risks to consumer spending posed by elevated energy prices and by
economic data releases indicating that economic growth may have been slowing even
before the hurricane.  In recent days, however, interest rate futures have retraced
some of those declines, influenced by a drop in energy prices as well as comments by
several FOMC participants that noted underlying strength in spending and some
concerns about inflation.  On net over the intermeeting period, the federal funds rate
expected for the middle of next year shifted down 30 basis points, to about 4 percent,
while measures of uncertainty about this path for policy derived from options prices
rose notably (Chart 1).  Futures quotes suggest about a one-in-five chance that the
FOMC will leave policy unchanged on Tuesday, the first time in more than two years
that the policy outcome has appeared this uncertain this close to the date of the
meeting.  Respondents to the Desk’s latest dealer survey attach slightly higher odds to
a pause at this meeting, and only a few expect any change to the characterization of
policy as accommodative or to the “measured pace” language.
(2) Yields on nominal Treasury notes shed about 20 to 30 basis points over the
intermeeting period.2  The decline in longer-term yields was accounted for by a
reduction in forward rates across the term structure in the pre-Katrina period—
consistent with a revision to the longer-term outlook—and a further drop post-
Katrina in near-term forward rates—suggestive of a larger downward revision to the
economic outlook in the nearer term.  On net, the price of crude oil was about
unchanged over the intermeeting period, but wholesale gasoline prices edged up, and
natural gas prices jumped (Chart 2). 3  TIPS-implied inflation compensation for the
next five years increased about 15 basis points over the intermeeting period, while
inflation compensation in the five-to-ten-year range changed little.  Survey measures
of inflation expectations held steady, although those surveys were mostly conducted
before the hurricane.
(3) Yields on investment-grade corporate bonds moved down about in line
with those on Treasuries, leaving their risk spreads about flat.  Spreads on speculative-
grade debt widened somewhat, but generally remained narrow.  Major equity indexes
were little changed over the intermeeting period, and the implied volatility of stock
prices remained low, as equity market participants apparently assessed the likely
aggregate economic impact of Hurricane Katrina as being fairly moderate and
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 38
Developments in the Ten-Year Treasury Futures Market
The Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) lists ten-year Treasury futures contracts for delivery in 
March, June, September and December of each year.  Trading in these contracts is very active, 
and they have come to serve an important role in hedging interest-rate risk.  Each contract 
requires the party on the short side to deliver any Treasury security with a remaining maturity 
between six-and-a-half and ten years to the party on the long side.  The invoice price that the 
party on the long side pays for the security is the accrued interest plus the futures price multiplied 
by a conversion factor that adjusts for the different coupons and maturities of the securities in 
the deliverable basket.  By design, the conversion factor that CBOT uses works well when 
market yields are around 6 percent.  However, with yields now well below that level, some 
securities are much cheaper to deliver than others.
Historically, the vast majority of investors in this market have closed out their positions or 
rolled into the next contract rather than actually taking delivery.  However, as shown in the 
bottom left panel, in the past few contract cycles open interest has remained relatively elevated 
in the final days of trading and a larger-than-usual number of contracts have gone through the 
delivery process, resulting in strained trading conditions for the cheapest-to-deliver securities.  
This pattern appears to be occurring again for the September 2005 contract, for which open 
interest currently stands at a record high for this stage in the contract cycle.  The cheapest-to-
deliver issue, which is the August 2012 note, has been trading at a substantial premium to 
comparable-maturity securities in the cash market, its repo rate has been close to zero, and the 
level of failures to deliver for this issue has been elevated. Concerns about trading in this note 
have led the Treasury to require a position report of large holders. As shown in the bottom 
right panel, the System Open Market Account has in recent days lent out a large fraction of its 
holdings of the August 2012 note in its securities lending program (new awards on any one day 
are capped at 65 percent of holdings) . Some investors complain that the parties on the long 
side of the futures contract are attempting to generate a short squeeze.  CBOT announced in 
June that it will limit investors' position sizes near expiration to $5 billion starting with the 
December 2005 contract.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 38
temporary, and offset by lower interest rates and higher anticipated federal spending.4
The stocks of oil companies and utilities registered substantial gains, while a broad
index of property and casualty insurers was down only about 2 percent, although the
shares of Allstate insurance company, which has a significant exposure in the Gulf
Coast area, declined 7 percent.  The announcement that two more large U.S. air
carriers entered into bankruptcy yesterday was widely expected and caused barely a
ripple in financial markets.
(4) The trade-weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar against major
foreign currencies fell about ¾ percent on balance over the intermeeting period
(Chart 3).5  The dollar was pressured lower during the period by data indicating
somewhat  weaker U.S. economic performance and, for a while, by concerns about
the consequences of Hurricane Katrina.  The dollar moved up about 1 percent against
the euro, as economic performance in the euro area continued to be sluggish, but it
slipped almost 1½ percent versus the yen and 2¼ percent vis-à-vis the Canadian
dollar.  The Bank of Canada raised its policy rate 25 basis points—the first such move
in almost a year.  Yields on benchmark long-term government securities in most
foreign industrial countries dropped 15 to 25 basis points over the intermeeting
period, while yields in Japan edged down only a small amount.  Stock prices in most
countries were about unchanged or up slightly on balance, but share prices rose
Japanese banks and also to the support for the governing coalition shown in national
elections earlier this week.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 38
(5) Over the intermeeting period, the dollar recorded a modest gain against an
index of currencies of our other important trading partners that included an increase
of 1½ percent versus the Mexican peso; the dollar was about unchanged versus the
Brazilian real.  Responding to weaker activity and better inflation news, the Bank of
Mexico eased its overnight lending rate 25 basis points; the central bank of Brazil also
cut its target rate 25 basis points.  The dollar appreciated against several Asian
currencies on worries about the effects of higher oil prices on economies in that
region.  The dollar depreciated about ¼ percent on balance over the intermeeting
period against the Chinese renminbi, though that currency continued to trade against
the dollar in a very tight range from day to day.
(6) Domestic nonfinancial debt appears to be on track for a fairly solid advance
in the third quarter (Chart 4).  With mortgage rates still low and house-price
appreciation apparently remaining robust, household debt seems likely to register
another substantial gain this quarter.  Nonfinancial business debt has been expanding
at a moderate pace.  Spreads on bank business loans remain fairly narrow, although
those on loans to lower-quality customers appear to have widened a bit from their
narrow levels in the spring.  Business credit quality remains strong:  Delinquency and
charge-off rates on business loans at banks edged down to near record lows in the
second quarter, and defaults on corporate bonds were negligible in recent months
although they ticked up in early September.
(7) M2 accelerated to a 5 percent annual rate in August, owing in part to a
resumption of growth in liquid deposits.  In recent weeks, M2 has continued to
expand, on average, at a faster pace than would have been predicted based on its
historical relationship with opportunity costs and nominal income, perhaps because
returns on longer-term assets have not been especially attractive.  Cash shipments to
depository institutions located in the region affected by Hurricane Katrina have
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 38
picked up, but there have been no discernible effects on the monetary aggregates to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 38
The Effects of Hurricane Katrina on Reserves and Monetary Aggregates 
 
As yet, there have been few discernible imprints of Hurricane Katrina on aggregate 
monetary and banking statistics.  Currency shipments in the six Federal Reserve offices 
serving the affected area are up about $3 billion relative to those in 2002 and 2003, years that 
were not greatly affected by hurricanes (chart).  But this represents only about 1 percent of 
estimated domestic currency holdings.     
 
While many of the affected depository institutions – especially banks and thrifts insured by 
the FDIC – have discount window borrowing documents in place, and some of them have 
collateral as well (table), there have been no requests for discount window advances by 
depositories in the region since Katrina’s landfall and only a few instances of small overnight 
overdrafts.  Liquidity needs apparently have not picked up given the severe dislocation of 
activity.  Such needs may increase as the clean-up continues, and the discount window and 
other sources of liquidity—including bankers’ banks, corporate central credit unions, and the 
Federal Home Loan Bank System—will be available to meet them. 
 
According to the latest data, deposits in the area most affected by the storm account for only 
about 1¼ percent of the national total.  Some of those deposits are held at institutions that 
are diversified regionally or nationally, but two-thirds of deposits in the affected area are 
held at institutions that have more than half of their deposits booked at offices in the region.  
A significant majority of the assets of these institutions are loans to households and 
businesses (presumably heavily weighted toward the local area) and municipal obligations, 
suggesting that the value of collateral these institutions would pledge should they decide to 
tap the discount window may be quite uncertain. 
 
The weekly deposit data (which are partly estimated for the area) do not yet suggest 
significant deposit inflows or outflows.  Presumably, as the clean-up and rebuilding of the 
region accelerates, fueled importantly by federal transfers and insurance payments, more 
noticeable deposit flows will emerge.
Discount Window Arrangements for Depositories 
Affected by Katrina*
(Number of Institutions)
FDIC 
Insured
NCUA 
Insured
Borrowing       
Documents 
in Place
Collateral  in 
Place
Cumulative Currency Shipments
New Orleans Area
August September
*Based on a preliminary list of institutions in the affected area.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 38
Economic Outlook
(8) The staff has appreciably revised its economic projection, mainly to
incorporate the effects of Hurricane Katrina.  The disruption to economic activity is
expected to hold down output and employment for several months before giving way
to recovery and reconstruction, aided by a large injection of federal spending.  By the
end of 2007, economic activity is seen as essentially back on the path in the August
forecast, with output close to its potential.  As in August, the staff has assumed that
the stance of monetary policy is tightened gradually over the next several quarters; the
federal funds rate reaches 4¼ percent by the middle of next year, a bit higher than
currently embedded in financial market prices.  Bond yields are expected to drift up
over the forecast period, as market participants come to appreciate that monetary
policy will firm slightly more than currently anticipated.  Equity prices rise at a pace
sufficient to produce risk-adjusted returns in line with those on fixed-income
securities, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar is assumed to edge down.  As
suggested by futures markets, the price of crude oil is forecast to follow a path
somewhat above that in the last projection, with spot prices rising slightly over the
next few months before declining gradually thereafter.  Retail energy prices in the near
term are expected to rise more substantially than predicted in August, owing partly to
disruptions to energy production and distribution that resulted from the hurricane,
but then to fall more steeply as the industry’s infrastructure is rebuilt.  The near-term
projection for overall inflation has been revised up sharply, mainly reflecting the direct
effects of higher consumer energy prices.  As energy prices recede, however, overall
PCE inflation is forecast to drop a little below 2 percent in 2006 and 2007.  The
projection for core inflation this year has been shaved a bit, but with the pass-through
of increased energy prices it has been boosted to 2¼ percent for 2006, up about
¼ percentage point from the August round.  Core inflation edges down to 2 percent
the following year.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 38
Policy Alternatives
(9) This Bluebook presents two formal policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized by the draft statements in Table 1.  Both draft
announcements refer to the adverse near-term effects on spending, production, and
employment of Hurricane Katrina.  (The box entitled “Monetary Policy
Announcements and External Events” summarizes the Committee’s past practice
with respect to mentioning significant exogenous events in its statements.)  The
announcements also refer to inflation pressures but indicate that core inflation has
been relatively low.  Under Alternative A, the Committee would leave its target for the
federal funds rate unchanged at 3½ percent at this meeting; the statement would
emphasize hurricane-related uncertainties and suggest that this was just a pause in the
tightening process.  Under Alternative B, the Committee would boost the target
macroeconomic effects of the hurricane are likely to be limited.  Because uncertainty
surrounding the economic outlook has risen considerably, this Bluebook also
considers ways of shading the language under Alternatives A and B to project more
distinct paths for policy.  Paragraph 13 considers changes to the statement language
(relative to Alternative B) that could express more concern about inflation.  In
contrast, paragraph 16 suggests wording changes to Alternative A that would be
consistent with an expectation of a more prolonged pause in firming.  Lastly, the box
at the end of this section entitled “Opening Up the Statement” examines fundamental
changes to the risk assessment that could be made to either Alternative A or B.
(10) If the Committee remains particularly concerned about heightened inflation
pressures and sees little chance that Hurricane Katrina will have lasting and sizable
adverse effects on aggregate spending and production, it may wish to tighten policy
downward revision to monetary policy expectations and the associated easing of
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 38
Table 1: Alternative Language for the September FOMC Announcement 
 August FOMC Alternative A Alternative B
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise 
leave its target for the federal 
funds rate by 25 basis points to 3½ 
percent unchanged.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise 
its target for the federal funds rate 
by 25 basis points to 3¾ percent.
The Committee deferred further 
policy firming in light of the 
uncertainties surrounding the 
economic effects of Hurricane 
Katrina.
[none/see below]
Output appeared poised to 
continue growing at a good pace 
before the tragic toll of the 
hurricane.  The widespread 
devastation in the Gulf region, the 
associated dislocation of economic 
activity, and the boost to energy 
prices imply that spending, 
production, and employment will 
be set back in the near term.  
Moreover, the disruption to the 
production and refining 
infrastructure has elevated 
premiums for energy products and 
may add to market volatility.
Output appeared poised to continue 
growing at a good pace before the tragic 
toll of Hurricane Katrina.  The 
widespread devastation in the Gulf 
region, the associated dislocation of 
economic activity, and the boost to 
energy prices imply that spending, 
production, and employment will be set 
back in the near term.  Moreover, the 
disruption to the production and refining 
infrastructure has elevated premiums for 
energy products and may add to market 
volatility.
While these unfortunate developments 
have increased uncertainty about near-
term economic performance, it is the 
Committee’s view that they do not pose a 
more persistent threat.  Rather, remaining 
monetary policy accommodation, coupled 
with robust underlying growth in 
productivity, is providing ongoing 
support to economic activity.
Higher energy and other costs have 
the potential to add to inflation 
pressures.  However, core inflation 
has been relatively low in recent 
months and longer-term inflation 
expectations remain well 
contained.
Higher energy and other costs have 
the potential to add to inflation 
pressures.  However, core inflation 
has been relatively low in recent 
months and longer-term inflation 
expectations remain well 
contained.
[no change]
[no change]
Assessment 
of Risk 6.  With underlying inflation
expected to be contained, the 
Committee believes that policy 
accommodation can be removed at 
a pace that is likely to be measured. 
Nonetheless, the Committee will 
respond to changes in economic 
prospects as needed to fulfill its 
obligation to maintain price 
stability.
[no change]
[no change]
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 38
financial conditions as an overreaction to recent developments, inclining it to try to
reverse at least a portion of this accommodation.  Indeed, the real federal funds rate
remains below the range of staff estimates of its equilibrium value (Chart 5),
suggesting that further policy tightening will be necessary even after a 25 basis point
move at the upcoming meeting.7  Considerable government spending will be
forthcoming to help rebuild the Gulf region, adding to pressures on resources.
Moreover, the further upward spike in consumer energy prices raises the possibility
that the FOMC may need to bring the real funds rate above its equilibrium value for a
time in order to reverse inflationary momentum.  A range of monetary policy rules, 
                                           
7 Starting with this Bluebook, the TIPS-based measure of the equilibrium real rate 
incorporates time-varying estimates of a term premium that compensates investors for 
uncertainty about real rates and of a liquidity premium that compensates investors for the 
relatively poor liquidity of TIPS.  Both estimates are obtained from a three-factor arbitrage-
free term-structure model.
Monetary Policy Announcements and External Events 
 
There is precedent for the Committee to allude to significant external events in 
its monetary policy announcement.  For example, in December 1999, the Federal 
Reserve announced that “in light of market uncertainties associated with the 
century date change, the Committee decided to adopt a symmetric directive in 
order to indicate that the focus of policy in the intermeeting period must be 
ensuring a smooth transition into the Year 2000.”  On September 17, 2001, the 
Committee cited the “tragic events” of the previous week.  And in January, 
March, and May 2003, the monetary policy statements referred variously to “oil 
price premiums,” “geopolitical uncertainties,” and the “hostilities” in Iraq.  
Indeed, in its announcement that March, the Committee temporarily suspended 
its practice of specifying the balance of risks to its dual objectives in light of the 
elevated uncertainty surrounding the situation in Iraq. 
 
The announcements proposed for Alternatives A and B are consistent with this 
pattern, citing “the tragic toll” of Hurricane Katrina.  They also acknowledge that 
data on spending, production, and employment will deteriorate as the hurricane’s 
effects show through in coming months.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 38
Equilibrium Real Rate Chart: Explanatory Notes
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to return 
output to its potential level over time.  For the first three measures listed below, the short-run 
equilibrium rate is defined as the rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the 
corresponding model’s projection of the economy.  For the first two measures, the medium-run concept 
is the value of the real funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years under the 
assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and 
then keep them equal thereafter.  The TIPS-based factor model measure provides an estimate of market 
expectations for the real federal funds rate seven years ahead.  The actual real federal funds rate shown 
in the chart employs the log difference of the core PCE price index over the previous four quarters as a 
proxy for expected inflation, with the staff projection used for the current quarter.
Measure Description
Single-Equation 
Model
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and 
its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.  In light of this 
model’s simple structure, the short-run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends only 
on the recent position of output relative to potential, and the medium-run measure is 
virtually constant.
Small Structural 
Model
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, and 
the real bond yield.  Unlike the estimates from the single-equation model, values of the 
equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth, 
fiscal policy, and capital markets.
Large Model 
(FRB/US)
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.  These 
projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the 
three-year horizon relevant for the short-run concept but are less sensible over longer 
horizons.  Thus, we report only the short-run measure for the FRB/US model.
Greenbook-
consistent
Measures of the equilibrium real rate cannot be directly obtained from the Greenbook 
forecast, because the Greenbook is not based on a formal model.  Rather, we use the 
FRB/US model in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook forecast to 
derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that its 
simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is run 
off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output 
gap.  The medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it 
requires a relatively long extension of the Greenbook forecast.
TIPS-based 
Factor Model
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’ expectations of 
the future path of real interest rates, but also include term and liquidity premiums.  The 
TIPS-based measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven-year-ahead 
instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the Bluebook publication 
date.  This forward rate is adjusted to remove estimates of the term and liquidity 
premiums based on a three-factor arbitrage-free term-structure model applied to TIPS 
yields, nominal yields, and inflation.  Because TIPS indexation is based on the total CPI, 
this measure is also adjusted for the medium-term difference—projected at 40 basis 
points—between total CPI inflation and core PCE inflation.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 38
especially those based on an inflation target of 1½ percent, also point to a further
near-term increase in the federal funds rate and suggest more tightening in coming
quarters (Chart 6).  The Committee’s uncertainty about prospects for the economy
and inflation may well have increased in the aftermath of the hurricane, but probably
a few months will elapse before a reasonably clear picture of its economic effects
emerges.  Thus, unless the Committee sees the hurricane as likely to undermine
spending significantly for several quarters or more—the period in which a change in
monetary policy would have most of its effect on spending—or has serious concerns
that a rate hike might interact in a particularly unfavorable way with household and
business confidence, members might believe it prudent to continue to firm policy at
this meeting.
(11) As shown in Table 1, the proposed announcement associated with
Alternative B would indicate that “Output appeared poised to continue growing at a
good pace before the tragic toll of Hurricane Katrina.”  It would go on to state that,
while the hurricane will have adverse short-run economic consequences, including
heightened uncertainty and market volatility, the longer-run prospects for the
economy are not diminished.  The statement would note that “Higher energy and
other costs have the potential to add to inflation pressures,” but would also indicate
that “. . . core inflation has been relatively low in recent months and longer-term
inflation expectations remain well contained.”  It would assert that “remaining
monetary policy accommodation” and robust underlying growth in productivity
continued to support economic activity.  The rest of the statement would repeat the
measured pace language and the assessment that, with appropriate monetary policy
action, the risks to growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.
(12) Investors currently see a modest probability that the FOMC will leave the
stance of monetary policy unchanged at this meeting.  Accordingly, a quarter-point
increase in the funds rate would tend to boost very short-term market interest rates a
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 38
Policy Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes 
 
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, πt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt – yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, π* policymakers’ 
long-run objective for inflation, it-1 the lagged federal funds rate, gt-1  the residual from the rule’s 
prescription the previous quarter, (yt+3|t – yt+3|t*) the staff’s three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output 
gap, (Δ yt+3|t – Δyt+3|t*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less potential output growth three quarters 
ahead, πt+3|t  a three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t – ut+3|t*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast 
of the unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from the Greenbook and staff memoranda 
closest to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Root-mean-
square error
Rule Specification 
1988:1-
2005:2
Rules with Imposed Coefficients
a 1.05a
it = 2 + πt + (yt – yt*) + 0.5(πt – π*) .68a .62a
it = it-1 + 0.5(Δ yt+3|t – Δ yt+3|t*) 
          + 0.5(πt+3|t – π*)
.96a .42a
Rules with Estimated Coefficients
it = .51it-1 + 0.49 [1.29 + 0.95(yt – yt*) 
          + 1.45πt]+ 0.52gt-1
.24 .26
it = .71it-1 + 0.29 [0.73 
          + 1.04(yt+3|t – yt+3|t*) + 1.59πt+3|t] 
          + 0.37gt-1
.25 .27
it = 0.49it-2 + 0.51 [0.29 
          – 2.11(ut+3|t – ut+3|t*) + 1.59πt+3|t]
.46 .63
it = 0.97it-1+ [–1.24 + 0.69πcomp5|t] .40
b .42
a RMSE for rules with imposed coefficients is calculated setting π* = 1.5. 
b RMSE for TIPS-based rule is calculated for 1999:1-2005:2.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 38
bit, and the retention of the “measured pace” language would suggest that further
policy tightening was likely, probably bringing the funds rate beyond the 4 percent
apex currently anticipated in markets.  Consequently, other market interest rates
would likely increase somewhat in response to the announcement.  The foreign
exchange value of the dollar could strengthen a touch, and equity prices could decline
a bit, although the suggestion that the FOMC was confident that the economic
expansion would not be severely affected by the hurricane could serve to limit the
decline in stock prices.
(13) At the August meeting, several participants noted that core PCE inflation
was running at the upper end of the range they considered to be consistent with price
stability.  Since then, the staff has marked up its forecast of core inflation for next year
about ¼ percentage point, to 2¼ percent.  Moreover, the edging lower of inflation
thereafter in the projection owes importantly to the assumed gradual decline in energy
prices.  If the Committee saw this inflation outcome as unacceptable or believed that
such an expectation was likely to prove optimistic, then it might view the words of
Alternative B as too timid about the prospects for additional policy tightening.  Such a
concern might well be intensified if significant odds were put on the possibility that
inflation expectations could become unanchored in response to surging energy prices,
perhaps in the manner discussed in the alternative simulation in the Greenbook.  The
likelihood of more tightening than currently built into financial market prices could be
conveyed to the public by shortening the wording for Alternative B that appears in
Table 1.  In particular, the Committee could give less weight to the disruptions from
Hurricane Katrina by striking the second and third sentences and dropping the word
“remaining” in row 3.8
(14) The Committee, in contrast, could arrive at a decision to keep the federal
funds rate unchanged for several reasons.  One possibility is that, while generally
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 38
accepting the economic outlook discussed under Alternative B, members may harbor
the reservation that there is a small probability that the disruption to economic activity
in the Gulf region and sapping of consumer and business confidence nationwide
could have serious consequences for the broader economy.  While the mean (or
modal) outlook might be taken as a reason to tighten, consideration of that adverse
tail may counsel delaying further firming for a time.  Under Alternative A, the
Committee would keep the target federal funds rate unchanged at 3½ percent at this
meeting and use the statement to explain that it was merely deferring firming in light
of the elevated uncertainties, and likely not ending the tightening cycle.  As in
Alternative B, the Committee could note the adverse near-term effects of the
hurricane on spending, production, and employment, but not include the sentence
suggesting that the effects will be temporary.  The text on inflation in Alternative B
could also be used in Alternative A.
(15) Short-term market interest rates would likely decline noticeably following
announcement of this alternative.  However, with the statement suggesting that
further tightening was still in the cards, the drop in intermediate- and longer-term
rates probably would be considerably smaller.  Equity prices could move slightly
higher, while the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets could decline a bit.
(16) Another possible reason for holding the funds rate unchanged is that a
longer pause in policy firming could be appropriate.  Committee members may be
concerned that the widespread and severe damage to private property and
infrastructure in the Gulf region, the extended displacement of a large population, the
sharp increase in consumer energy prices, and a potential significant drop in consumer
confidence could well exert a more substantial drag on aggregate economic activity
than in the staff forecast.  Such a possibility is illustrated in the Greenbook’s
“sentiment slump” scenario and the scenario based on a pessimistic view of the
effects of Katrina.  Moreover, while the stance of policy may still be accommodative,
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 38
the extent of that accommodation has been reduced significantly by the Committee’s
actions through August.  Thus, the Committee may feel comfortable awaiting further
Opening Up the Statement
The “measured pace” language, which has been included in the 
Committee’s statements for the past eleven meetings, has served to signal to 
market participants that the federal funds rate will be marched up steadily as long 
as policy accommodation remains in place.  The Committee may believe that this 
language has now outlived its usefulness for several reasons, independent of this 
meeting’s outcome on the stance of policy.  First, the 2½-percentage-point 
increase in the nominal federal funds rate since mid-2004 has placed the real 
federal funds rate near some model-based estimates of its equilibrium (as shown 
in Chart 5).  By that arithmetic, some members might be of the view that policy 
accommodation has been substantially removed and that the Committee should 
halt the process of firming sometime soon.  Second, the devastation in the Gulf 
region probably implies that more uncertainty attends the outlook, and this 
uncertainty is unlikely to be resolved soon, perhaps increasing the attractiveness 
of being more gradual in removing policy accommodation.  Third, the 
possibilities that elevated energy prices, on the one hand, could sap consumer 
confidence or, on the other, unanchor inflation expectations may require more 
nimble adjustments to the stance of policy than consistent with the “measured 
pace” language.
In prior discussions of statement language, some have expressed a
preference for providing signals about the future direction of policy only in 
unusual situations, if at all.  In that view, guidance about interest rates, which 
seemed useful when significant disinflation was a risk and at the outset of policy 
tightening, is no longer useful when the Committee is unsure about its actions at 
the next few meetings.  The simple expedient, then, would be to drop rows 5 and 
6 and any mention of the extent of policy accommodation in Table 1.
Others have argued, however, that providing information about the future
direction of the federal funds rate helps the public make better-informed 
decisions, enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy.  Moreover, simply 
stating that the Committee was not certain whether the next move in rates would 
be up or down would, on this view, be useful information to market participants.
(continued on next page)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 38
information on the effects of Hurricane Katrina, as well as of the cumulative
tightening of policy to date, before resuming policy firming—even if that wait could
be extended.  Such a view could be conveyed to the public by striking sentence 2 from
the draft statement for Alternative A.  The statement could also drop the word
“action” that now appears in row 5 in order to suggest that appropriate monetary
Opening Up the Statement (cont.)
One way of regaining flexibility about the range of future action while still 
providing such information would be to eliminate the “measured pace” language 
from the statement and move from the current practice of basing the risk 
assessment on appropriate policy to assuming explicitly that the current stance of 
policy will be kept unchanged for several quarters.  Under such an assumption, 
the assessments of the probabilities of lower or higher economic growth than is 
sustainable and of lower or higher inflation, along with an overall risk assessment 
if needed, can provide guidance about the future direction of policy.  Rows 5 and 
6 of Table 1 in both columns A and B could be replaced with the following 
formula:
The Committee’s economic outlook is such that, if the federal 
funds rate were maintained at its current level for the next several 
quarters, output growth is [less/as/more] likely to be above 
[as/than] below its sustainable pace.  Inflation over the same period 
is [less/as/more] likely to increase [as to/than] decrease.  As a 
result, the Committee views the near-term risks to its dual 
objectives as [tilted to the downside/balanced/tilted to the upside].  
In any event, the Committee is prepared to take the steps necessary 
to maintain price stability and sustainable economic growth.
If the Committee desires to convey the sense that the current stance of policy is 
unsustainably easy, it could set both toggle switches to their “more” setting.  
That is, it would tell the public that, if maintained for the next few quarters, a 
nominal funds rate of 3½ percent (under A) or 3¾ percent (under B) would 
likely foster a pickup in resource utilization and inflation.  As both 
measurements would point in the same direction, the overall risk balance 
sentence could be omitted in this case with no harm to clarity.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 38
policy going forward would not necessarily involve near-term tightening, and refer to
“remaining” policy accommodation in the first sentence in row 6.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(17) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 growth is projected to average about
whole just under 3 percent (Table 2).  Velocity is forecast to increase 3¼ percent this
year.  Over 2006 and 2007, the expansion of M2 is forecast to pick up to 4¼ percent
and 5 percent, respectively, with the velocity of M2 flattening out as the effects on
opportunity costs of past policy firmings fade.  Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is
forecast to decelerate over the forecast period.  The expansion of household sector
debt is projected to slow in the fourth quarter of 2005 to 8 percent and to continue to
decline over subsequent quarters, reaching about a 6 percent rate by the end of 2007,
as a moderation in home price appreciation prompts a significant deceleration of
home mortgage debt.  The expansion of business sector debt is also projected to slow,
but more gradually.  Federal debt growth, by contrast, remains brisk over the forecast
period, with growth rates of 7¾ percent, 8½ percent, and 8 percent, respectively, for
the years 2005 though 2007.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 38
No Change1 Raise 25 bp2 Greenbook3
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
Table 2
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 38
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
(18) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate AT/to
an average of around ____________ 3½ percent.
Risk Assessments
A. The Committee perceives that, with appropriate monetary policy action,
the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both sustainable
growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.  With underlying
inflation expected to be contained, the Committee believes that policy
accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.
Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to changes in economic
prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.
B. The Committee perceives that, with appropriate monetary policy action,
the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both sustainable
growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.  With underlying
inflation expected to be contained, the Committee believes that policy
accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.
Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to changes in economic
prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 38
Appendix Chart 1
Treasury Yield Curve
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
September 15, 2005   
August 8, 2005
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 38
Appendix Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 38
Appendix Chart 3
Stock Indexes
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
S&P 500*
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 38
Appendix Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 38
Appendix Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
+
+
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
                Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 38
Appendix Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
Ratio scale, index (1980=100)
Journal of Commerce Index
Ratio scale, index (1967=100)
CRB Spot Industrials
CRB Futures
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 38
Appendix Chart 7
Growth of Real M2 and M3
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 38
Appendix Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2
Implicit GDP
price deflator (P) Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 38
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
Appendix Table 1
Selected Interest Rates
(Percent)
p - preliminary data
Sep 
Oct 
Nov 
Dec 
    
Jan  
Feb  
Mar  
Apr  
May  
Jun  
Jul  
Aug
Jul  
Jul  
Jul  
Aug  
Aug  
Aug  
Aug  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep
Aug  
Aug  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep  
Sep
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 38
Appendix Table 2
Money Aggregates
Seasonally Adjusted
nontransactions components
in M2 in M3 only
M1 M2 M3
Annual growth rates (%):
Levels ($billions):
p preliminar y
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 37 of 38
Appendix Table 3
Changes in System Holdings of Securities
1
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
September 15, 2005
Treasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5
Agency total
Jul 20 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- 3,535 --- 3,535
Intermeeting Period
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)
acquired in exchange for maturing bills. Excludes maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing issues,
except the rollover of inflation compensation.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 38 of 38
