Content last modified 02/09/2012.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MAY 5, 2006
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) May 5, 2006
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments1
(1) Investors had anticipated the FOMC’s decision at its March meeting to raise
the target federal funds rate 25 basis points, to 4¾ percent, but the retention of the
language that “some further policy firming may be needed” evidently led them to
mark up somewhat their expected path for the federal funds rate.2  Subsequently,
speeches by Federal Reserve officials, the release of the minutes of the March FOMC
meeting, and the Chairman's testimony before the Joint Economic Committee were
generally taken to suggest that the FOMC was more likely than had previously been
thought to leave policy unchanged after one more move.  Money market futures rates
rose in response to key data releases that were read as indicating greater global
economic strength and higher inflation pressures than had been expected.  On net,
federal funds futures rates for the end of this year and beyond increased 25 to 35 basis
points, and the expected policy path currently peaks at about 5.2 percent toward the
end of this year before sloping down gradually over 2007 (Chart 1).  Option-implied
uncertainty about the path for money market rates edged up but remains low in its
historical range.  The Desk survey and futures quotes suggest that investors are
virtually certain of a 25 basis point increase in the target funds rate at the May FOMC
meeting and see a roughly one-in-three chance of a like-sized move in June.
(2) Over the intermeeting period, yields on two- and ten-year nominal Treasury
securities rose 25 and 45 basis points, respectively.  The ten-year rate, at 5.23 percent, 
                                           
1 Financial market quotes are as of the close of business on Thursday, May 4. 
2 The effective federal funds rate averaged 4.79 percent over the intermeeting period.  In the 
last few days, the funds rate traded on the firm side despite a sizable provision of reserves by 
the Desk, as reserve managers at banks once again anticipated policy firming by the 
Committee.  The Desk purchased $1.1 billion of Treasury coupon securities in the market.  
The volume of outstanding long-term RPs increased $1 billion, to $15 billion.
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
May July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2006 2007
May 4, 2006
March 27, 2006
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Change in Implied One-Year Forward Treasury
Rates since Last FOMC
Years Ahead
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
Next Five Years
Five-to-Ten Years Ahead
Inflation Compensation*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves, and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
Spot WTI
Far-Dated Futures
Daily FOMC
Oil Prices
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 41
is now above its level just prior to the onset of the current round of policy tightening.
A rise in distant-horizon forward rates, possibly owing to a modest rebound in term
premiums, accounted importantly for this movement in yields (see box entitled “The
Recent Rise in Distant-Horizon Forward Rates and Term Premiums”).  Yields on
TIPS rose less than those on comparable-maturity nominal Treasury securities.  The
the rise in energy prices.  In contrast, with survey measures of long-run inflation
expectations unchanged to 20 basis points higher, the 20 basis point increase in five-
to-ten-year forward inflation compensation appears to reflect both expectations of
higher inflation and an increase in the inflation risk premium.
(3) Major stock price indexes were up a bit over the intermeeting period, as
positive first-quarter earnings reports more than offset the negative effects of higher
energy prices and interest rates (Chart 2).  The implied volatility of equity prices
remained near historical lows.  With the rise in long-term real Treasury yields, the
equity premium is estimated to have narrowed a bit, though it remains slightly above
its average level of the past two decades.  Measures of the credit quality of
nonfinancial firms remained solid, supported by gains in earnings and by strong and
liquid balance sheets.  Spreads of yields on investment-grade bonds over those on
comparable-maturity Treasury securities were about unchanged, while spreads on
speculative-grade bonds declined.
(4) The trade-weighted exchange value of the dollar against major foreign
currencies fell 4¾ percent on balance over the intermeeting period (Chart 3).  The
dollar’s decline came amid fairly widespread signs of stronger global growth that
boosted investors’ expectations of further monetary policy tightening abroad.
Increased focus in public debate on risks posed by the large U.S. external imbalance
also appeared to erode investor support for the dollar.  The dollar dropped
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 41
The Recent Rise in Distant-Horizon Forward Rates and Term Premiums 
 
In the Treasury market, the nine-to-ten-year-ahead nominal forward rate climbed 60 basis 
points over the intermeeting period, while the comparable indexed forward rate from TIPS 
rose about 35 basis points.  Thus, distant-horizon forward inflation compensation increased 
about 25 basis points.  Judging from the staff’s arbitrage-free term structure model, the ten-
year instantaneous forward nominal term premium—which includes compensation for 
inflation risk—moved up notably over the intermeeting period (lower left panel).  
Nonetheless, the estimated term premium remains well below its historical average and is 
nearly a percentage point below its level at the beginning of the current tightening cycle.   
 
The recent rise in distant-horizon forward rates appears to be a global phenomenon, with 
such rates posting substantial increases in other major industrialized countries (lower right 
panel).  The correlation between these foreign and domestic forward rates has been 
particularly high over the last two years, suggesting that their movements owe predominantly 
to international factors.  However, over the intermeeting period, forward rates have risen 
more in the United States than in foreign countries, and inflation compensation has moved 
up more in U.S. markets than in other countries, perhaps in part as a result of the recent 
depreciation of the dollar and concerns that more is in store. 
 
The reasons for the apparent backup in U.S. term premiums of late are hard to ascertain, but 
may include heightened inflation concerns, some waning of foreign demand for Treasury 
securities that has been evident in recent auctions and in custody holdings at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, and investors’ reassessment of the appropriate pricing of 
interest-rate risk.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 41
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
Wilshire
Nasdaq
Stock Prices
S&P 500 EPS
NIPA, economic
profits before tax
Corporate Earnings Growth Percent
*Change from four quarters earlier.
    Source. I/B/E/S for S&P 500 EPS.
    e Staff estimate.
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Real Long-Term Treasury Yield*
*Perpetuity Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year expected inflation.
Note. + Denotes the latest observation using daily interest rates and stock 
prices and latest earnings data from I/B/E/S.
Equity Valuation
Expected Defaults* (left scale)
Bond Default Rate** (right scale)
Expected Defaults of Nonfinancial Companies
and Corporate Bond Default Rate
*Firm-level estimates of year-ahead defaults from KMV corporation, weighted
by firm liabilities as a percent of total liabilities, excluding defaulted firms.
**Six-month moving average, from Moody’s Investors Service
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 41
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields (Nominal)
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
UK
France
Japan
Canada*
Percent
Ten-year Government Bond Yields (Inflation Indexed)
* Fifteen-year yields.
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 41
versus the Canadian dollar.  The Canadian currency, and those of several other smaller
commodity exporters, appeared to be boosted by the sharply higher prices of oil and
some other key primary products.  On April 25, the Bank of Canada raised its policy
rate 25 basis points and signaled that further policy tightening was likely.  On May 3,
the Reserve Bank of Australia also raised its policy rate 25 basis points.  Yields on
long-term government securities in major foreign industrial countries moved up 25 to
over the period.  Based on returns on inflation-indexed securities, the advances in
nominal yields abroad appear to owe mostly to higher real yields.  Stock prices in
foreign industrial countries recorded gains of 1 to 3 percent.
(5) The dollar fell about 1¼ percent against an index of currencies of our other
important trading partners.
may have been accentuated by the G-7 statement calling for “greater exchange rate
flexibility…in emerging economies with large current account surpluses, especially
China.”  Although Chinese authorities allowed only a slight appreciation of the yuan
over the period, they did announce some changes in foreign exchange regulations;
they also raised their benchmark lending rate 27 basis points and issued guidance on
lending to certain sectors intended to slow investment growth.  Central banks in
Brazil and Mexico cut their policy rates again, but the Bank of Mexico added that it
saw no room for further easing for the foreseeable future.  Both countries continued
to benefit from favorable financial conditions:  EMBI+ spreads narrowed, and stock
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 41
prices recorded increases close to 10 percent.  The Brazilian real strengthened
substantially, while the Mexican peso was about unchanged versus the dollar over the
(6) Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is estimated to have grown at a
supported by robust net issuance of U.S. corporate bonds and a double-digit
expansion of business loans at commercial banks.  Results from the latest Senior Loan
Officer Opinion Survey indicate that banks eased standards and terms for C&I loans
further.  In the household sector, consumer credit has continued to expand slowly.
Although only limited data are currently available, growth of household mortgage
debt is projected to have moderated somewhat in the first quarter against a backdrop
of higher mortgage interest rates, some signs of a deceleration in house prices, and
reports in the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey indicating lower demand for
residential mortgage loans.  Federal debt is estimated to have expanded at nearly a 13
percent rate in the first quarter, a pace roughly in line with first-quarter growth a year
(7) M2 advanced at a 6½ percent pace during the first quarter, somewhat below
the growth rate of nominal GDP, and expanded moderately in April.  This recent
growth has been due importantly to increases in small time deposits, which have been
buoyed by favorable offering rates.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 41
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Nonfinancial Debt
s.a.a.r.
Percent
e Estimated.
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
Monthly rate
Growth of Household Debt
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Mortgage Rates
Source. Freddie Mac.
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 41
Economic Outlook
(8) The sharp run-up in energy prices over the intermeeting period, together
with somewhat larger-than-expected increases in core consumer prices, led the staff to
boost its inflation outlook for the near term.  News on output and spending also came
in above staff expectations, but little of this additional strength is expected to persist
in the forecast.  In view of the intensification of inflation pressures, the staff forecast
now assumes that the Committee will leave the funds rate at 5 percent after this
meeting rather than easing slightly next year, as was the case in the March Greenbook.
In the current forecast, longer-term Treasury yields edge lower as market expectations
for monetary policy come into alignment with the staff assumption, equity prices rise
at a rate sufficient to produce risk-adjusted returns about equal to those on fixed-
income instruments, and house price appreciation slows substantially.  The real
foreign exchange value of the dollar against a broad basket of currencies is assumed to
decline at an average rate of a little over 2 percent over the forecast period.  In line
with futures quotes, the staff forecasts that the price of West Texas intermediate
crude oil will be around $75 per barrel over the projection period, roughly $11 per
barrel higher than in the last forecast.  Against this backdrop, the staff projects that
real GDP will expand 3¾ percent in 2006 and 3 percent in 2007, close to the March
Greenbook projection.  With output growing a bit less quickly than potential next
year, the unemployment rate is expected to creep up to 5 percent, the staff’s estimate
of the NAIRU.  Core PCE inflation is now expected to be 2¼ percent this year,
slightly above the March forecast, but to edge down to 2 percent next year as energy
prices flatten out.  Total PCE prices are seen as rising about 2½ percent and 2 percent
in 2006 and 2007, respectively.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 41
Longer-Run Scenarios
(9) Simulations of the FRB/US model provide a longer-term perspective that
could help inform the Committee’s near-term policy choice.  To that end, staff
extended the basic features of the Greenbook outlook through 2010.  In that
extension, monetary policy adjusts to hold core PCE inflation at about 2 percent.  In
the absence of any significant supply shocks or changes in expectations, the
unemployment rate remains near the 5 percent staff estimate of the NAIRU.  The
associated medium-run value of the equilibrium real funds rate is about 2¾ percent,
which implies a modest step-down in the nominal funds rate to roughly 4¾ percent
after 2007.  With this as the baseline, the model can be used to simulate the effects of
alternative assumptions for monetary policy over the next few years.  In these
simulations, participants in financial markets—including those in the equity, bond,
and foreign exchange markets—are assumed to understand fully the forces shaping
the economic outlook, whereas households and firms are assumed to form their
expectations using more limited information.
(10) To shed light on the implications of ending the process of policy firming,
the first simulation considers a policy trajectory in which the federal funds rate is held
constant at its current level through 2010 rather than being raised to 5 percent as in
the Greenbook.  The policy path beyond 2010 is set using the aggressive Taylor rule
as described below in the explanatory notes for policy rules.  As shown in the upper
left panel of Chart 5, the funds rate path in this alternative scenario (the dashed line) is
a bit lower than under the extended baseline (the solid line) over the next two years
and a bit higher thereafter.  Under the assumption that this policy path is fully
anticipated by financial market participants, the alternative scenario produces a slightly
lower trajectory for longer-term real interest rates over the next two years relative to
the baseline.  This in turn generates a modestly lower path for the unemployment rate
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 41
Chart 5
Ending the Policy Firming Process
Baseline
Lower near-term funds rate
Federal Funds Rate
Five-Year Real Interest Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Four-quarter average
Core PCE Inflation
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 41
during 2007 and 2008 and slightly higher core inflation through the remainder of the
(11) Because policy paths that merely hold inflation around its current rate might
not be viewed as acceptable by the Committee, the next set of simulations examines
policies that would generate a more rapid decline in core inflation toward an inflation
objective of 1½ percent.  In these simulations, the funds rate reaches 5¾ percent later
this year and remains at that rate through at least mid-2008 (Chart 6).  Two different
scenarios illustrate the role of inflation expectations in determining the
macroeconomic effects of the additional policy tightening.  In one, long-term inflation
expectations respond only sluggishly to inflation outcomes (the dashed lines); in the
other, expectations are assumed to converge to the 1½ percent target by late 2008, as
might be the case if the public became convinced that the Committee had that
inflation goal (the dotted lines).  In the first scenario, making significant progress in
reducing inflation involves holding the funds rate at 5¾ percent through the end of
conditions, the unemployment rate rises steadily to about 5½ percent over the next
two years and does not start to return to the NAIRU until late in the decade; this slack
helps generate a slow decline in core inflation.  In the second scenario, the more rapid
adjustment of long-run inflation expectations brings about a more rapid decline in
actual inflation with less slack in economic activity.  As a result, policymakers can
begin cutting the funds rate noticeably earlier, and because investors fully anticipate
the timing of the future policy easing, nominal and real yields on longer-term bonds
rise somewhat less than in the first scenario.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 41
Chart 6
Policy Tightening and the Evolution of Inflation Expectations
Baseline
Sluggish adjustment of inflation expectations
Rapid adjustment of inflation expectations
Federal Funds Rate
Five-Year Real Interest Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Four-quarter average
Core PCE Inflation
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 41
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(12) This Bluebook presents three alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized by the draft statements in Table 1.  Under Alternative A,
the Committee leaves the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting.  It also
indicates a best guess that, if any adjustment to the stance of policy subsequently
proved necessary, it likely would be upward.  Under Alternative B, the target for the
federal funds rate is raised another 25 basis points at this meeting, and the risk
assessment suggests that the Committee may pause in June.  Under Alternative C, the
target for the funds rate is raised 50 basis points and the risks are described as
balanced without mention of additional policy action.  All three alternatives provide a
fuller description of the rationale for policy action and some forward-looking
language about the economic outlook.
(13) If the Committee believes that the outcome projected by the staff in the
Greenbook forecast is both likely and best balances the Federal Reserve’s dual
objectives, then it may wish to couple another 25 basis point firming at this meeting
with a risk assessment that hints that the tightening cycle may be coming to a close, as
in Alternative B.  A quarter-point move at this meeting would bring the cumulative
tightening since June 2004 to 4 percentage points.  While a portion of that rise has
been offset by higher inflation, real short-term interest rates have been boosted
appreciably as well, from below zero to around 2¾ percent as measured using trailing
core PCE inflation as a proxy for expected inflation.  The real federal funds rate has
been lifted to around the middle of the range of model-based estimates of its short-
run equilibrium (Chart 7) and to a level about equal to the equilibrium rate implicit in
the Greenbook projection.  Members may also view the recent backup in longer-term
rates as augmenting the financial restraint imposed by higher short-term interest rates.
Indeed, under the staff forecast, the maintenance of the nominal funds rate at
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 41
Table 1: Alternative Language for the May FOMC Announcement
March FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the federal 
funds rate unchanged at 4-3/4 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 
5 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 
5-1/4 percent.
Economic growth rebounded to nearly a 
5 percent annual rate in the first quarter.  The 
Committee sees growth as likely to moderate 
to a sustainable pace, partly reflecting a 
gradual cooling of the housing market, other 
lagged responses to previous rate increases, 
and the effects of energy price increases.
Economic growth rebounded to nearly a 
5 percent annual rate in the first quarter.  
The Committee sees growth as likely to 
moderate toward a more sustainable 
pace, partly reflecting a gradual cooling 
of the housing market, other lagged 
responses to previous rate increases, and 
the effects of energy price increases.
Economic growth rebounded to nearly 
a 5 percent annual rate in the first 
quarter.  The Committee sees growth as 
likely to moderate somewhat in coming 
quarters, though data confirming a 
slowing in growth have been sparse.
As yet, the run-up in the prices of energy and 
other commodities appears to have had only 
a modest effect on core inflation, ongoing 
productivity gains have helped to hold the 
growth of unit labor costs in check, and 
inflation expectations remain contained.  The 
Committee expects core inflation to remain 
well contained.  Still, possible increases in 
resource utilization, in combination with the 
elevated prices of energy and other 
commodities, have the potential to add to 
inflation pressures.
As yet, the run-up in the prices of energy 
and other commodities appears to have 
had only a modest effect on core 
inflation, and ongoing productivity gains 
have helped to hold the growth of unit 
labor costs in check.  The Committee 
expects core inflation to remain 
contained.  However, the recent climb in 
energy and other commodity prices, an 
apparent slight rise in inflation 
expectations, and possible increases in 
resource utilization have the potential to 
add to inflation pressures.
As yet, the run-up in the prices of 
energy and other commodities appears 
to have had only a modest effect on 
core inflation, and ongoing productivity 
gains have helped to hold the growth of 
unit labor costs in check.  However, the 
recent climb in energy and other 
commodity prices, an apparent rise in 
inflation expectations, and possible 
increases in resource utilization have the 
potential to add to inflation pressures.
Against this backdrop, the Committee 
preferred to await additional information 
about economic developments before taking 
any further action.  The Committee sees the 
risks to its price stability objective as slightly 
to the upside and judges it more likely that its 
next policy action will be a tightening rather 
than an easing.
To keep the risks to the attainment of 
both sustainable economic growth and 
price stability roughly in balance, some 
further policy firming may be needed.  
The Committee judges that any 
additional firming is likely to be modest.  
However, the extent and timing of any 
such firming will depend importantly on 
the evolution of the economic outlook as 
implied by incoming information.
The Committee judges that, with this 
action, the risks to the attainment of 
both sustainable economic growth and 
price stability are roughly in balance.
Assessment 
of Risk
In any event, the Committee will respond to 
changes in the economic outlook, as implied 
by incoming information, as needed to foster 
its objectives of sustainable economic growth 
and price stability.
In any event, the Committee will 
respond to changes in economic 
prospects as needed to support the 
attainment of its objectives.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 41
Chart 7
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval
90 percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.2 2.1
   Small structural model 2.6 2.5
   Large model (FRB/US) 3.8 3.7
   Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.2 - 4.4(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.3 - 5.4(
Greenbook-consistent measure 2.8 2.8
Medium-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.2 2.1
   Small structural model 2.4 2.5
   Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.4 - 3.2(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.7 - 3.8(
TIPS-based factor model 2.2 2.1
Memo
   Actual real federal funds rate 2.70 2.74
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 41
Equilibrium Real Rate Chart: Explanatory Notes 
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to return output to its 
potential level over time.  For the first three measures listed below, the short-run equilibrium rate is defined as the 
rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the corresponding model’s projection of the 
economy.  For the first two measures, the medium-run concept is the value of the real federal funds rate projected 
to keep output at potential in seven years under the assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and 
potential output into line in the short run and then keeps them equal thereafter.  The TIPS-based factor model 
measure provides an estimate of market expectations for the real federal funds rate seven years ahead.  The actual 
real federal funds rate is constructed as the difference between the nominal rate and realized inflation, where the 
nominal rate is measured as the quarterly average of the observed federal funds rate, and realized inflation is 
given by the log difference between the staff’s estimate of the core PCE price index and its lagged value four 
quarters earlier.  For the current quarter, the nominal rate is specified as the target federal funds rate on the 
Bluebook publication date.
Measure Description
Single-equation 
Model
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and 
its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.  In light of this 
model’s simple structure, the short-run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends only 
on the recent position of output relative to potential, and the medium-run measure is 
virtually constant.
Small Structural 
Model
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, and 
the real bond yield.  Unlike the estimates from the single-equation model, values of the 
equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth, 
fiscal policy, and capital markets.
Large Model 
(FRB/US)
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.  These 
projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the 
three-year horizon relevant for the short-run concept but are less sensible over longer 
horizons.  Thus, we report only the short-run measure for the FRB/US model.
Greenbook-
consistent
Measures of the equilibrium real rate cannot be directly obtained from the Greenbook 
forecast, because the Greenbook is not based on a formal model.  Rather, we use the 
FRB/US model in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook forecast to 
derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that its 
simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is run 
off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output 
gap.  The medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it 
requires a relatively long extension of the Greenbook forecast.
TIPS-based 
Factor Model
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’ expectations of 
the future path of real interest rates, but also include term and liquidity premiums.  The 
TIPS-based measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven-year-ahead 
instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the Bluebook publication 
date.  This forward rate is adjusted to remove estimates of the term and liquidity 
premiums based on a three-factor arbitrage-free term-structure model applied to TIPS 
yields, nominal yields, and inflation.  Because TIPS indexation is based on the total CPI, 
this measure is also adjusted for the medium-term difference—projected at 40 basis 
points—between total CPI inflation and core PCE inflation.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 41
growth to a pace a little below that of its potential, slightly easing pressures on
resources and promoting a modest downward tilt in core inflation to rates below
convinced that output growth would slow to this extent if the funds rate were
maintained at 5 percent, it might nonetheless believe that the stance of policy is not
far from neutral.  If so, a pause in policy firming before long would be unlikely to
jeopardize the Committee’s price stability objective and might be appropriate to allow
a better assessment at a later date of the cumulative effects of its policy actions.
(14) Under Alternative B, the rationale paragraph could indicate that spending is
likely to slow because of a cooling of the housing market and the restraint imparted by
increases in energy prices and interest rates.  The Committee could repeat its analysis
in the March statement of recent factors affecting inflation, but then acknowledge that
a slight rise in inflation expectations could also add to inflation pressures.  To treat its
dual objectives symmetrically, row 3 includes the Committee’s expectation that core
inflation will remain contained, just as there is forward-looking language on economic
growth in the previous row.  In view of the additional quarter-point firming that
would be implemented under this alternative, the risk assessment might be softened a
little relative to that released after the last meeting by adding “The Committee judges
that any additional firming is likely to be modest” and adopting some of the language
of the Chairman’s recent testimony:  “the extent and timing of any such firming will
depend importantly on the evolution of the economic outlook as implied by incoming
information.”  Inclusion of the reference to “timing” is intended to suggest that
additional firming would not necessarily take place at the June meeting.  If the
Committee saw only a small probability that it would act again in June, it could tune
the message by replacing the second sentence of row 4 with “The Committee judges
that additional firming, if any, is likely to be modest.”  In either case, the dependency
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 41
of future policy actions on data could be underscored by essentially reiterating the
final sentence from the March announcement.
(15) Investors seem sure of a 25 basis point hike in the federal funds rate at this
meeting and see only about a one-in-three chance of a similar move in June.  The
statement accompanying Alternative B would likely maintain or slightly increase these
odds.  Market interest rates could back up a few basis points, and downward pressure
on the dollar might be reduced a bit, at least for a time, and equity prices could
(16) The sizable rise over the intermeeting period in long-term nominal interest
rates (which apparently included a significant pickup in compensation for expected
inflation), the weakening of the exchange value of the dollar, and the rise in some
survey measures of inflation expectations could be read by members as evidence of an
erosion in the public’s confidence in the Committee’s commitment to price stability.
If so, the combination of a half-point action at this meeting and the words presented
in Alternative C might be appealing.  With energy prices having risen sharply further
in recent weeks, the Committee could be concerned that elevated energy and
commodity prices and relatively high levels of resource utilization may begin to leave a
more distinct imprint on core inflation and inflation expectations.  Moreover,
members may believe that core inflation currently is already at or above the upper end
of an acceptable range, inclining them to foster a steeper downward trajectory in
inflation than that forecast in the Greenbook.  In that regard, the alternative
simulation provided earlier suggests that the nominal federal funds rate would need to
reach 5¾ percent by year-end to foster a 1½ percent inflation goal over the next few
(17) The rationale portion of the policy statement associated with Alternative C
could temper the expectation of a moderation in growth with the observation that
“data confirming a slowing in growth have been sparse.”  As in March, the inflation
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 41
paragraph could cite limited energy-price pass-through and productivity gains as
having helped to hold inflation in check, but would not indicate that the Committee
expected core inflation to remain contained.  Reasserting that “inflation expectations
are contained” might be problematic, and, as in Alternative B, rising inflation
expectations could be cited as a factor that could add to inflation pressures.  In light
of the size of the policy move, the Committee might want to declare that the risks to
its dual objectives are balanced.
(18) The policy action and statement associated with Alternative C would catch
market participants unawares.  Real bond yields could jump up noticeably; the rise in
nominal yields would be somewhat less if inflation expectations declined—but that
would depend on the extent to which investors took the action as an assertion of the
Committee’s anti-inflation resolve.  The recent tendency toward weakness in the
foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely be checked, and stock prices would
decline.  Given the size of the policy surprise, volatility, both actual and implied, could
(19) The likely reaction in financial markets, which could be sizable, to a 50 basis
point increase in the target for the federal funds rate might diminish the appeal of
Alternative C for the Committee.  But some of the rationale language of this
alternative could be used to stiffen the policy statement announcing a quarter-point
increase and thus make it more likely that financial markets would build in high odds
of a like-sized action in June.  For instance, the Committee could combine the
rationale paragraphs of Alternative C with the risk assessment of Alternative B.  To
make it more likely that market participants price in an additional move, the
Committee could strike the sentence characterizing additional firming as likely to be
“modest” in row 4 of Alternative B.  This might be favored if the Committee was
impressed by the resilience of aggregate demand in the face of the substantial increase
in energy prices and concerned that the momentum of spending could push the level
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 41
of output well above the economy’s potential.  Indeed, if the Committee harbored a
suspicion that economic slack had already been more than eliminated, it might see
increased inflation pressures as a palpable risk.  In that vein, members might read the
most recent figures on new and existing home sales as suggesting that the housing
market, while off its peak, is not cooling quickly enough to provide much assurance
that overall economic growth is in the process of slowing to potential.  In that regard,
the “domestic boom” alternative simulation in the Greenbook, which puts the funds
rate at 6¼ percent by year-end 2007, may strike some members as an uncomfortably
plausible outcome.
(20) In contrast, the Committee may believe that further policy tightening at this
meeting is not necessary or desirable and that, at least for now, maintaining the
current stance of policy is appropriate, as in Alternative A.  As noted previously, the
cumulative firming of policy to date has been significant, and the real federal funds
rate is now well within the range of model-based estimates of its equilibrium value.  In
these circumstances, the Committee may wish to pause to obtain more information
that would be useful in assessing whether further action will be necessary.  Put
differently, policy accommodation now appears to have been eliminated, and, with
core inflation remaining contained—and perhaps believed likely to edge lower over
time—despite sharp increases in energy and commodity prices, the Committee may
not feel a need to move from a roughly neutral posture to a restrictive stance.  That is
the message of the simulation presented earlier:  If the equilibrium real rate is in the
neighborhood of 2¾ percent, a 2 percent inflation goal could be achieved by holding
the nominal funds rate at 4¾ percent.  Indeed, estimated monetary policy rules imply
that the existing stance of policy is about appropriate or even a little firmer than
would be predicted by past Committee behavior (Chart 8).  Model simulations using a
number of simple policy rules also suggest that further tightening may not be required
at this time (Chart 9).  And even if members believe that further tightening could
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 41
Chart 8
Information from Estimated Policy Rules and Financial Markets
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Outcome-based rule
   70 percent confidence interval
   90 percent confidence interval
Forecast-based rule
Estimated Policy Rules
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Market-based expectations
   70 percent confidence interval
   90 percent confidence interval
Market Expectations
Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 41
Chart 9
Policy Paths under Alternative Inflation Objectives
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Baseline Taylor rule
Aggressive Taylor rule
First-difference rule
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Baseline Taylor rule
Aggressive Taylor rule
First-difference rule
Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 41
Policy Rule Charts: Explanatory Notes
For the rules described below, it denotes the federal funds rate for quarter t, while the explanatory 
variables include the staff’s estimate of trailing four-quarter core PCE inflation (πt), its forecasts  
of inflation two and three quarters ahead (πt+2|t and πt+3|t), its assessment of the current output gap 
( *t ty y− ), its one-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap ( *1| 1|t t t ty y+ +− ), its three-quarter-ahead 
forecast of annual average GDP growth relative to potential ( 4 4 *3| 3|t t t ty y+ +Δ − Δ ), and the assumed value 
of policymakers’ long-run inflation objective ( *π ).    
Rule prescriptions are computed using dynamic simulations of the FRB/US model, implemented as 
though the rule is followed starting at this FOMC meeting.  This quarter’s prescription is a weighted 
average of the actual value of the federal funds rate thus far this quarter and the value obtained from the 
FRB/US model simulations using the timing of this meeting within the quarter to determine the weights.  
Finally, for the forecast-based rule and the first-difference rule, it should be noted that prescriptions near 
the end of the Greenbook horizon also depend on an extension of the Greenbook baseline forecast. 
  
Estimated Policy Rules:  Estimation is performed using real-time quarterly data taken from the 
Greenbook and staff memoranda closest to the middle of each quarter.  The specific lag structure of the 
outcome-based rule is chosen according to the Bayesian information criterion over the sample period 
starting from 1988Q1.  The forecast-based rule differs from the outcome-based rule in that it also 
permits staff forecasts of inflation and the output gap to be among the explanatory variables.  
Confidence intervals, shown only for the outcome-based rule, are based on stochastic simulations of the 
FRB/US model, where the shocks are randomly drawn from the set of model equations residuals for the 
period 1986-2004.  The following table indicates the specification of each rule and its root mean squared 
error (RMSE) over the sample 1993:1-2005:4.  
Outcome-based Rule
it = 0.27 + 1.14it-1 – 0.36it-2 + 0.32πt
+ 0.60( *t ty y− ) – 0.40( *1 1t ty y− −− )  
.19
Forecast-based Rule
it = 0.24 + 1.14it-1 – 0.35it-2 + 0.31πt+2|t
+ 0.42( *1| 1|t t t ty y+ +− ) – 0.23( *1 1t ty y− −− )  
.18
Market Expectations:  The expected funds rate path is based on quotes from fed funds and Eurodollar 
futures, and the confidence intervals are obtained from options on those futures.  
 
Simple Policy Rules:  The following table indicates the specification of each rule and its RMSE over 
the sample 1993:1-2005:4 for two inflation objectives. 
  π*=1.5 π*=2
Baseline Taylor Rule it = 2 + πt + 0.5(πt – *π ) + 0.5( *t ty y− ) .99 .99
Aggressive Taylor Rule it = 2 + πt + 0.5(πt – *π ) + ( *t ty y− )  .62 .63
First-difference Rule it = it-1 + 0.5(πt+3|t – *π ) + 0.5( 4 4 *3| 3|t t t ty y+ +Δ − Δ ) .51 .44
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 41
eventually prove necessary to address upside risks to inflation, they may see no
urgency to implement such restraint.  Such an assessment might be importantly
influenced by members’ regional knowledge of the housing situation.  With national
data, particularly survey information, pointing to some cooling, the Committee may
put some weight on the “housing slump” alternative simulation in the Greenbook,
which suggests that if significant confidence effects accompany a drop in housing
values, then considerably easier monetary policy would be warranted.
(21) The rationale section of the Committee’s statement associated with
Alternative A could begin like that in Alternative B but soften the characterization of
the outlook for growth to “likely to moderate to a sustainable pace.”  It could use
essentially the same paragraph discussing inflation as that for Alternative B, but retain
the assertion that “inflation expectations remain contained” and emphasize the
expectation that core inflation will remain “well contained.”  The risk assessment
might be revised considerably from that employed at recent meetings.  In particular, it
could indicate that “Against this backdrop, the Committee preferred to await
additional information about economic developments before taking any further
action.  The Committee sees the risks to its price stability objective as slightly to the
upside and judges it more likely that its next policy action will be a tightening rather
than an easing.”  To accommodate those changes, the final sentence of the risk
assessment might be modified slightly to read “In any event, the Committee will
respond to changes in the economic outlook, as implied by incoming information, as
needed to foster its objectives of sustainable economic growth and price stability.”
(22) Both the absence of policy action and the statement associated with
Alternative A would come as a considerable surprise to market participants.  Short-
term market rates would probably drop by about 25 basis points as market
participants removed all but a small probability of near-term policy firming.  The
effect on bond yields would depend in part on whether inflation expectations were
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 41
adversely affected by the lack of tightening at this meeting and the suggestion that
policy could be on hold for some time.  If inflation expectations were unperturbed,
bond yields most likely would decline, stock markets rally, and the foreign exchange
value of the dollar weaken.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(23) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 growth is projected to expand 5 percent
this year, restrained by a further increase in the opportunity cost of holding M2.  As a
result, M2 velocity would rise about 1½ percent, after increases of 1½ and 2½ percent
in 2004 and 2005, respectively.  Next year, M2 growth is forecast at 5½ percent, in
line with the expansion in nominal GDP, as opportunity costs are expected to be
about unchanged on balance following the leveling off of short-term market interest
(24) Domestic nonfinancial sector debt growth is expected to slow to
likely to fall off fairly sharply, reflecting a deceleration in mortgage debt, but at
seen as expanding 7½ percent, only a little lower than last year’s pace, with the
proceeds of a considerable portion of the borrowing slated to finance equity
retirement.  Despite the widening of the federal budget deficit, federal debt growth
slows to 6¾ percent in 2006.  Next year, overall debt growth is projected to drop
further, reflecting a noticeable slowdown in the nonfederal components.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 41
No Change
Raise 25 bp/
Greenbook* Raise 50 bp**
Monthly Growth Rates
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
*  Increase of 25 basis points in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change
thereafter.  This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook
** Increase of 50 basis points in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
Table 2
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 41
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
(25) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around ____________ 4¾percent.
Risk Assessments
A.    Against this backdrop, the Committee preferred to await additional
information about economic developments before taking any
further action.  The Committee sees the risks to its price stability
objective as slightly to the upside and judges it more likely that its
next policy action will be a tightening rather than an easing.  In any
event, the Committee will respond to changes in the economic
outlook, as implied by incoming information, as needed to foster its
objectives of sustainable economic growth and price stability.
B.    To keep the risks to the attainment of both sustainable economic
growth and price stability roughly in balance, some further policy
firming may be needed.  The Committee judges that any additional
firming is likely to be modest.  However, the extent and timing of
any such firming will depend importantly on the evolution of the
economic outlook as implied by incoming information.  In any
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 41
event, the Committee will respond to changes in economic
prospects as needed to support the attainment of its objectives.
C.    The Committee judges that, with this action, the risks to the attainment
of both sustainable economic growth and price stability are roughly in
balance.  In any event, the Committee will respond to changes in
economic prospects as needed to foster these objectives.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 41
Appendix Chart 1
Treasury Yield Curve
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
May 4, 2006   
March 27, 2006
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 41
Appendix Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 41
Appendix Chart 3
Stock Indexes
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
S&P 500*
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 41
Appendix Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 41
Appendix Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
                Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 41
Appendix Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
Journal of Commerce Index
Total
Metals
CRB Spot Industrials
CRB Futures
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 41
Appendix Chart 7
Growth of M2
Nominal M2
Real M2
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 37 of 41
Appendix Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2
Implicit GDP
price deflator (P) Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 38 of 41
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
