Content last modified 02/09/2012.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
AUGUST 3, 2006
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 3, 2006
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The FOMC’s decision at its June meeting to increase the federal funds rate
target by 25 basis points to 5¼ percent was widely anticipated, but market participants
apparently read the accompanying statement as indicating that a near-term pause was
more likely than had been foreseen, and the expected path of the nominal funds rate
edged lower.  Subsequently, policy expectations jumped in response to the release of
June consumer price data, but dropped following the Chairman’s semiannual
monetary policy testimony and declined further after the release of the minutes of the
June FOMC meeting (Chart 1).  Both of these communications were apparently read
as indicating that, while the FOMC was concerned about elevated readings on
inflation, it viewed price pressures as likely to abate over coming quarters.  Policy
expectations were also damped by incoming data on economic activity over the
intermeeting period that were somewhat softer than expected.
(2) Futures quotes suggest that investors now put the likelihood of a quarter-
point increase in the target rate at this meeting at around 35 percent, down from
about 70 percent before the June meeting; the expected path of the funds rate is
essentially flat for the remainder of the year.  Further ahead, futures rates now point
to a more pronounced downward tilt to the expected path of policy next year.  In
contrast to futures-market investors, respondents to the Desk’s survey of primary
dealers appear to expect a somewhat firmer near-term policy stance, placing a
probability of about 50 percent on a quarter-point action at the August meeting;
almost all respondents expect a tightening at one of the next three meetings.  The
primary dealers also expect the August FOMC statement to acknowledge that core
inflation readings are still elevated, to describe economic growth as moderating, and
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
June 29 July 4 July 7 July 12 July 17 July 20 July 25 July 28 Aug. 2
Percent Percent
PPI
CPI
MPR
testimony
(Senate)
FOMC
minutes
FOMC
statement
Employment
report
Probability of a 25 b.p. Firming at August FOMC meeting*
*Estimated from federal funds futures, with an allowance for term premia.
August 3, 2006
June 28, 2006
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Next Five Years
Five-Year Forward, Five Years Ahead
Inflation Compensation*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves, and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 39
to indicate that, while the Committee expects slower growth to restrain inflation going
forward, it remains concerned about inflation risks.  Despite the evident uncertainty
over the outcome of the August meeting, short-term Eurodollar implied volatilities
rose modestly since the June meeting but have remained low.
(3) The federal funds rate averaged 5.23 percent over the intermeeting period.
The implementation of the Board’s revised Payment System Risk policy on July 20
went smoothly, in part because practices in the federal funds and other money
markets have adjusted in response to the policy change (see the box on page 5).1
(4) Consistent with the revision to monetary policy expectations, yields on two-
and ten-year nominal Treasury securities fell about 30 basis points over the
intermeeting period.  Yields on TIPS declined about in line with those on comparable
nominal Treasury securities, leaving inflation compensation little changed, while some
survey-based measures of inflation expectations ticked down.  Monetary policy
communications and the softer growth outlook apparently led investors to believe
that, despite the disappointing recent news on consumer prices and further increases
in energy prices, inflation would be contained going forward even with a lower path
of policy.
(5) Broad stock price indexes posted modest increases, on net, over the
intermeeting period (Chart 2).  Equity prices were buoyed by earnings reports that
were mainly solid and by FOMC communications that were seen as signaling a
possible end to the current phase of policy tightening, but these gains were partly
offset by concerns about turmoil in the Middle East, associated oil price increases, and
negative second-quarter earnings reports from a few high-profile firms.  The equity
risk premium rose slightly, and implied volatility of the S&P 500 remained somewhat
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 39
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Wilshire
Dow Jones Technology
Stock Prices
Real Long-Term Treasury Yield*
*Perpetuity Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year expected inflation.
Note. + Denotes the latest observation using daily interest rates and stock 
prices and latest earnings data from I/B/E/S.
Equity Valuation
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Bond Default and C&I Loan Delinquency Rates
Percent of outstandings
C&I loan delinquency rate
    (Call Report)
Bond default rate*
*6-month moving average, from Moody’s Investors Service.
Percent of liabilities
Expected Year-Ahead Defaults*
*Firm-level estimates of year-ahead defaults from KMV corporation, weighted
by firm liabilities as a percent of total liabilities, excluding defaulted firms.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 39
above its average over the first four months of the year.  Business default rates
remained low.  Spreads of yields on investment-grade bonds over those on
comparable-maturity Treasury securities were about unchanged, while spreads on
speculative-grade bonds widened some; both stayed narrow by historical standards.
(6) Heightened tensions in the Middle East contributed to volatile conditions in
foreign financial markets over the intermeeting period, with declines in U.S. interest
rates an important common factor in foreign financial developments.2  Yields on
long-term government bonds dropped in almost all industrial countries, though
Changes in the Federal Funds Market in Response to the Revised PSR Policy
On July 20, 2006, the Board’s revised Payments System Risk (PSR) policy took effect.  
Under the revised policy, the Reserve Banks will release principal and interest (P&I) 
payments on securities issued by government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) and certain 
international organizations only when the entity’s Federal Reserve account contains 
sufficient funds to cover the payments.  In the past, the GSEs had routinely incurred very 
large daylight overdrafts, especially on days of sizable P&I payments.  Nevertheless, 
implementation of the policy has resulted in no disruptions to the payment system or the 
federal funds market, including on July 25, the first day on which large P&I payments were 
made.
The GSEs have reportedly relied on several strategies to comply with the new PSR 
policy, including tapping the increasingly active early-return federal funds market.  Under 
early-return contracts, borrowers are obliged to return funds to the lender at a specified 
time, typically between 9:30 and 11:00 a.m., that is earlier than under the regular-return 
arrangements.  Early-return funds tend to trade about 2 to 4 basis points below regular-
return federal funds.  Based on reports from federal funds brokers, early-return federal 
funds accounted for as much as one-fifth of the brokered federal funds market on July 25.  
The lower rate at which early-return federal funds trade and their increasing share of the 
market implies that the effective federal funds rate will tend to understate the average rate 
for regular-return federal funds.  This effect is particularly pronounced on days when early-
return contracts account for a relatively large share of federal funds trades.  Desk and 
Board staff are studying the implications of the policy change and the early-return market 
for the effective rate and the funds market in general.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 39
generally by less than their U.S. counterparts (Chart 3).  In Canada, yields fell about as
much as in the United States, as the Bank of Canada reiterated on July 13 that it
considered its current policy stance to be consistent with achieving its inflation
objective over the medium term.  In contrast, bond yields in Japan and the United
Kingdom were about unchanged on balance as declines early in the intermeeting
period were reversed later when indicators of economic activity came in stronger than
expected.  As expected, both the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan raised
policy interest rates 25 basis points; for Japan, this move marked the end of the zero-
interest-rate target.  The Bank of England surprised markets this morning with a
while.”  The dollar appreciated about 1 percent against the Canadian dollar but fell a
bit more than 2 percent on average against the currencies of other industrial countries.
On balance, the trade-weighted index of the dollar against other major currencies fell
countries rose moderately.
(7) Equity values rebounded vigorously in most emerging markets, partly in
response to the decline in U.S. interest rates.  Mexican equity prices were among the
strongest performers, spurred by the apparent victory of Felipe Calderón in Mexico’s
presidential election.  EMBI+ spreads declined around 20 and 35 basis points for
Mexico and Brazil, respectively.  The dollar fell about 3½ percent against the Mexican
peso and 1 percent against the real.  The dollar also fell against most Asian currencies,
including a ¼ percent decline against the Chinese renminbi.  Overall, the dollar
depreciated 1¼ percent against an index of currencies of other important U.S. trading
(8) Debt of the nonfinancial business sector expanded at an 8¾ percent annual
rate in the second quarter, down only a bit from its rapid first-quarter pace.  C&I
loans, commercial paper, and corporate bonds all posted solid gains.  In July, business
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 39
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields (Nominal)
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Industrial Countries
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock Price Indexes
Emerging Market Economies
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 39
loan growth is estimated to have stayed robust, but net issuance of corporate bonds
was somewhat soft and commercial paper outstanding contracted (Chart 4).
According to the July Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, banks further eased
lending standards and some terms on C&I loans over the previous three months,
largely in response to increased competition from other banks and nonbank lenders.
The limited data in hand for the household sector suggest that debt growth was still
brisk in the second quarter, though below the first quarter’s double-digit pace.  While
cash-out refinancing activity remained strong in the second quarter, applications for
mortgages to purchase homes continued to wane, pointing to a modest decline in
overall mortgage borrowing.  Consumer loan growth through May remained subdued.
In the federal sector, tax receipts were strong in the second quarter, and Treasury debt
outstanding contracted slightly.  State and local governments stepped up borrowing.
Overall, the expansion of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is estimated to have
slowed last quarter to an annual rate of just under 7 percent.
(9) M2 growth averaged 5¼ percent in June and July, somewhat stronger than
projected at the time of the last FOMC meeting but still consistent with moderate
nominal income growth and high opportunity cost.  Retail money funds and small
time deposits, whose yields tend to rise about in line with short-term market interest
rates, expanded rapidly over the two months.  By contrast, liquid deposits, whose
yields typically rise much more slowly than market rates, continued to run off.
Currency growth was negative in June and July.  Available data indicate that domestic
demand for currency was likely about average while international demand was
unusually weak.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 39
Chart 4
Debt and Money
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
Monthly rate
e Estimated.
Loans to large and medium-sized firms
Loans to small firms
Net Percentage of Domestic Respondents Tightening
Standards for C&I Loans Percent
Growth of Household Debt
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of Nonfinancial Debt
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2 p
p Projected.
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
e Estimated.
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 39
Economic Outlook
(10) In the staff outlook, the forecasts for aggregate demand and potential
output have both been revised down, leaving expected pressures on resource
utilization about as projected in the June Greenbook.  Nonetheless, the outlook for
inflation has deteriorated somewhat, reflecting incoming consumer price data and
higher energy prices.  In the forecast, a federal funds rate of 5¼ percent over the
remainder of this year and next—the same path as was assumed in June—engenders
subdued GDP growth and core inflation that edges down slowly from its recent
elevated level.  Long-term Treasury yields are about unchanged through the end of
next year.  Stock prices are again assumed to rise at about a 6½ percent annual rate,
but from a level that is a somewhat higher than in June, while the foreign exchange
value of the dollar is assumed to depreciate at a 2½ percent annual rate against an
index of major foreign currencies.  After rising sharply over the period since the June
Greenbook was completed, oil prices are assumed to remain about flat through 2007,
consistent with quotes in futures markets.  Against this backdrop, and with incoming
data confirming that aggregate demand moderated considerably in the second quarter,
the staff projects that real GDP will increase at an average annual rate of about
slowly than the staff’s estimate of potential GDP growth (which has been revised
down from 3.2 percent to 2.9 percent in light of the annual revision to the National
Income and Product Accounts), the unemployment rate rises steadily, reaching 5¼
percent by the end of 2007 as it did in the June Greenbook.  As the pass-through of
increases in energy prices ebbs and pressures on resources ease, core inflation declines
gradually over the projection period.  Nonetheless, core PCE inflation is expected to
average 2½ percent this year and 2¼ percent in 2007, slightly above the June
projection for both years.  The staff’s forecast for inflation is broadly in line with the
central tendency of the FOMC participants’ projections compiled for the last meeting,
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 39
but its forecast for the unemployment rate is notably higher, as was the case in June.
The central tendency for real GDP growth, which was compiled before the annual
revision to the National Income and Product Accounts, was higher than either the
June or the current staff forecast.3
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(11) This Bluebook presents four policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized by the draft statements in Table 1.  Under Alternatives A
and B, the Committee would leave the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting,
while under Alternatives C and D it would tighten policy another 25 basis points.  In
Alternatives B and D, the accompanying statement would indicate that risks to
inflation remain to the upside and signal that additional tightening might still be
forthcoming, depending on incoming information.  In contrast, Alternatives A and C
would imply that the tightening cycle may well have come to a close.  For reference,
the June statement is included on the page following Table 1.
(12) Although recent rates of inflation, if sustained, would presumably be judged
inconsistent with the maintenance of price stability, the Committee might see the
current stance of policy as likely to be sufficient to put core inflation on a downward
track.  If so, it might be inclined to keep the federal funds rate unchanged at
firming might prove necessary, as in Alternative B.  The Committee may agree with
the staff assessment that core inflation is likely to decline gradually in coming quarters
as the forces that have temporarily boosted inflation begin to unwind and the
moderation in economic growth fosters an easing of resource pressures.  Maintaining 
                                           
3 The central tendency for core PCE inflation was 2¼ to 2½ percent for 2006 and 2 to 2¼ 
percent for 2007.  For real GDP growth it was 3¼ to 3½ percent for 2006 and 3 to 3¼ 
percent for 2007, while for the rate of unemployment in the fourth quarter it was 4¾ to 5 
percent for both years.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 39
Table 1: Alternative Language for the August FOMC Announcement
Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Alternative D
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 
5½ percent.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise its 
target for the federal funds rate by 
25 basis points to 5½ percent.
[Same as A]
[Same as A]
[Same as A]
Readings on core inflation have been 
elevated in recent months, owing in part 
to the pass-through of increased energy 
and other commodity prices.  However, 
inflation pressures seem likely to 
moderate over time, reflecting contained 
inflation expectations and the cumulative 
effects of monetary policy actions and 
other factors restraining aggregate 
demand.
Readings on core inflation have been 
elevated in recent months, and the high 
levels of resource utilization and of the 
prices of energy and other commodities 
have the potential to sustain inflation 
pressures.  However, inflation pressures 
seem likely to moderate over time, 
reflecting contained inflation 
expectations and the cumulative effects 
of monetary policy actions and other 
factors restraining aggregate demand.
Readings on core inflation have 
been elevated in recent months.  
The moderation in the growth of 
aggregate demand and anchored 
inflation expectations should help to 
contain inflation in coming quarters. 
However, the high levels of resource 
utilization and of the prices of 
energy and other commodities have 
the potential to sustain inflation 
pressures.
Although the Committee expects 
inflation pressures to diminish gradually, 
it judges that some inflation risks remain.  
The extent and timing of any additional 
firming that may be needed to address 
these risks will depend on the evolution 
of the outlook for both inflation and 
economic growth, as implied by 
incoming information.
[Same as A]
The extent and timing of any 
additional firming that may be 
needed to foster a moderation in 
inflation pressures will depend on 
the evolution of the outlook for 
both inflation and economic 
growth, as implied by incoming 
information.
Assessment of 
Risk
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 39
June FOMC Statement
the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 5-1/4 percent.
strong pace earlier this year, partly reflecting a gradual cooling of the housing
market and the lagged effects of increases in interest rates and energy prices.
productivity gains have held down the rise in unit labor costs, and inflation
expectations remain contained. However, the high levels of resource utilization
and of the prices of energy and other commodities have the potential to sustain
inflation pressures.
limit inflation pressures over time, the Committee judges that some inflation
risks remain. The extent and timing of any additional firming that may be
needed to address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for
both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
as needed to support the attainment of its objectives.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 39
the current policy stance would be consistent with prescriptions from the estimated
forecast-based policy rule (Chart 5) as well as the first-difference rule with a long-run
inflation objective of 2 percent (Chart 6).  (See the box “Intercept Shifts in Empirical
Taylor Rules.”)  A pause at this meeting, after seventeen consecutive actions, might be
seen as desirable in order to limit the risk of over-tightening and the adverse
consequences for employment and growth.  With the real federal funds rate in the
range of model-based estimates of its equilibrium value (Chart 8), the risk that
deferring action for a brief time might significantly worsen underlying inflationary
trends would seem to be modest.  Nonetheless, the Committee may feel that elevated
energy  and commodity prices, possible further increases in these prices, and high
levels of resource utilization imply that the upside risks to inflation remain substantial
and perceive only limited downside risks to the economic expansion, and so see
Intercept Shifts in Empirical Policy Rules 
 
Chart 5 shows the projections of two empirical policy rules—specified in terms of 
either outcomes or forecasts of the output gap and core inflation—that have been 
estimated using quarterly data from 1988Q1 to 2005Q4.  In previous Bluebooks,  
both of these rules involved a time-invariant intercept, essentially implying that  
the medium-run equilibrium real rate (r*) and the implicit inflation objective (π*) 
remained constant throughout the sample period.  However, recent staff analysis 
indicates that a significant upward shift in the intercept of each empirical rule 
occurred in the late 1990s.  Such a shift could arise from either a 75 basis point  
rise in r*, a 1 percentage point decline in π*, or some combination of the two.   
The funds rate projections and confidence intervals shown in Chart 5 incorporate 
these intercept shifts.  The projections generated by the forecast-based rule are 
broadly similar to the expectations of market participants, while the outcome-based 
rule points to some additional firming.   
 
Reflecting the possibility of an upward shift in the value of r*, this Bluebook 
introduces an additional simple policy rule in Chart 6.  For each specified value  
of π* (either 1½ or 2 percent), the new rule follows Taylor (1999) with respect  
to the policy coefficients—which determine the responsiveness of the funds rate  
to movements in the output gap and core inflation—but specifies the value of r*  
at 2.75 percent instead of 2 percent.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 39
Chart 5
Information from Estimated Policy Rules and Financial Markets
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Outcome-based rule
   70 percent confidence interval
   90 percent confidence interval
Forecast-based rule
Estimated Policy Rules
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Market-based expectations
   70 percent confidence interval
   90 percent confidence interval
Market Expectations
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 39
Chart 6
Policy Implications of Simple Rules
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Taylor (1993) rule
Taylor (1999) rule
Taylor (1999) rule with higher r*
First-difference rule
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Taylor (1993) rule
Taylor (1999) rule
Taylor (1999) rule with higher r*
First-difference rule
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 39
Chart 7
Optimal Policy Paths Under Two Inflation Objectives
Federal Funds Rate
Equal Weights
Less Weight On Unemployment Objective
Federal Funds Rate
Five-Year Real Interest Rate
Five-Year Real Interest Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Four-quarter average
Core PCE Inflation
Four-quarter average
Core PCE Inflation
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 39
Policy Rule Charts: Explanatory Notes
Forecast-based rule
it =  1.16it-1 – 0.36it-2
Market Expectations:  The expected funds rate path is based on quotes from fed funds and Eurodollar 
futures, and the confidence intervals are obtained from options on those futures.  
  
Simple Rules:  The following table indicates the specification of each rule. 
Taylor (1993) rule it = 2 + πt + 0.5(πt – *π ) + 0.5( *t ty y− )
Taylor (1999) rule it = 2 + πt + 0.5(πt – *π ) + ( *t ty y− )
Taylor (1999) rule     
with a higher r*
it = 2.75 + πt + 0.5(πt – *π ) + ( *t ty y− )
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 39
Chart 8
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval
90 percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 39
Equilibrium Real Rate Chart: Explanatory Notes 
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to return output to its 
potential level over time.  For the first three measures listed below, the short-run equilibrium rate is defined as the 
rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the corresponding model’s projection of the 
economy.  For the first two measures, the medium-run concept is the value of the real federal funds rate projected 
to keep output at potential in seven years under the assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and 
potential output into line in the short run and then keeps them equal thereafter.  The TIPS-based factor model 
measure provides an estimate of market expectations for the real federal funds rate seven years ahead.  The actual 
real federal funds rate is constructed as the difference between the nominal rate and realized inflation, where the 
nominal rate is measured as the quarterly average of the observed federal funds rate, and realized inflation is 
given by the log difference between the staff’s estimate of the core PCE price index and its lagged value four 
quarters earlier.  For the current quarter, the nominal rate is specified as the target federal funds rate on the 
Bluebook publication date.
Measure Description
Single-equation 
Model
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and 
its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.  In light of this 
model’s simple structure, the short-run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends only 
on the recent position of output relative to potential, and the medium-run measure is 
virtually constant.
Small Structural 
Model
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, and 
the real bond yield.  Unlike the estimates from the single-equation model, values of the 
equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth, 
fiscal policy, and capital markets.
Large Model 
(FRB/US)
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.  These 
projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the 
three-year horizon relevant for the short-run concept but are less sensible over longer 
horizons.  Thus, we report only the short-run measure for the FRB/US model.
Greenbook-
consistent
Measures of the equilibrium real rate cannot be directly obtained from the Greenbook 
forecast, because the Greenbook is not based on a formal model.  Rather, we use the 
FRB/US model in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook forecast to 
derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that its 
simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is run 
off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output 
gap.  The medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it 
requires a relatively long extension of the Greenbook forecast.
TIPS-based 
Factor Model
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’ expectations of 
the future path of real interest rates, but also include term and liquidity premiums.  The 
TIPS-based measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven-year-ahead 
instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the Bluebook publication 
date.  This forward rate is adjusted to remove estimates of the term and liquidity 
premiums based on a three-factor arbitrage-free term-structure model applied to TIPS 
yields, nominal yields, and inflation.  Because TIPS indexation is based on the total CPI, 
this measure is also adjusted for the medium-term difference—projected at 40 basis 
points—between total CPI inflation and core PCE inflation.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 39
additional firming as more likely than easing in coming months.  The Committee may
find communicating this posture particularly important if it were concerned that
inaction at this meeting might lead investors to question its vigilance against inflation.
(13) Under Alternative B, the rationale paragraph in the statement would
indicate that economic growth has moderated, noting the role of the lagged effects of
increases in interest rates and energy prices and of the continuing cooling of the
housing market.  While acknowledging the elevated readings on core inflation, it
would also cite the reasons to expect inflation to decline in coming quarters:
contained inflation expectations, the cumulative effects of past policy firmings, and
other factors restraining aggregate demand.  In its assessment of risks, the Committee
would reiterate its judgment that some upside inflation risks remain and point to the
possibility of additional firming should incoming information warrant such action.
(14) Investors see about a one-third chance of a policy firming at this meeting
and appear to anticipate a statement similar to that under Alternative B.  As a result,
the market reaction to implementation of this alternative would likely be fairly small.
While short-term interest rates would decline somewhat, intermediate- and long-term
rates, stock prices, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar probably would
change little.
(15) If the Committee judges that the risks to the attainment of its objectives are
now roughly in balance, it may be attracted to the policy choice and wording of
Alternative A.  The Committee may see greater downside risks to economic growth
than it did in June.  Among other developments, the incoming information on the
housing sector may be viewed as suggesting the possibility of a more prolonged and
sizable reduction in residential construction and spending than is currently anticipated
by the staff, along the lines of the “housing slump” alternative Greenbook scenario.
The incoming data pointing to a slowing in economic growth may also have increased
the Committee’s confidence that the recent elevated inflation readings are unlikely to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 39
be sustained.  Keeping the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent for some time would be
roughly consistent with an optimal policy path suggested by a simulation of the
FRB/US model with a long-run inflation objective of 2 percent (Chart 7).
(16) The rationale presented for Alternative A in the post-meeting statement
could be similar to that for Alternative B, since both alternatives would keep the
federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting.  However, the assessment of risks could
simply point to the dependence of future policy adjustments on incoming
information.  Against the backdrop of its statements over the previous two years, in
which the Committee either provided explicit rate guidance or pointed to upside
inflation risks, such an announcement would likely suggest to market participants that
the Committee was not predisposed to raising rates or lowering them going forward.
(17) As in Alternative B, shorter-term interest rates would fall a little in response
to an announcement along the lines of Alternative A.  However, longer-term yields
might edge higher if market participants became concerned that the Committee was
underestimating inflation risks or was willing to tolerate somewhat higher rates of
inflation going forward than earlier anticipated.
(18) The Committee may judge instead that an additional 25 basis point increase
in the federal funds rate at this meeting, as in Alternative C, is needed to bring the
risks to the outlook for inflation and economic growth into better balance.  A firming
at this meeting might be appropriate if the staff’s inflation forecast were seen as likely
and generally acceptable but the Committee wished to have slightly greater assurance
that inflation would diminish in coming quarters.  Members might worry that inflation
pressures could turn out to be a little greater than projected in the Greenbook.  The
economy has proved quite resilient in the face of higher oil prices and tighter
monetary policy over the past two years, and members may see economic growth as
most likely to rebound from its sharply slower pace in the second quarter.  In light of
the recent upside surprises in price data, raising the federal funds rate at this meeting
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 39
might also seem desirable as a signal of the Committee’s resolve to foster a decline in
inflation.  Even with the firming action under this alternative, the Committee may
judge that significant upside risks to inflation remain.  However, some members may
see the slowing in the expansion of aggregate demand of late as suggesting that the
downside risks to growth have increased since the last meeting.  The Committee
might see Alternative C as bringing the risks to the attainment of its growth and price
stability objectives roughly in balance and believe that, after implementation of such a
policy choice, an easing and a tightening of policy are about equally probable.
(19) Under Alternative C, the paragraph on economic activity in the rationale
section could be identical to that proposed for Alternatives A and B.  The
announcement could then acknowledge the elevated readings on core inflation and
cite the potential for high levels of resource utilization and of the prices of energy and
other commodities to sustain inflation pressures, but it could also point to the factors
likely to reduce inflation over coming quarters.  In the risk assessment sentence of the
announcement, the Committee could merely point to the dependence of future policy
adjustments on incoming information, as in the assessment proposed for
Alternative A.  Market participants would likely interpret such an announcement as
suggesting that the Committee no longer had a significant inclination to continue
firming policy.
(20) With market participants placing less than fifty-fifty odds on a policy move
at this meeting, short-term interest rates would likely jump in response to
implementation of Alternative C.  However, the effect on intermediate-term interest
rates would be considerably more muted, and long-term rates could even decline a
little should the announcement persuade investors that inflation pressures were less
intense than they had appreciated or that the Committee was seeking a slightly lower
long-term rate of inflation than they had previously perceived.  Despite the rise in
short-term interest rates, with policy tightening evidently having drawn to a close,
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 39
equity prices might rally.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar might be little
(21) If members were dissatisfied with the gradual and limited reduction in
inflation in the staff forecast and favored a trajectory of policy that would foster a
steeper decline, they might wish to adopt the action and language of Alternative D.
The optimal policy path simulations of the FRB/US model (Chart 7) and the first-
difference rule (Chart 6), with a long-term inflation objective equal to 1½ percent,
would both call for additional firming of policy even following a 25 basis point
tightening at the August meeting.  The Committee may also find Alternative D
attractive if it deems the outlook for employment and growth to be more favorable
than the staff projection.  Moreover, members may be concerned that the staff has
underestimated the persistence of the forces that have boosted inflation, possible
consequences of which are illustrated by the “persistent inflation” alternative
Greenbook scenario.  Indeed, the optimal policy path suggested by a simulation of the
FRB/US model under perfect foresight in this scenario would call for considerable
additional policy firming in coming months.  However, the policy response would be
tempered in the more realistic circumstance that the persistence of the inflationary
forces became clear only gradually over time (see box on next page).  Even if the
Committee saw the staff inflation forecast as the most likely outcome, and one that
would be satisfactory, it might find this alternative appealing if it were persuaded by
recent price data that the upside risks to inflation, and the potential costs should these
risks be realized, continued to predominate despite an additional 25 basis points
increase in the federal funds rate at this meeting.  The potential for further increases
in energy prices, for example as a result of mounting geopolitical tensions, could be a
reason for such worries.
(22) While acknowledging the moderation in economic growth and other forces
that are expected to contain inflation in coming quarters, the rationale paragraph
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 39
Persistent Inflation:  Implications of Alternative Policy Assumptions
The policy path implied by a simple rule—such as the empirical outcome-based rule 
shown in Chart 5 and used in analyzing the alternative scenarios in the Greenbook—
often differs from the optimal policy when policymakers fully understand the forces 
affecting the real economy and inflation, but may well yield prescriptions close to 
those under the optimal policy when these forces become evident only gradually.   
For example, the chart below compares these alternative policy assumptions in the 
context of the Greenbook’s ‘Persistent Inflation’ scenario, in which the recent rise  
in core inflation is much more persistent than in the staff’s current projection.  The 
solid lines depict the optimal policy and associated macroeconomic outcomes (as 
deviations from baseline) when policymakers have perfect foresight about the persistence 
of the inflation pressures and place equal weight on the objectives of stabilizing 
inflation, stabilizing unemployment, and avoiding sharp funds rate changes.  In this 
case, the optimal policy involves a 75 basis point funds rate hike by the end of 2006.  
In contrast, if the persistence of the shock does not become apparent until mid-2007, 
the optimal policy with gradual learning (dashed lines) generates a funds rate trajectory 
over the next six quarters that lies between the path obtained under perfect foresight 
and the path associated with the empirical outcome-based rule (dotted lines), in which 
policy responds to contemporaneous four-quarter average core inflation and to 
contemporaneous and lagged output gaps.  All three policy paths generate fairly 
similar trajectories for inflation, reflecting the relatively sluggish inflation dynamics  
in the FRB/US model.
Deviations from Baseline (in percentage points)
Optimal Policy With Perfect Foresight Optimal Policy With Gradual Learning Empirical Outcome-Based Rule
Federal Funds Rate
Five-Year Real Interest Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Four-quarter average
Core PCE Inflation
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 39
under Alternative D could emphasize that several factors have the potential to sustain
inflation pressures.  The risk assessment could be similar to the Committee’s
statement in June, indicating that additional firming may be needed, but reference an
intention to foster a moderation in inflation pressures.
(23) The policy choice and announcement of Alternative D would come as a
considerable surprise to market participants and lead to an upward revision of their
outlook for the path of policy.  Short- and intermediate-term interest rates would
climb significantly.  Longer-term rates probably would also rise, especially if investors
read the statement as suggesting that they should be more concerned about inflation
prospects, but the increase would be limited if market participants also revised
downward their perceptions of the Committee’s long-term inflation objective.  Equity
prices would likely fall, while the foreign exchange value of the dollar might rise.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(24) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 is expected to grow about 4 percent in
costs, and the velocity of M2 is forecast to increase about 2 percent.  With short-term
interest rates unchanged, however, opportunity cost is forecast to level out in coming
months and subsequently decline a little. Consequently, M2 growth is expected to pick
up in coming quarters and, in 2007, to about match the growth in nominal income of
approximately 4¾ percent.  Debt growth of the domestic nonfinancial sector is
projected to drop from 9½ percent last year to 8¼ percent in 2006 and to 6½ percent
in 2007.  Federal debt growth, which was depressed by unexpectedly strong tax
receipts this spring, is expected to pick up over the forecast horizon. However, with
the expected further deceleration in house prices, mortgage borrowing is projected to
slow considerably from its recent strong pace.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 39
Table 2
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
No change/
Greenbook* Raise 25 bp
* No change in the target federal funds rate at this meeting.  This forecast
is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 39
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
(25) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around ________________ 5¼ percent.
Risk Assessments
A. In these circumstances, future policy adjustments will depend on the
evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as
implied by incoming information.
B. Although the Committee expects inflation pressures to diminish
gradually, it judges that some inflation risks remain.  The extent and
timing of any additional firming that may be needed to address these
risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and
economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
C. Same as A.
D. The extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to
foster a moderation in inflation pressures will depend on the evolution
of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by
incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 39
Appendix Chart 1
Treasury Yield Curve
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
August 3, 2006   
June 28, 2006
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 39
Appendix Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 39
Appendix Chart 3
Stock Indexes
Ratio scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
Ratio scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
S&P 500*
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 39
Appendix Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 39
Appendix Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
+
+
+
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
+
+
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
                Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 39
Appendix Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
Journal of Commerce Index
Total
Metals
CRB Spot Industrials
CRB Futures
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 39
Appendix Chart 7
Growth of M2
Nominal M2
Real M2
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 39
Appendix Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2
Implicit GDP
price deflator (P) Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 39
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
