Content last modified 02/09/2012.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
JANUARY 26, 2006
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) January 26, 2006
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Investors had largely anticipated the FOMC’s decision at the December
meeting to raise the target federal funds rate 25 basis points, to 4¼ percent.1
Although market participants had expected a change in the portions of the statement
characterizing policy as accommodative, the complete removal of the reference
pushed down expectations of the path of monetary policy from the middle of 2006
onward.  These expectations dropped further in response to the publication of the
minutes of the December meeting, readings on economic activity that were on the
soft side of market forecasts, and benign inflation data.  In recent days, some of the
drop in expectations has been rolled back, partly in response to stronger-than-
expected economic data releases and reports that the Committee was likely to firm
policy in March.  Money market futures rates for the end of next year declined about
10 basis points over the intermeeting period and imply the expectation of modest
policy easing by then (Chart 1).  In contrast, near-term expectations of policy were
unchanged over the intermeeting period.  Judging from futures quotes and responses
to the Desk’s latest dealer survey, market participants are virtually certain of a 25 basis
point hike in the federal funds target at the upcoming meeting and put roughly two-
thirds odds on a similar increase at the March meeting.  Against the backdrop of the
1 Over most of the intermeeting period, the effective federal funds rate held close to the new 
target.  Late in the period, however, the funds rate traded on the firm side despite the sizable 
provision of reserves by the Desk, as reserve managers at banks once again shifted their 
demand earlier in the maintenance period given the widespread anticipation of policy firming 
by the Committee.  The Desk purchased $3.3 billion of Treasury coupon securities in the 
market and $1.6 billion of Treasury bills from foreign customers.  It also redeemed 
$1.3 billion of Treasury coupon securities.  The volume of outstanding long-term RPs 
decreased $2 billion, to $18 billion.
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2006 2007
5.5
Percent
January 26, 2006
December 12, 2005
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premia and other adjustments.
Jan. Mar. May
Probability of a 25 Basis Point Tightening
at Upcoming FOMC Meetings*
*Estimated from federal funds futures.
December 12, 2005
January 26, 2006
Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2004 2005
190
Percent Basis points
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2004 2005
7
Percent
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2004 2005
3.5
Percent
Five-Year
Ten-Year
TIPS Yields*
Daily
FOMC
*Estimates are from a smoothed inflation-indexed Treasury yield curve.
Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2004 2005
4.0
Percent
Five-to-Ten Years Ahead
Next Five Years
Inflation Compensation*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves, and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 42
growing belief that the tightening cycle is drawing to a close and that policy might
ease soon thereafter, option-implied uncertainty about the path for policy edged a bit
lower over the period.
(2) Over the intermeeting period, yields on nominal Treasury coupon securities
were little changed to down slightly.  The declines occurred at longer maturities,
serving to invert slightly the yield curve between one and five years and resulting in a
20 basis point drop in the one-year forward rate ten years hence (see box entitled
“The Flat Yield Curve, the Level of Short-Term Rates, and Growth Prospects”).
Some of the fall at longer maturities may have reflected a further decline in term
premiums, consistent with the edging lower of implied volatilities on options on
Eurodollar futures.  After adjusting for carry effects, TIPS-based inflation
compensation at maturities of five and ten years was about unchanged over the
period, as the effects of the subdued inflation data were apparently offset by the step-
up in oil prices.
(3) The rise in oil prices, along with weaker-than-expected earnings reports and
downbeat guidance from corporations about future earnings, weighed on equities, and
broad stock price indexes rose slightly on balance (Chart 2).  Implied volatilities on
major equity indexes increased notably, albeit to levels that are still low by historical
standards.  Nonetheless, staff estimates of the equity premium moved sideways.  The
credit quality of nonfinancial firms generally remained solid.  While the six-month
trailing bond default rate has been boosted by the bankruptcy filings of a few large
firms that had long been recognized as being in weak financial condition, forward-
looking measures of default risk stayed low.  Yields on investment- and speculative-
grade corporate debt moved about in line with those on comparable Treasury
securities, leaving risk spreads about unchanged.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 42
(4) The dollar’s foreign exchange value against other major currencies dropped
about 1¾ percent on balance over the intermeeting period (Chart 3).  Downward
pressure on the dollar was prompted in part by softer-than-expected U.S. economic
data early in the period and the slight decline in U.S. long-term interest rates.  The
The Flat Yield Curve, the Level of Short-Term Rates, and Growth Prospects 
 
The Treasury yield curve flattened further over the intermeeting period and is now 
slightly inverted between about one and five years.  Some commentators have pointed 
to the tendency of the yield curve to invert before business cycle peaks to argue that 
the current term structure could be a harbinger of a pronounced slowdown in growth 
or even a recession.  Historically, flat or inverted yield curves owing to unusually high 
short-term interest rates have tended to be followed by slowdowns, but at present  
short-term rates are not unusually high.  An econometric model estimated with data 
over the past forty-five years, using the level of the federal funds rate as well as the 
ten-year over three-month term spread, has substantially better predictive power for 
recessions than an alternative model based on the term spread alone.  The chart 
below shows the probability of a recession at any time in the next four quarters 
implied by this econometric model.  As can be seen, the odds of a recession in the 
next year implied by the model remain low.  In that regard, it is worth noting that 
yield curves in Australia and the United Kingdom have been inverted for some time, 
and their economies have continued to expand robustly.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 42
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2004 2005
130
Index(12/31/03=100)
Wilshire
Nasdaq
Stock Prices
Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2004 2005
40
Percent
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
12-Month Forward
   Trend E/P Ratio
Real Long-Term Treasury Yield*
*Perpetuity Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year expected inflation.
Note. + Denotes the latest observation using daily interest rates and stock 
prices and latest earnings data from I/B/E/S.
Equity Valuation
S&P 500 EPS
NIPA, economic
profits before tax
Corporate Earnings Growth Percent
*Change from four quarters earlier.
    Source. I/B/E/S for S&P 500 EPS.
8
Percent of Liabilities Percent of Outstandings
Expected Defaults* (left scale)
Bond Default Rate** (right scale)
Expected Defaults of Nonfinancial Companies
and Bond Default Rate
*Firm-level estimates of year-ahead defaults from KMV corporation, weighted
by firm liabilities as a percent of total liabilities, excluding defaulted firms.
**Six-month moving average, from Moody’s Investors Service
Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2004 2005
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 42
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2004 2005
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2004 2005
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2004 2005
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Index(12/31/03=100)
FOMC
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2004 2005
US
UK
Japan
Germany
Ten-Year Less Three-Month Government Bond Yields
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 42
dollar fell nearly 3¼ percent against the yen, as readings on the Japanese economy
continued to confirm solid growth.  Remarks by ECB officials suggesting that more
tightening will be needed to combat inflation helped drive the dollar about
2½ percent lower versus the euro.  In contrast, the dollar posted only a slight loss
against the Canadian dollar; the Bank of Canada raised its policy rate 25 basis points
during the intermeeting period.  Yields on long-term government securities were up
slightly on net in most foreign industrial countries.  On balance, most foreign stock
markets rose modestly.  Japanese markets had outperformed until mid-January, when
news of a corporate accounting scandal and concerns about softer earnings in the
global high-tech sector caused a brief selling binge.  The downdraft left Japanese stock
prices close to unchanged on balance.
(5) The dollar fell about 1¾ percent over the intermeeting period against an
index of currencies of our other important trading partners.  The drop included 3 to
5 percent declines against the currencies of Korea, Singapore, Thailand, and Taiwan
amid perceptions that the region’s growth prospects were continuing to improve.
.2  Signs of greater flexibility in
Chinese foreign exchange markets, including the start early this month of over-the-
counter trading of the renminbi, as well as the strengthening of the yen, may have
added to the upward pressure on other Asian currencies.  Most stock markets in the
region recorded solid increases over the period, but they were rattled—particularly in
Korea—by the events shaking the Tokyo market.  Equity prices recorded quite strong
increases in Latin America as well, where financial conditions for major U.S. trading
partners continued to be favorable, and the Brazilian central bank cut its policy rate
75 basis points in mid-January.  Both Brazil and Argentina surprised financial markets
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 42
by announcing repayment of all their remaining obligations to the International
Monetary Fund.
(6) Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is estimated to have grown at an annual
rate of 7¾ percent in the fourth quarter, down from the rapid 9 percent pace seen in
the third quarter (Chart 4).  Household debt growth appears to have moderated, given
hints of a downshift in mortgage borrowing from its robust third-quarter pace and an
outright decline in consumer credit in October and November.  Consumer credit was
likely set back in part by increased charge-offs following October’s spike in
bankruptcy filings.  Filings since then have remained quite low.  Business sector debt
slowed somewhat in the fourth quarter, mainly reflecting a run-off of commercial
paper by multinational firms that were reported to have repatriated foreign earnings.
At the same time, firms raised a moderate amount of funds in the bond market, and
business lending at commercial banks continued to be vigorous.  The January Senior
Loan Officer Opinion Survey confirmed that demand for C&I loans strengthened in
the fourth quarter and indicated some further easing of lending standards and terms
for those loans.  Surveyed banks, however, reported somewhat weaker demand for
household loans.  Federal debt is estimated to have grown at a 7¾ percent annual rate
in the fourth quarter.  The Treasury recently stated publicly that its debt will likely hit
the current statutory limit in mid-February (see box entitled “Treasury Debt Subject
to Limit”).
(7) M2 growth rose to 5 percent at an annual rate in December, bringing
fourth-quarter growth to 5¼ percent.3  That monetary aggregate appears to be
accelerating to an 8 percent rate in January.  The December increase in M2 was driven
mainly by the expansion of liquid deposits, with about half of the increase in that
component estimated to reflect continued effects of Hurricane Katrina.  Stronger
foreign demand for dollars apparently boosted currency growth, and the expansion of
3 These data incorporate the results of the annual seasonal factor review.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 42
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Nonfinancial Debt
Percent, s.a.a.r.
2005 Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4 p
Growth of Household Debt
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Household Bankruptcies
Thousands of filings
Weekly, n.s.a.
*Source. Visa Bankruptcy Notification Service.
Jan.21
-40
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
2004 Q1 Q2 Q3 Oct Nov Dec
2005
Monthly rate
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
2004 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 42
retail money market funds and small time deposits remained robust.  On the eve of
tomorrow’s NIPA release, the expansion of M2 in the fourth quarter nearly matches
the staff estimate of nominal GDP growth despite the rise in opportunity costs.
Treasury Debt Subject to Limit 
 
 According to staff estimates, on or around February 16, 2006, the Treasury will 
likely reach the statutory ceiling of $8,184 billion on the public debt in the absence of 
Congressional action to lift the limit.  As has been the case in previous episodes, the 
Treasury probably would use extraordinary accounting devices to avoid breaching the 
limit.  The Treasury would first likely begin to underinvest the Government Securities 
Investment Fund (the so-called G-fund, which is part of the federal employees’ thrift 
savings plan) and tap the Exchange Stabilization Fund and possibly the Civil Service 
Retirement and Disability Fund.  Two of the previously used accounting devices, 
however, are no longer available:  Debt of the Federal Financing Bank, which is not 
subject to the limit, was swapped with other Treasury debt to avoid the last debt limit 
crisis, and the Treasury eliminated its holdings of compensating balances at depository 
institutions.  While the room afforded by the available accounting devices depends on 
the duration of the debt limit emergency period declared by the Secretary of the 
Treasury, staff estimates suggest that the Treasury will be able to maintain normal 
cash and debt management practices through the end of March—but not much 
longer—without Congress raising the limit.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 42
Economic Outlook
(8) The economic outlook has changed little since the December Greenbook.
The staff responded to the news over the intermeeting period—including weaker-
than-expected exports, federal spending, and inventory investment—by marking
down real GDP growth in the fourth quarter, but that revision is expected to be
largely reversed by faster growth over the first half of this year.  Inflationary pressures
are seen as a tad more intense in the near term, and the staff now assumes that the
federal funds rate will rise to 4¾ percent this spring and edge back to 4½ percent only
after mid-year 2007.  Longer-term interest rates are projected to remain around their
current low levels, the stock market is, as usual, expected to generate a risk-adjusted
yield similar to those on fixed-income investments, and house prices are anticipated to
decelerate sharply.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar is assumed to extend its
recent declines by depreciating at a gradual pace over the rest of this year and next.
Guided by quotes from futures markets, the staff assumes that spot oil prices will
remain close to their present elevated levels over the forecast interval.  Given these
underlying conditions, real GDP is expected to expand 3¾ percent this year, boosted
by hurricane-related spending, before moderating to a 3 percent pace in 2007―slightly
below the growth rate of potential output.  Over the forecast period, the
unemployment rate hovers around the estimated NAIRU of 5 percent.  Total and
core PCE inflation are both about 2¼ percent this year, a touch higher than in the last
forecast owing largely to the pass-through of higher energy and core import prices.
As those effects diminish, both inflation measures drop back to 1¾ percent in 2007.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 42
Longer-Run Scenarios
(9) Longer-run aspects of monetary policy choice—including the selection of
an inflation objective—can be informed by simulations of the FRB/US model.  The
model was first used (with judgmental adjustments) to extend the staff’s forecast for a
decade beyond the Greenbook horizon.  In that extension, the natural rate of
unemployment is assumed to hold steady at 5 percent, while labor force growth slows
markedly because of demographic factors, and the pace of structural labor
productivity growth declines gradually towards its long-run historical average.  As a
result, potential output growth slows to just above 2¼ percent by 2015, nearly a
percentage point lower than the rate projected for the current year.  As for aggregate
demand, the personal saving rate rises gradually while the unified federal budget
deficit is projected to widen from about 2¾ percent of GDP this year to slightly more
than 3¼ percent of GDP in 2015.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar is
assumed to decline in real terms at an annual rate of 5 percent from 2008 onward,
which helps to keep the current account deficit within a range of about 6½ to
8 percent of GDP through 2015.
(10) The first set of simulations depicts optimal policy paths conditional on a
long-term inflation objective of either 1½ or 2 percent (expressed in terms of core
PCE inflation).  In each simulation, policymakers are assumed to assign equal priority
to minimizing deviations in inflation from the long-run objective, deviations in the
unemployment rate from its natural rate, and changes in the federal funds rate, subject
to the constraint that inflation settles down to its long-run objective over the next
seven years.4  The optimal path of the funds rate is conditioned on the structure of
4 More precisely, the federal funds rate path is chosen to minimize the equally weighted sum 
of three components—the squared deviations of core PCE inflation from its target, the 
squared deviations of the unemployment rate from its natural rate, and squared changes in 
the federal funds rate—subject to the constraint that core PCE inflation must be close to its 
target by 2012 and remain on target thereafter.  It should be noted that the latter constraint
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 42
the macroeconomy as captured in the FRB/US model as well as on the longer-term
outlook embedded in the extended Greenbook baseline.  Participants in financial
markets—including those in the equity, bond, and foreign exchange markets—are
assumed to understand fully the economy and the policy formulation process,
whereas households and firms are assumed to form their expectations using more
limited information.5
(11) In each panel of Chart 5, the solid line depicts the scenario in which the
optimal path of policy is directed toward an inflation objective of 1½ percent.  In this
case, the nominal federal funds rate rises a bit above 5 percent by late 2006 and then
declines gradually to just below 4 percent by 2012.  With this backdrop of moderately
tight financial conditions, the unemployment rate rises gradually to about 5½ percent
at the end of 2007 before returning to its natural rate over the following five years.
This economic slack helps to ensure that this year’s projected pickup in core PCE
inflation is only transitory.  The adjustment of inflation is restrained somewhat by
long-term inflation expectations of households and firms (not shown), which are
currently estimated at about 2 percent and lag a bit behind actual inflation in
converging to the long-run objective.6  The dashed line in each panel corresponds to
the optimal policy scenario with a long-run inflation objective of 2 percent.  In this
case, the funds rate remains at about 4¼ percent through mid-2007 and then gradually
rises to about 4¾ percent in subsequent years to check the inflationary effects of
faster dollar depreciation.  With the funds rate essentially on hold for an extended
period, some of this year’s projected rise in core PCE inflation becomes permanent.  
                                                                                                                                        
was not imposed in constructing the longer-run scenarios considered in prior Bluebooks 
(most recently in June 2005). 
5 In these simulations, it is assumed that monetary policy has achieved a degree of credibility  
that causes the adjustment of long-run inflation expectations to be somewhat more rapid 
than the average pace over the past several decades. 
6 The FRB/US estimate of long-run inflation expectations is constructed by adjusting  
the readings of the Philadelphia Fed survey of professional forecasters to account for  
the average difference between CPI and PCE inflation.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 42
Chart 5
Optimal Policy with Alternative Inflation Objectives
6
Percent
1.5 Pct. Inflation Objective
2.0 Pct. Inflation Objective
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
4
Percent
1Real Federal Funds Rate
6.5
Percent
Civilian Unemployment Rate
2.5
Percent
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 42
Inflation rises a bit further after 2007 and settles in around 2 percent by the end of the
decade.  Because the realized path of inflation is fairly close to the long-run inflation
expectations that households and firms currently hold, this scenario does not involve
sizable resource slack.
(12) The second set of simulations examines the range of inflation outcomes that
might occur over the next seven years under the two alternative long-run inflation
objectives.  These simulations were performed using the standard version of the
FRB/US model, starting from each optimal policy scenario described above and
assuming that the U.S. economy is subject to the same distribution of exogenous
shocks seen over the past two decades (roughly corresponding to the “Great
Moderation” period).7  The upper panel of Chart 6 depicts the 70 percent confidence
interval around the baseline core PCE inflation projection under each long-run
objective, while the lower panel depicts the corresponding 90 percent confidence
intervals.  The distributions of inflation outcomes under the alternative objectives are
fairly similar over the period covered by the Greenbook but become more distinct in
subsequent years.  As indicated by the horizontally hatched region in each panel, the
long-run objective of 1½ percent implies that nearly two-thirds of the inflation
outcomes from 2008 to 2012 fall in the range of 1 to 2 percent.  In contrast, with a
long-run objective of 2 percent, the lower panel indicates that nearly 90 percent of the
inflation outcomes fall in the interval from 1 to 3 percent.
7 Specifically, the exogenous shocks are drawn from the estimated FRB/US residuals over 
the period 1987Q1 through 2004Q4.  Because stochastic simulations with fully optimal 
policy are not computationally feasible if investor expectations are fully model consistent, 
these simulations have been conducted using the standard version of the model in which all 
expectations are based on more limited information.  The policy response to exogenous 
shocks is determined by the version of Taylor’s rule with coefficients of 1.0 on the output 
gap and 0.5 on the inflation gap.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 42
Chart 6
Range of Inflation Outcomes
4
Percent
2 Percent Inflation Objective
1.5 Percent Inflation Objective
70 Percent Confidence Interval
4
Percent
90 Percent Confidence Interval
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 42
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(13) This Bluebook discusses three short-run policy alternatives that are
presented in Table 1.  The target funds rate would be raised 25 basis points under
Alternatives B and C but left unchanged under Alternative A.  Alternative C retains
risk assessment language identical to that used in the December statement on the
notion that this will convey to markets a high likelihood of further firming in March.
The assessment of risks under both Alternatives A and B is intended to soften that
sense by suggesting that policy is likely—but not certain—to tighten in the future.
Because the slowing in economic growth in the fourth quarter owed importantly to
swings in federal spending and exports that are thought to be temporary, the
description of the economy in the sentence in row 2 of the table begins with
“Smoothing through near-term volatility in spending and production” rather than
“Despite elevated energy prices and hurricane-related disruptions” for each
alternative.  The sentence then continues by reiterating that “the expansion in
economic activity appears solid.”
(14) If the Committee believes that a 25 basis point tightening at this meeting
may be sufficient, at least for a time, to keep both inflation and inflation expectations
contained in the face of increased energy prices and diminishing resource slack, it may
prefer Alternative B.  While the staff has penciled in an assumed additional
tightening after this meeting, it also assumes that the move will be reversed next year.
The Committee might believe that the relatively benign macroeconomic outcomes of
the Greenbook could be achieved by validating current market expectations of both a
¼ percentage point firming on Tuesday and two-thirds odds on a like-sized move in
March.  As shown in Chart 7, this policy move would place the real funds rate about
at the center of the range of staff estimates of its equilibrium value.  While the
Greenbook projections for economic growth and inflation have been revised up for
this year, the current level of the output gap is slightly wider owing to a greater-than-
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 42
Table 1: Alternative Language for the January FOMC Announcement
December FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep raise its target 
for the federal funds rate unchanged 
by 25 basis points to at 4¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise its 
target for the federal funds rate by 25 
basis points to 4½ ¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 
4½ ¼ percent.
Smoothing through near-term 
volatility in spending and production 
Despite elevated energy prices and 
hurricane-related disruptions, the 
expansion in economic activity 
appears solid.
Smoothing through near-term 
volatility in spending and production 
Despite elevated energy prices and 
hurricane-related disruptions, the 
expansion in economic activity 
appears solid.
Smoothing through near-term 
volatility in spending and production 
Despite elevated energy prices and 
hurricane-related disruptions, the 
expansion in economic activity 
appears solid.
Rationale 
3. Core inflation has stayed relatively
low in recent months and longer-
term inflation expectations remain 
contained.  Nevertheless, possible 
increases in resource utilization as 
well as elevated energy prices have 
the potential to add to inflation 
pressures.
While possible increases in resource 
utilization as well as elevated energy 
prices have the potential to add to 
inflation pressures, core inflation has 
stayed relatively low in recent months.  
Moreover, longer-term inflation 
expectations remain contained.
While cCore inflation has stayed 
relatively low in recent months and 
longer-term inflation expectations 
remain contained, Nevertheless, 
possible increases in resource 
utilization as well as elevated energy 
and other cost pressures prices have 
the potential to add to boost 
underlying inflation pressures.
The Committee judges that some 
further measured policy firming may 
well is likely to be needed to keep the 
risks to the attainment of both 
sustainable economic growth and 
price stability roughly in balance.
The Committee judges that some 
further measured policy firming may 
well is likely to be needed to keep the 
risks to the attainment of both 
sustainable economic growth and 
price stability roughly in balance.
Assessment 
of Risk
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 42
Chart 7
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
8
Percent
25 b.p. Tightening
Current Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Bands
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence band
90 percent confidence band
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 1.9 2.1
   Small structural model 2.3 2.4
   Large model (FRB/US) 3.5 3.7
   Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (0.9 - 4.2(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.0 - 5.1(
Greenbook-consistent measure 2.5 2.4
Medium-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.1 2.2
   Small structural model 2.5 2.5
   Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.4 - 3.2(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.7 - 3.8(
TIPS-based factor model 2.1 2.1
Memo
   Actual real federal funds rate 2.51 2.17
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 42
Equilibrium Real Rate Chart: Explanatory Notes
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to return 
output to its potential level over time.  For the first three measures listed below, the short-run 
equilibrium rate is defined as the rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the 
corresponding model’s projection of the economy.  For the first two measures, the medium-run concept 
is the value of the real funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years under the 
assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and 
then keep them equal thereafter.  The TIPS-based factor model measure provides an estimate of market 
expectations for the real federal funds rate seven years ahead.  The actual real federal funds rate shown 
in the chart employs the log difference of the core PCE price index over the previous four quarters as a 
proxy for expected inflation, with the staff projection used for the current quarter.
Measure Description
Single-equation 
Model
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and 
its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.  In light of this 
model’s simple structure, the short-run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends only 
on the recent position of output relative to potential, and the medium-run measure is 
virtually constant.
Small Structural 
Model
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, and 
the real bond yield.  Unlike the estimates from the single-equation model, values of the 
equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth, 
fiscal policy, and capital markets.
Large Model 
(FRB/US)
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.  These 
projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the 
three-year horizon relevant for the short-run concept but are less sensible over longer 
horizons.  Thus, we report only the short-run measure for the FRB/US model.
Greenbook-
consistent
Measures of the equilibrium real rate cannot be directly obtained from the Greenbook 
forecast, because the Greenbook is not based on a formal model.  Rather, we use the 
FRB/US model in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook forecast to 
derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that its 
simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is run 
off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output 
gap.  The medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it 
requires a relatively long extension of the Greenbook forecast.
TIPS-based 
Factor Model
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’ expectations of 
the future path of real interest rates, but also include term and liquidity premiums.  The 
TIPS-based measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven-year-ahead 
instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the Bluebook publication 
date.  This forward rate is adjusted to remove estimates of the term and liquidity 
premiums based on a three-factor arbitrage-free term-structure model applied to TIPS 
yields, nominal yields, and inflation.  Because TIPS indexation is based on the total CPI, 
this measure is also adjusted for the medium-term difference—projected at 40 basis 
points—between total CPI inflation and core PCE inflation.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 42
anticipated deceleration of production in the fourth quarter of last year.  In
consequence, Committee members may view the need for further policy firming after
this meeting to be about as they had expected in December.  Even if members are
fairly confident that an additional firming step will be necessary at the March meeting,
they may view this as an appropriate time to begin to wean market participants from
explicit characterizations of future interest rate action in the statement as a matter of
routine.  On that score, the attendant increase in expected interest rate volatility might
be seen as engendering a more healthy respect for risk in financial markets.
(15) Although the proposed wording for Alternative B suggests greater
uncertainty about future policy moves, it continues to indicate that the risks are tilted
toward the possibility of further policy firming.  It would state that “some further
policy firming may well be needed” to keep risks in balance, replacing “is likely to”
with “may well” in that phrase.  The proposed wording would also drop the word
“measured,” as some may believe that the phrase may imply more than one future
move.  The minutes of the December meeting likely helped prepare markets not to
interpret the dropping of the word “measured” as a signal that the Committee
expected to move policy in larger increments going forward.  If the Committee
wanted to stress the role incoming data will play in its deliberations on further action,
it may want to reverse the order of rows 4 and 5 and delete “In any event.”  The
wording in Table 1 does not do so on the thought that the Committee would prefer
to make relatively few changes to the statement at this time.  Some members may be
uncomfortable with the language of Table 1 either because they believe that further
firming will be unnecessary or that the Committee should get out of the business of
signaling its policy intent.  In either case, it might be appropriate to strike row 4 and
rely on a revised version of row 5 to underscore the uncertainties surrounding policy
and the necessity of being responsive to economic data.  In particular, row 5 could
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 42
read, “The Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to
foster the attainment of sustainable economic growth and price stability.”
(16) Futures markets and surveys suggest that investors are sure of a 25 basis
point policy firming at this meeting and place greater than even odds on another such
move in March.  Therefore, selection of this policy move coupled with the language
of Alternative B likely would not result in substantial changes in financial market
prices.  Short-term interest rates might edge lower and stocks could rally a bit as
market participants strengthen their expectations that the tightening phase may be
drawing to a close.  Offsetting this effect somewhat, implied volatilities on options on
money market futures may step up as the Committee sends a less confident signal
about its future action.
(17) If the Committee believes that appreciable further policy firming will likely
be needed to address upside risks to inflation―which include the potential pass-
through of higher prices of oil and other commodities and a lower foreign exchange
value of the dollar―it may prefer to associate a ¼ percentage point increase in the
target funds rate at this meeting with the language in Alternative C.  A firmer tone
might also seem appropriate in light of the longer-run scenarios discussed earlier.  To
achieve a 1½ percent objective for core PCE inflation, model-based optimal policy
paths, along with several policy rules shown in Charts 8 and 9, point to a need to raise
the funds rate above 4½ percent fairly soon.8  Even if a target funds rate above
4½ percent needs to be reversed before too long, it might be required to offset near-
term pressures on inflation.  In addition, the moderation in spending growth in the
staff forecast depends in part on some cooling of house price appreciation, which is
not yet a foregone conclusion, and projecting a more restrictive stance of policy may
be appropriate until such a trend is better established. 
                                           
8 Chart 8 presents two new estimated rules, along with confidence bands reflecting 
uncertainty about the policy path obtained from model-based simulations of future 
economic shocks and on options quotes, as discussed in the box.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 42
New Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules 
 
This Bluebook introduces two new exhibits related to policy rules.  First, Chart 8 depicts the 
implications of estimated policy rules, together with information from futures and options 
prices.  In the top left panel, the dashed line denotes the path implied by a rule that relates 
the federal funds rate to its own lagged values, to the current four-quarter average core PCE 
inflation rate, and to the current and lagged output gap (known as an outcome-based rule 
because it relies on observed macroeconomic variables).  This empirical specification was 
chosen using a formal statistical procedure that balances simplicity of the specification with 
goodness-of-fit over the sample period 1988Q1 through 2005Q4.  Dynamic simulation of 
the FRB/US model was then used to determine the predicted funds rate path that this rule 
implies over the Greenbook horizon.1  
 
The chart also depicts the range of uncertainty for the outcome-based rule associated with 
the incidence of shocks that might occur over the forecast period.  For that purpose, 
stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model were performed using the estimated 
distribution of shocks over the post-1987 period to every equation of the model, except the 
policy rule.  The dark green region shows the 70 percent confidence interval while the light 
green region denotes the 90 percent confidence interval. 
 
The dotted line in the left panel portrays the path prescribed by a forecast-based rule, 
estimated using Greenbook forecasts for the two-quarter-ahead four-quarter-average core 
PCE inflation rate and the one-quarter-ahead and one-quarter lag of the output gap, along 
with two lags of the funds rate.  This specification was chosen by a procedure similar to that 
for the outcome-based rule.  Relative to the outcome-based rule, this rule prescribes a path 
that is tighter by about ¼ percentage point during 2006 and easier by a similar amount 
during 2007.2   
 
The right panel of Chart 8 provides information from futures and options markets.  
Expectations for the federal funds rate derived from quotes on federal funds and Eurodollar 
futures are shown as a dotted line in the right panel.  The expected funds rate has a mild 
humped shape over the next two years.  The confidence bands reflect uncertainty as 
computed from options prices.  Note that financial markets have built in somewhat less 
uncertainty than is suggested by the stochastic simulations of the outcome-based rule. 
 
Finally, Chart 9 reports on prescriptions from simple policy rules that have been included in  
Bluebooks since January 2004.  Using dynamic simulations of the FRB/US model, these rule 
prescriptions are now shown for the entire Greenbook horizon.  With an inflation objective 
of 1½ percent, the baseline and aggressive Taylor rules prescribe funds rate paths that are 
lower than the Greenbook assumption, whereas the first-difference rule implies a markedly 
tighter path during 2007. 
 
1 Further explanatory notes are given on the page following these charts. 
2 Confidence intervals for this rule are not available.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 42
Chart 8
Information from Estimated Policy Rules and Financial Markets
2005 2006 2007
10
Percent
* Predicted values are based on the dynamic simulation of the FRB/US model.  Confidence bands, shown only for the
outcome-based rule, are based on stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model, where the shocks are randomly drawn
from 1988-2004 set of model equation residuals.
** Expected funds rate path is based on fed funds and Eurodollar futures quotes, and the confidence bands come from
options on those futures.
Actual funds rate and Greenbook assumption
Outcome-based rule
   70 percent confidence band
   90 percent confidence band
Forecast-based rule
2005 2006 2007
10
Percent
Actual funds rate and Greenbook assumption
Market-based expectations
   70 percent confidence band
   90 percent confidence band
2006 2007
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 42
Chart 9
Information from Simple Policy Rules
10
Percent
* Predicted values are based on the dynamic simulation of the FRB/US model.
** Expected funds rate path is based on fed funds and Eurodollar futures quotes.
Actual federal funds rate and Greenbook assumption
Baseline Taylor Rule
Aggressive Taylor Rule
First-difference Rule
Market-based expectations derived from futures quotes
2006 2007
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 42
Policy Rule Charts: Explanatory Notes 
 
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate for quarter t, πt the staff estimate (at quarter t) 
of trailing four-quarter core PCE inflation, (yt – yt*) the staff estimate of the output gap, πt+2|t and πt+3|t 
the staff’s two- and three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, (yt+1|t – yt+1|t*) the staff’s one-quarter-ahead 
forecast of the output gap, π* policymakers’ long-run objective for inflation, and (Δyt+3|t – Δyt+3|t*) the 
staff’s three-quarter-ahead forecast of four-quarter output growth less potential output growth.  Data are 
real-time quarterly averages taken from the Greenbook and staff memoranda closest to the middle of 
each quarter. 
 
Chart on Estimated Policy Rules:  The outcome-based rule is chosen according to the Bayesian 
information criterion over the sample period starting from 1988Q1.  This criterion chooses the specific 
lag structure for the policy rule.  The predicted values (the dashed line in the left panel) come from a 
dynamic simulation of this rule using the FRB/US model, with add-factors to match the Greenbook 
baseline.  The forecast-based rule differs from the outcome-based rule in that it also permits staff 
forecasts of inflation and the output gap to be among the explanatory variables.  Its predicted values (the 
dotted line in the left panel) involve the Greenbook extension due to its forward-looking feature. 
 
Chart on Simple Policy Rules:  The predicted values of three simple rules are based on dynamic 
simulations of these rules using the FRB/US model.  The predicted values of the first-difference rule 
involve the Greenbook extension.
Root-mean-
square error
Rule Specification 
1988:1-
2005:4
2001:1-
2005:4
Estimated Policy Rules
it = 0.27 + 1.14it-1 – 0.36it-2 + 0.32πt
       + 0.60(yt – yt*) – 0.40(yt-1 – yt-1*)
.22 .23
it = 0.24 + 1.14it-1 – 0.35it-2 + 0.31πt+2|t
        + 0.42(yt+1|t – yt+1|t *) – 0.23(yt-1 – yt-1*)
.20 .23
Simple Policy Rules
a 1.01a
it = 2 + πt + 0.5(πt – π*) + (yt – yt*)  .67a .61a
it = it-1 + 0.5(πt+3|t – π*) + 0.5(Δ yt+3|t – Δ yt+3|t*)
.95a .40a
a RMSE for rules with imposed coefficients is calculated setting π* = 1.5.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 42
(18) Under Alternative C, the wording proposed for the inflation outlook, line 3,
would indicate slightly greater concern about the potential for “increases in resource
utilization as well as energy and other cost pressures” to “boost underlying inflation.”
The assessment of risks could be quite similar to that announced following the
December meeting, including a statement that “some further measured policy firming
is likely to be needed” to maintain balanced risks to price stability and sustainable
growth.  Markets would probably see the language under Alternative C as indicating a
greater probability of future policy tightening than they had expected.  Short- and
intermediate-term interest rates would likely rise with the revisions to the market’s
expected path for the funds rate.  The stock market might fall back a little, but longer-
term interest rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar probably would not
change much.
(19) If members see sizable odds that the target funds rate has already been
raised sufficiently to check inflationary pressures, the Committee would presumably
choose to forego a policy move at this meeting, as in Alternative A.  With the real
funds rate now well within the range of estimates of its equilibrium, it might be
desirable to pause at this meeting before deciding whether to move to a position that
could entail policy restraint.  Given the lags in the effects of policy changes on the
economy and the already substantial cumulative increase in the target funds rate, the
Committee may prefer to await further data to assess whether additional tightening
steps would risk an undesirable overshooting.  Indeed, given the deceleration in
economic activity in the fourth quarter and the depressed level of longer-term interest
rates, members may believe that the staff forecast is too optimistic about the
prospects for continued solid growth.  Moreover, the possibility that the saving rate
might rise more rapidly toward historical norms, as discussed in an alternative
simulation in the Greenbook, may be of sufficient concern to the Committee that it
would require more evidence of inflationary pressures before firming policy further.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 42
In addition, if the Committee preferred that the core PCE inflation rate remain near
2 percent, rather than drop back to 1½ percent, the long-run scenarios discussed
earlier would suggest no need to raise the funds rate above 4¼ percent this year.
(20) The proposed wording of inflation concerns for Alternative A, in row 3 of
Table 1, is basically a reordering of the sentences employed in the last announcement.
The phrase regarding elevated energy prices and resource utilization is placed first to
leave readers with the sense that such concerns have been somewhat assuaged by
recent readings on core inflation and inflation expectations.  Even if members believe
that further tightening will likely be needed at some point, they may view those
sentiments to be adequately communicated by the asymmetric risk assessment under
Alterative A.
(21) Markets would be very surprised if the Committee chose to keep the target
funds rate unchanged at this meeting.  Short-term interest rates would likely fall by
close to 25 basis points, although the expected funds rate path probably would not
flatten out completely, as the statement would point to the possibility of additional
tightening in the future.  Long-term interest rates should decline much less, in part
because financial markets have built in an expectation that the ¼ percentage point
move predicted for this meeting would be unwound in the second half of next year.
However, with an unchanged policy stance at this meeting, stock prices could move
higher and the dollar fall, at least temporarily.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(22)  Under the staff forecast, M2 is expected to expand about 5½ percent this
year, about ½ percentage point slower than nominal GDP, owing to the lagged
response of money demand to increases in opportunity costs.  M2 growth should be
supported somewhat by the flat yield curve, which implies that the returns on M2
instruments are more attractive than usual when compared with yields on notes and
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 42
bonds.  As these interest rate effects subside in 2007, M2 is expected to expand
5 percent, equal to the rate of growth of nominal GDP.  Domestic nonfinancial sector
debt is anticipated to decelerate to a 7½ percent pace this year and 6½ percent in
2007, largely because a projected sharp decline in house price appreciation holds
down home mortgage borrowing.  Overall business borrowing is also expected to
slow a bit, owing in part to a projected deceleration in commercial real estate prices.
Federal debt is forecast to grow at an average 7½ percent pace over this year and
next, while state and local borrowing throttles back with the completion of many
advance refundings.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 42
Table 2
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
No change Raise 25 bp* Greenbook**
Monthly Growth Rates
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
*   Increase of 25 basis points in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter.
** This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 42
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Statement
(23) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around ____________ 4¼ percent.
Risk Assessments
A. or B.  The Committee judges that some further policy firming may
well be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both
sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance.
In any event, the Committee will respond to changes in economic
prospects as needed to foster these objectives.
C.   The Committee judges that some further measured policy firming is
likely to be needed to keep the risks to the attainment of both
sustainable economic growth and price stability roughly in balance.
In any event, the Committee will respond to changes in economic
prospects as needed to foster these objectives.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 42
Appendix Chart 1
Treasury Yield Curve
4
Percentage Points
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
6.0
Percent
January 26, 2006   
December 12, 2005
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 42
Appendix Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 42
Appendix Chart 3
Stock Indexes
45
Ratio
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
140
160
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
S&P 500*
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 42
Appendix Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
8
Percent
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
8
Percent
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
8
Percent
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 42
Appendix Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
10
Percent
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
14
Percent
+
+
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
                Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 42
Appendix Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
160
Ratio scale, index (1980=100)
Journal of Commerce Index
400
Ratio scale, index (1967=100)
CRB Spot Industrials
400
Ratio scale, index (1967=100)
CRB Futures
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 37 of 42
Appendix Chart 7
Growth of Real M2 and M3
10
Percent
10
Percent
15
Percent
15
Percent
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 38 of 42
Appendix Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2
140
Ratio ScalePrice Level
Implicit GDP
price deflator (P) Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*)
140
Ratio Scale
12
PercentInflation                1
12
Percent
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 39 of 42
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
4-week 3-month 6-month 3-month 1-month 2-year 5-year 10-year 20-year 5-year 10-year Fixed-rate ARM
