Content last modified 02/07/2013.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
SEPTEMBER 13, 2007
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 13, 2007
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Credit concerns in U.S. and foreign financial markets intensified sharply
during the intermeeting period, and liquidity in some markets was substantially
impaired.  Heightened investor unease about exposure to subprime mortgages, and to
structured credit products more generally, elicited a sharp rise in rates on asset-backed
commercial paper (ABCP), as well as a notable shortening of ABCP maturities and a
substantial contraction in ABCP issuance amid a sharp reduction in investor demand.
Investors sought the safe haven of Treasury securities, while banks sought to increase
their liquidity and were cautious about balance sheet capacity and counterparty
exposure to ABCP.  Term interbank funding markets, particularly in Europe, but also
in the United States, were significantly impaired, with rates rising well above expected
future overnight rates and traders reporting a substantial drop in availability of term
funding.  Although the Federal Reserve and some other central banks responded with
a number of measures to increase liquidity early in the intermeeting period, strains
mounted over the first few weeks of the interval and remain elevated.  In longer-term
markets, broad U.S. equity prices edged up over the intermeeting period.  Yields on
both investment-grade and speculative-grade corporate bonds moved down, but
spreads widened as rates on Treasury coupon securities fell even more.  Issuance of
investment-grade corporate bonds was quite robust, but speculative-grade issuance
remained weak, and the leveraged loan market stayed virtually shut.  In the housing
finance sector, the spread between rates on jumbo fixed-rate mortgages and similar-
quality conforming loans widened to historical highs, while subprime mortgage loans
remained unavailable.  The deterioration in financial conditions, along with some
weaker-than-anticipated economic data, led investors to mark down the expected path
for U.S. monetary policy significantly.
Money Markets
(2) The commercial paper market has been investors’ main focus during the
intermeeting period.  Shortly after the August FOMC meeting, rates on overnight
ABCP jumped in the United States and Europe after a French-based international
bank suspended redemptions at some affiliated funds that had invested in mortgage-
related securities.  Rates on ABCP and on low-rated unsecured commercial paper
have remained elevated since then, although yields on higher-rated unsecured
commercial paper issued by nonfinancial firms are 25 to 30 basis points lower than at
the time of the August meeting.  Some CP issuers, particularly ABCP programs with
exposure to non-conforming mortgages, have found it difficult to roll over maturing
paper.  As a result, some issuers have drawn on backup lines at banks or taken the
unprecedented step of exercising options to extend maturities of outstanding paper,
and a few have defaulted.  Outstanding ABCP has contracted nearly 20 percent (not
at an annual rate) since the week of the August FOMC meeting, and outstanding
unsecured paper has fallen about 7 percent (Chart 1).  Moreover, banks reportedly
have been purchasing and retaining some CP on their balance sheets.  Outstanding
asset-backed euro commercial paper has contracted more than 10 percent.  Issuance
of all types of CP has been concentrated at very short maturities, as investors remain
leery of providing term funding, especially for asset-backed programs.  As investors
sought to shift from riskier commercial paper to short-term Treasury securities, yields
on three-month Treasury bills declined 80 basis points, on net, over the intermeeting
period and were extremely volatile.
(3) The spreading concern about ABCP led to a substantial firming in interbank
overnight rates in the United States and abroad.  On August 9 the European Central
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 49
Bank (ECB) conducted an unscheduled tender operation, the beginning of a series of
operations to provide liquidity.  The Desk also responded by providing reserves
generously that day and the next, and the Federal Reserve announced it was providing
liquidity to maintain orderly trading in the market.  (See box “Recent developments in
reserve markets.”)  The central banks of Canada, Japan, Australia, Norway, and
Switzerland all conducted special market operations over the following week to inject
liquidity into overnight funding markets.
(4) Despite these liquidity injections, dislocations in term interbank markets
persisted.  On August 17, the Board approved a 50 basis point reduction in the
primary credit rate and announced changes in discount window practices.  On two
occasions later in the period, the ECB conducted special operations that provided a
total of 115 billion euros on three-month terms.  Nonetheless, banks in the United
States and overseas have continued to manage their assets and liabilities very
cautiously, amid heightened pressures on their balance sheet capacity and counter-
party credit risk.  (See box “Recent developments in term bank funding markets.”)
Capital Markets
(5) Conditions in corporate lending and securities markets have been mixed.
Longer-term investment- and speculative-grade corporate bond spreads have edged
up somewhat, and CDX and LCDX spreads have changed little, on balance, since the
August FOMC meeting.  Investment-grade corporate bond issuance was strong in
August as yields declined, but issuance of speculative-grade bonds was scant.
Likewise, only a few small deals were reportedly syndicated in the leveraged loan
market.  The pipeline of underwritten leveraged loan deals that have not yet been
drawn remains large.  Banks reportedly plan to bring these loans to market this fall;
uncertainty regarding prospects for those efforts as well as for the commercial paper
market, however, appears to have contributed to the reluctance of commercial and
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 49
Recent Developments in Reserve Markets
In late July and early August, strains in European funding markets began to spill over to 
U.S. money markets.  Increasingly strong bidding by foreign banks pressured the federal funds 
rate higher, and on August 9 and 10, when these strains had become particularly acute, the Desk 
conducted substantial reserve-adding operations.  Indeed, on August 10, there were three 
operations, totaling $38 billion, including two well after the Desk’s usual morning intervention 
time, and the Federal Reserve announced that it was “providing liquidity to facilitate the orderly 
functioning of financial markets.”
To help address market pressures in term markets, on Friday, August 17, the Federal 
Reserve temporarily narrowed the spread of the primary credit rate over the target federal funds 
rate to 50 basis points and made changes to the primary credit program to permit large as well as 
small depository institutions (DIs) to borrow for terms of up to thirty days, renewable at the 
borrower’s request.  Subsequently, several large banks publicly announced that they were 
borrowing from the discount window.  In addition, the Board granted a few large commercial 
banks exemptions from section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act in order to enable the banks to 
use discount window credit to fund loans to securities affiliates that hold substantial mortgage-
related assets.
Collateral pledged to the discount window grew significantly over the intermeeting period as 
large DIs apparently sought to bolster their contingency funding sources.  Pledged collateral now 
exceeds $900 billion in lendable value, the highest level ever.  In response to inquiries from DIs, 
the Reserve Banks clarified their policy that investment-grade asset-backed commercial paper 
(ABCP) is acceptable as collateral.  As of September 13, ABCP pledges totaling roughly $10 
billion have been accepted, and DIs have submitted about eighty additional ABCP prospectuses 
for evaluation by Reserve Banks.
Over the period, the Desk gradually shifted its conduct of open market operations to exert 
upward pressure on the federal funds rate to bring it closer to the target, and in the past week, 
reserve provision has been very restrained.  Indeed, on September 12, which was the last day of a 
reserve maintenance period, discount window borrowing jumped to over $7 billion.  While the 
funds rate was close to or a bit above target on a few days, it has been volatile both interday and 
intraday and has averaged noticeably below target.  Throughout this period, liquidity in the 
market for overnight fed funds has appeared ample, brokered volumes have reached record 
levels, and the market has seemed to be functioning well.  However, conditions in term funding 
markets remain impaired.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 49
Recent Developments in Term Bank Funding Markets
Conditions in term bank funding markets deteriorated substantially over the intermeeting 
period.  Many lenders have preferred to lend overnight to conserve liquidity, and institutions that 
are perceived as having particularly large exposure to risky assets such as ABCP, or as being less 
creditworthy more generally, have experienced significant difficulty securing term financing.  
Indeed, some large commercial banks report that, in recent weeks, term borrowing, in federal 
funds or Eurodollars, has been difficult or impossible.  According to discussions with market 
participants, the borrowers most directly affected seem to have been European banks, including 
their U.S. branches.
Quoted term rates have been very elevated, with term premiums appearing to be 
significantly above typical levels.  As a consequence of these developments, banks’ funding in 
wholesale markets has become increasingly concentrated at overnight maturities, similar to 
developments in the commercial paper market.  Moreover, with term funding markets for 
dollars, euro, sterling, and other currencies impaired, the foreign exchange swap market also 
broke down.  Over the past week, however, market strains seem to have eased a bit, and banks 
have reported more trading taking place for tenors up to one month, albeit still at elevated rates.
The breakdown in term funding markets appears attributable to several factors.  Banking 
institutions have become quite concerned that they may be required to provide funding for a 
large volume of leveraged loans and ABCP and are consequently conserving liquidity.   Banks 
also have reportedly become more concerned about counterparty credit exposures in light of 
elevated market volatility and latent losses on subprime mortgage products and related assets.  At 
least in part, tightness has persisted in the market because many banks have been unwilling to 
expand their balance sheets to arbitrage the spread.  Such reluctance may owe in part to concerns 
that they may approach regulatory capital ratios or capital ratios negotiated with rating agencies.  
And, given the current size of their balance sheets, banks may perceive other lending 
opportunities as more attractive.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 49
investment banks to make major new balance sheet commitments.  Broad stock price
indexes, though volatile, edged up over the intermeeting period.  Option-implied
volatility on the S&P 500 spiked to the highest level since early 2003 but later
subsided and was only a bit higher, on balance, over the period.
(6) Markets for nonconforming mortgages were impaired over the intermeeting
period, although the origination of conforming mortgages appears to have been
largely unaffected by recent developments.  Securitization activity for non-prime and
jumbo mortgages has been extremely limited in recent weeks, impeded by a near
absence of demand from investors.  In response, nondepositories reportedly have
substantially reduced their originations of jumbo mortgages, but some banks and
thrifts report that they are offering prime borrowers jumbo mortgages at higher rates
and holding the resulting assets on their balance sheets.  Some mortgage borrowers
who would have been classified as subprime a year ago are reportedly using private
mortgage insurance to qualify for conforming loans, although this segment of
borrowers is likely finding credit expensive and difficult to obtain.
Market Functioning
(7) Trading conditions in some securities markets were strained over the
intermeeting period.  Treasury bill market functioning was notably impaired at times,
with bid-asked spreads extremely wide by historical standards.  The demand for
Treasury collateral increased sharply in the repo market, and overnight general
collateral (GC) repo rates were far below the federal funds rate for a few days.
However, the temporary reduction from 100 to 50 basis points in the minimum fee
for borrowing securities from the SOMA Securities Lending Facility, announced on
August 21, reportedly played some role in improving conditions in the bill and repo
markets; the spread between the overnight federal funds rate and the corresponding
GC repo rate has since returned to more normal levels.  The secondary market for
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 49
Treasury coupon securities has also shown some signs of stress, but conditions have
not been nearly as problematic as in the bill market.  Bid-asked spreads for Treasury
coupon securities have been somewhat above their average levels of recent years, but
trading volumes have been high.  On-the-run liquidity premiums for two- and ten-
year Treasury securities have stayed elevated.  Two-year swap spreads increased
substantially over the intermeeting period, although those at the ten-year horizon fell a
bit, perhaps held down in recent days in part by mortgage convexity hedging
demands.  Disruptions to both U.S. and European term interbank funding markets
also affected the foreign exchange swap market, where bid-asked spreads rose to as
much as twenty times their normal levels, and trade sizes reportedly were much
smaller than usual.  In contrast, conditions in the CDS market have improved over
the intermeeting period, especially for index products, and the secondary market for
corporate bonds also functioned well, with bid-asked spreads within their historical
Monetary Policy Expectations and Treasury Yields
(8) Investors marked down the expected near-term policy path significantly
during the intermeeting period, evidently in response to ongoing disruptions in short-
term credit markets and a few key data releases (Chart 2).  The FOMC’s decision at its
August 7 meeting to leave the federal funds rate target unchanged at 5¼ percent, the
accompanying statement, and the minutes of that meeting were about in line with
market expectations, and reactions in financial markets were muted.  None of the
statements or actions by the Federal Reserve on August 10 or August 17 elicited large
initial responses in short-term interest rates.  However, further disappointing news on
the housing sector and, especially, the drop in August payrolls and sizable downward
revisions to payrolls in June and July revealed in the latest employment report
appeared to solidify market expectations for a near-term policy easing.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 49
(9) Investors generally expect either a quarter- or half-point cut in the funds
rate at the upcoming meeting.  Binary options on the target funds rate after the
September meeting suggest that investors now assign about 35 percent odds to a 50
basis point reduction in the target and approximately 50 percent odds to a 25 basis
point cut.  According to the Desk’s survey of primary dealers, which was conducted
after the release of the employment report, respondents assign about 40 percent odds
to a 50 basis point reduction and about 55 percent odds to a 25 basis point cut.
Survey participants also anticipate substantial revision to the FOMC statement, with
many expecting the Committee to cite downside risks to growth as the dominating
concern.  The primary dealers marked down their expected path for the funds rate as
well; their average anticipated target at the end of next year is now 4½ percent.
Futures quotes suggest that investors expect as much as 125 basis points of easing by
the end of next year, almost 50 basis points more than at the time of the last FOMC
meeting and somewhat more than the primary dealers.  Estimates of the expected
path of monetary policy based on market quotes are more uncertain than usual given
that term premiums in many short-term financial markets have likely increased but by
amounts that are difficult to gauge.  Moreover, money market options indicate that
uncertainty about the path of the funds rate has soared, with the width of 90 percent
confidence intervals around the anticipated funds rate six and twelve months ahead
touching multiyear highs.  The skew of the implied distribution of expected funds
rates at those horizons remains notably negative.
(10) Two-year nominal Treasury yields declined about 35 basis points, on net,
over the intermeeting period, roughly in line with the revision in policy expectations.
Ten-year nominal yields fell about 25 basis points to 4½ percent, the lowest level in a
year.  TIPS-based inflation compensation at the five-year horizon was about
unchanged, despite the rise in spot oil prices, while the five-year forward measure
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 49
ending in ten years rose 10 basis points.  The Reuters/Michigan survey suggests that
households’ short- and long-term inflation expectations ticked down in August.
Foreign Developments
(11) In major industrial countries other than the United States, yields on
government bonds fell 10 to 30 basis points, as expectations of monetary tightening
were scaled back (Chart 3).  The European Central Bank, the Bank of England, and
the Bank of Japan did not raise their policy rates, contrary to expectations at the start
of the intermeeting period.  However, the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Riksbank,
and the Swiss National Bank increased policy rates 25 basis points.  The foreign
exchange value of the dollar fell about 1½ percent against the major currencies over
the intermeeting period.  The yen rose more than 2½ percent, on net, while the
Australian dollar fell 1¾ percent, reflecting a pullback from the carry trade.1  Broad
equity indexes recorded only small net changes in Europe and Canada but dropped
more than 8 percent in Japan.
(12) Recent market turbulence has been less pronounced in most emerging
markets than in the industrial economies.  Equity prices recorded strong gains in some
Asian markets, led by a 13 percent increase in China.  Stock prices were little changed
or down in Latin America and Eastern Europe.  Dollar-denominated bond spreads in
major emerging markets and local-currency bond yields were little changed except in
Brazil, where yields rose about 60 basis points.  The Chinese renminbi appreciated
more than ¾ percent against the dollar over the intermeeting period, but most other
emerging-market currencies depreciated, leaving the dollar essentially unchanged on
average against the currencies of our other important trading partners.
.   , the Reserve Bank of 
Australia (a non-reporting central bank) confirmed publicly that it had intervened in 
mid-August without disclosing details of its operations.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 49
Debt and Money
(13) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is estimated to be expanding at
an annual rate of almost 7 percent in the current quarter, similar to the second-quarter
pace (Chart 4).  Nonfinancial business debt likely expanded robustly in August,
supported by a strong rebound in bond issuance by investment-grade companies and
a jump in C&I loans.  In part, the recent surge in C&I loans reflected disbursements
of LBO-related loans that arranging banks have been unable to syndicate to non-bank
investors.  C&I loans may also have been boosted by decisions by some firms to
substitute bank loans for commercial paper.  Consumer credit continued to expand at
a moderate pace through July.  Household mortgage borrowing is estimated to have
slowed further in the third quarter, reflecting decelerating house prices, the slower
pace of home sales, and the tighter credit conditions facing some mortgage borrowers.
(14) A surge in liquid deposits and a jump in retail money market mutual funds
boosted M2 growth to a 10½ percent annual rate in August.  The strong inflows into
money funds likely reflected portfolio shifts in response to recent financial market
developments, as households pulled back from equity and fixed income mutual funds.
Government-only money funds, which hold nothing but Treasury and agency
securities and repurchase agreements, attracted a disproportionately large share of
inflows in August as a whole.  However, flows to such funds appear to have abated
somewhat in recent days.  Flows into liquid deposits also picked up in August,
presumably as investors shied away from turbulent financial markets.  Some
institutions appeared to have stepped up their bids for small time deposits in recent
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 49
Economic Outlook through 2009
(15) Although spending data have come in about as expected over the
intermeeting period, anecdotal reports on real activity in recent weeks have been
downbeat, the August employment report was weaker than expected and conditions
in mortgage and other credit markets have tightened appreciably.  As a result, the staff
has marked down substantially its projection for aggregate demand and lowered its
assumption for the path of monetary policy over coming quarters.  The forecast now
assumes that the Committee will cut the target for the funds rate to 4¾ percent by the
October meeting and will then hold the stance of policy unchanged through the end
of the forecast period.  As the staff assumes less easing of monetary policy than
apparently anticipated by investors, longer-term Treasury yields are expected to firm a
bit over the forecast period.  Equity prices are, as usual, assumed to rise at the 6½
percent annual rate required to put them at parity with Treasury securities on a risk-
adjusted basis, and the real foreign exchange value of the dollar is expected to
depreciate a little less than 2 percent per year.  Spot oil prices are expected to edge
lower, in line with futures market quotes.  Against this backdrop, real GDP is forecast
to expand at a 2½ percent annual rate in the current quarter, but to slow to an annual
rate of 1 percent in the fourth quarter before picking up to around 1¾ percent in
actual GDP growing more slowly than potential on average.  This Greenbook extends
the forecast through 2009; in that year real GDP growth is projected to pick up to a
pace slightly above that of potential GDP.  In this forecast, the staff has revised down
its estimate of the NAIRU from 5 percent to 4¾ percent in light of the recent
behavior of inflation and labor costs.  This revision implies an increase in the staff’s
estimate of the level―but not the projected growth rate―of potential output.  The
unemployment rate is now seen as edging up to nearly 5 percent in 2009.  With the
unemployment path marked up slightly from the previous Greenbook, and the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 49
estimate of the NAIRU having been revised down, the staff now envisions the
emergence of some slack in labor and product markets and has consequently marked
down its inflation forecast a bit.  Core PCE inflation is forecast to average 2 percent
in the second half of this year before edging down to just under 2 percent in the next
two years.  With energy prices decelerating, total PCE inflation is projected to average
close to 2 percent in the second half of this year and to fall to around 1¾ percent in
Update on Medium-Term Strategies
(16) This section provides an update of the materials on medium-term strategies
for monetary policy that were presented in the August Bluebook.  As shown in Chart
about 50 basis points and now stands at 2.8 percent, about 60 basis points below the
actual real federal funds rate.2  This downward revision largely reflects the staff’s
assessment of the implications for aggregate demand of the recent financial
turbulence, which has increased the cost of credit to many borrowers, diminished the
availability of specific types of mortgage funding, weakened the outlook for house
prices, contributed to a fall in consumer confidence, and worsened the prospects for
foreign real activity.  In addition, anecdotal information and some of the statistical
data that pertain directly to the period since the onset of financial turbulence have
been downbeat.  The three model-based estimates of short-run r* range from 1.8 to
that these three measures do not incorporate current-quarter information or
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 49
judgmental adjustments and hence do not reflect the recent deterioration in financial
market conditions.
(17) Chart 6 depicts optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model using the
Greenbook forecast and its extension beyond 2009.3  In these simulations,
policymakers place equal weights on keeping core PCE inflation close to a specified
goal, on keeping unemployment close to the long-run NAIRU, and on avoiding
changes in the nominal funds rate.4  For an inflation goal of 1½ percent (the left-hand
set of charts), the optimal control simulation prescribes a nominal federal funds rate
path that rises slightly to about 5½ percent over the next few quarters and then
declines to about 3¾ percent by the end of 2012.  With an inflation goal of 2 percent
(the right-hand set of charts), the optimal funds rate declines nearly a full percentage
point over the next few quarters to a plateau somewhat below 4½ percent.  Under
both specifications of the inflation goal, the prescriptions for policy through 2010 are
½ to ¾ percentage point lower than in August, primarily reflecting the downward
revision to aggregate demand.  The path of the unemployment rate over the next
several years in each simulation is little changed from the previous Bluebook, while
the subsequent decline reflects the downward revision of the staff’s assessment of the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 49
NAIRU.  The paths for core PCE inflation through 2010 are slightly lower than in
(18) As shown in Chart 7, the outcome-based monetary policy rule prescribes a
funds rate path that declines to about 4¼ percent in the second half of 2008—about
¾ percentage point lower than in the August Bluebook—and then rises about
model indicate a 70 percent probability that the funds rate will be in a range of 3 to 6
percent at the end of next year.5  Financial market participants’ expectations regarding
the funds rate path from 2008 through 2012 appear to have declined about
½ percentage point over the intermeeting period, roughly the same amount as the
decline in the Greenbook-consistent measure of short-run r*.  This suggests that
market participants’ assessment of the strength of the economy may have been
marked down by an amount similar to that in the staff outlook.  Interest rate caps
indicate that the lower bound of the 70 percent confidence interval for the funds rate
at the end of 2008 is now at about 3 percent, consistent with some other evidence
suggesting that market participants perceive a substantial likelihood of very slow
growth or even a recession over the year ahead.  Prescriptions from simple policy
rules are about ¼ to ½ percentage point lower than in the previous Bluebook.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(19) This Bluebook presents four policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized in Table 1.  Language that was not shown in the either of
the Committee’s August FOMC statements is shown in red, while wording from the
unscheduled August 17 statement is colored blue.  The statements from the August 7
and 17 FOMC meetings are shown on page 23.  Under Alternatives A and B, the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 49
Table 1: Alternative Language for the September 2007 FOMC Announcement
Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Alternative D
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for the 
federal funds rate 50 basis points to 
4¾ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for the 
federal funds rate 25 basis points to 
5 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
Economic growth was moderate during 
the first half of the year, but the 
tightening of credit conditions has the 
potential to intensify the housing 
correction and to restrain economic 
growth more generally.  Today's action 
is intended to help forestall some of the 
adverse effects on the broader economy 
that might otherwise arise from the 
disruptions in financial markets and to 
promote moderate growth over time.
Economic growth was moderate during 
the first half of the year, but the 
tightening of credit conditions has the 
potential to intensify the housing 
correction and to restrain economic 
growth more generally.  Today's action 
is intended to help forestall some of the 
adverse effects on the broader economy 
that might otherwise arise from the 
disruptions in financial markets and to 
promote moderate growth over time.
Economic growth was moderate during 
the first half of the year.  Financial 
market conditions have deteriorated in 
recent weeks, leading to tighter credit 
and an intensification of the housing 
correction.  These developments have 
the potential to restrain growth in 
economic activity.  Nonetheless, the 
economy seems likely to continue to 
expand at a moderate pace over coming 
quarters, supported by solid growth 
outside the housing sector and a robust 
global economy.
Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly this year.  However, 
the Committee judges that some 
inflation risks remain, and it will 
continue to monitor inflation 
developments carefully.
Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly this year.  However, 
the Committee judges that some 
inflation risks remain, and it will 
continue to monitor inflation 
developments carefully.
Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly this year.  However, 
a sustained moderation in inflation 
pressures has yet to be convincingly 
demonstrated. Moreover, the high level 
of resource utilization has the potential 
to sustain those pressures.
Assessment 
of Risk
The Committee will continue to closely 
follow timely indicators of economic 
prospects and will act as needed to 
foster price stability and sustainable 
economic growth.
Even after today’s action, the 
Committee judges that the downside 
risks to economic growth outweigh the 
upside risks to inflation. Future policy 
adjustments will depend on the outlook 
for both inflation and economic growth, 
as implied by incoming information.
In the current circumstances, the 
Committee judges that the downside 
risks to economic growth are now 
roughly balanced by the upside risks to 
inflation.  Future policy adjustments will 
depend on the outlook for both 
inflation and economic growth, as 
implied by incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 49
Language from August 2007 FOMC Statements
August 7 FOMC Meeting August 17 Unscheduled Meeting
Policy 
Decision
markets have been volatile in recent weeks, credit conditions have become 
tighter for some households and businesses, and the housing correction is 
ongoing. Nevertheless, the economy seems likely to continue to expand at a 
moderate pace over coming quarters, supported by solid growth in 
employment and incomes and a robust global economy.
Financial market conditions have deteriorated, and tighter credit conditions and 
increased uncertainty have the potential to restrain economic growth going 
forward.
Rationale 
3. Readings on core inflation have improved modestly in recent months.
However, a sustained moderation in inflation pressures has yet to be 
convincingly demonstrated. Moreover, the high level of resource utilization 
has the potential to sustain those pressures.
Assessment 
of Risk
In these circumstances, although recent data suggest that the economy has 
continued to expand at a moderate pace, the Federal Open Market Committee 
judges that the downside risks to growth have increased appreciably. The 
Committee is monitoring the situation and is prepared to act as needed to 
mitigate the adverse effects on the economy arising from the disruptions in 
financial markets.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 49
Committee would lower the target federal funds rate 50 basis points to 4¾ percent.
Alternative A would characterize the downside risks to growth as outweighing upside
risks to inflation, while Alternative B would not provide an assessment of the overall
balance of risks.  Under Alternative C, the policy rate would be lowered 25 basis
points to 5 percent, and the statement would indicate that the downside risks to
economic growth outweigh the upside risks to inflation.  Alternative D would leave
the target rate unchanged at 5¼ percent and report that the risks to growth and
inflation are roughly balanced.  As for the rationale portion of the statement,
Alternatives A, B, and C substantially modify the August 7 assessment of the outlook
for growth and of the risks around that outlook in light of credit and housing market
developments, using some of the wording from the August 17 statement.  In contrast,
Alternative D recognizes the deterioration in financial conditions but repeats the
judgment that moderate growth is likely over coming quarters.  Inflation readings
have continued to be benign but have not improved further over the past several
months.  Accordingly, under all four alternatives, the statement that inflation readings
have improved “in recent months” is changed to shift the time reference for the
improvement in inflation to “this year.”  In addition, under the first three alternatives,
the inflation assessment is modified to observe that “some inflation risks remain” and
that the Committee will “monitor inflation developments carefully,” but the reference
to pressures on resource utilization is deleted.  This may be appropriate if the
Committee is now a bit more confident that the continued favorable inflation
readings represent a permanent moderation in inflation and if it shares the staff view
of the degree of pressure in the labor market.  In Alternative D, the inflation
assessment is unchanged from the August 7 statement.  As usual, the Committee
could consider combining elements from more than one alternative.
(20) Financial conditions have deteriorated sharply on balance since the
August 7 FOMC meeting, making it more difficult and costly for households to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 49
obtain nonconforming mortgages and also leading to tighter credit conditions for
some firms.  In addition, some nonfinancial indicators, including the August
employment report, pending home sales, and anecdotal reports from contacts in
private industry, suggest a weaker near-term outlook.  In view of these developments,
the Committee may judge that prospects for economic activity have deteriorated
notably, and that the risk of a substantial and protracted slowdown in economic
growth is now unacceptably large.  With such an outlook, and with inflation data
continuing to be benign, members might see it as appropriate to counter the effect of
tighter financial conditions by easing policy by 50 basis points at this meeting, as in
Alternative B.  If members judge that evolving circumstances will likely warrant
easing policy by 50 basis points or more over the next several months, as in the staff
forecast, then they might think it prudent to implement a half-percentage-point cut at
this meeting.  The real federal funds rate is now about 50 basis points above its
Greenbook-consistent equilibrium value (Chart 5) and is also above the range of
model-based equilibrium estimates, suggesting that a half-point easing in policy is
unlikely to lead to unacceptable pressures on resources.  A 50 basis point rate cut is
also consistent with the prescriptions of a number of simple policy rules, even with a
also be viewed as valuable insurance against the risk of a further slide in investor and
consumer confidence or a possible further deterioration in financial market
conditions.  Should such fears ultimately prove to be unfounded, and financial
markets and the outlook for the economy improve, the Committee might believe that
it could act quickly to take back some or all of the easing.
(21) The draft language of Alternative B repeats the observation from the
August 7 FOMC statement that economic growth was moderate in the first half of
the year.  However, it drops the assessment from the August 17 statement that
“recent data suggest that the economy has continued to expand at a moderate pace,”
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 49
as information that has subsequently become available suggests greater weakness in
activity.  It then adapts language from the August 17 statement to note the potential
dampening effect of financial market turmoil on the housing market and the growth
outlook more generally.  The statement observes that the rate cut is intended to
forestall the effects of these developments on the economy and to promote moderate
growth “over time.”  This wording leaves open the possibility that growth may be
weak for a time but suggests that the longer-term outlook remains healthy.
Alternative B refrains from making any explicit characterization of the balance of
risks, stating that “The Committee will continue to closely follow timely indicators of
economic prospects and will act as needed” to attain its dual objectives.  Although
this sentence does not literally express any asymmetry, analysts are likely to read the
statement overall as indicating some predelication to ease policy further.  This
approach could be seen as giving the Committee flexibility going forward, either to
ease further in response to soft incoming data or to stand pat if the economy appears
to be stabilizing.  If members find Alternative B attractive, but wish to adopt an
explicit statement of balanced risks, then they might insert the sentence “After today’s
action, the Committee judges that the downside risks to economic growth are now
roughly balanced by the upside risks to inflation” at the start of the assessment of risk
(22) Measuring market expectations is especially challenging in the current
environment, but investors appear to place substantial odds on two possible target
rate decisions at this meeting―a quarter-point cut and a half-point cut―and seem to
envision cumulative easing of 75 to 100 basis points by the end of this year.  With
Alternative B putting 50 basis points of easing in place and suggesting at least some
possibility of further rate cuts, this alternative would likely prompt a modest decline in
short-term interest rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar might edge
lower.  However, intermediate-term interest rates would probably change relatively
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 49
little.  The effect on equity, credit, and term funding markets would depend on how
investors interpreted the decision.  They would most likely conclude that the sizable
policy response may offset some of the macroeconomic effects of credit market
turmoil, leading equity prices to rally and risk spreads to narrow.  But it is possible
that the relatively large policy move and the statement could lead investors to infer
that the growth outlook is weaker than they had previously thought, having the
opposite effect.  Going forward, the reference to the Committee closely following
timely indicators may sharpen the sensitivity of markets to near-term and forward-
looking economic data.
(23) If members are particularly pessimistic about the growth outlook, or see
the downside risks as especially large, then they may prefer to both ease 50 basis
points and explicitly point to downside risks in order to maximize the scope for
further near-term policy action, as envisioned in Alternative A.  Members might view
the current configuration of asset prices and credit spreads as possibly presaging a
sharp slowdown in growth or even a recession.  (See box “Financial indicators of
recession risk.”)  The Committee may be concerned that the housing correction could
be more severe than anticipated by the staff, as explored in the “Greater housing
correction” alternative simulation in the Greenbook.  Members may also worry that a
serious credit crunch could be emerging with economic consequences of the sort
explored in the Greenbook “Bank capital crunch” scenario.  If asset-backed
commercial paper programs draw even more heavily on bank backup liquidity lines
and banks come to hold a large volume of leveraged loans and mortgages on their
balance sheets, banks may tighten terms and standards for lending to households and
businesses in order to conserve liquidity and balance sheet capacity.  Continued
market volatility or the emergence of news of losses could lead to solvency concerns
about one or more major market participants, which would likely worsen counterparty
credit concerns and interbank funding problems.  The Committee may consider these
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 49
Financial Indicators of Recession Risk 
 
Some financial market observers consider the slope of the 
Treasury yield curve to be a useful predictor of future 
macroeconomic conditions.  The yield curve had been inverted 
or flat until June and recently has steepened somewhat; thus, by 
that measure, the risk of recession appears to have diminished in 
recent months.  However, spreads between corporate yields and 
comparable-maturity Treasury yields also have had considerable 
statistical power in predicting recent recessions.  Some of those 
credit spreads have surged over the past month to levels 
comparable to those reached in 1989 and 2000.  Thus, markets 
may be signaling high odds of imminent macroeconomic 
deterioration, despite the steepening of the Treasury yield curve. 
 
Combining term and credit spreads in a logistic regression 
produces a model that performs well in “predicting” the last two 
recessions one year ahead while at the same time minimizing the 
number of false positives—that is, predictions of recessions that 
did not occur.  Different measures of term and credit spreads 
produce slightly different results in this model, but a good fit is 
achieved—over the 1988 through 2006 estimation period—by 
using the spread on AA-rated five-year corporate bonds and the 
difference between ten- and two-year Treasury yields.1  The 
August 2007 average values of these variables suggest a 
probability of about 40 percent that the U.S. economy will be in 
a recession in August 2008.  This is the largest probability that 
the model has produced since late 2000, and it is up from 
virtually zero earlier in the year.  If spreads during the first part 
of September were to persist for the remainder of the month, 
the estimated probability would rise to over 80 percent. 
 
The apparently heightened risk of recession is notable, but some 
caveats are in order.  In particular, given the rather 
unprecedented nature of recent developments, it is possible that 
the term and credit spreads currently reflect different factors 
than they did prior to the previous two recessions.  Moreover, 
the AA spread has risen more dramatically than some other 
credit spreads in recent weeks.  For example, high-yield bond 
spreads remained near their historical averages and thus 
continued to suggest less than 10 percent odds of a recession as 
of August.  Although high-yield spreads have not previously 
performed as well in predicting business cycles as AA spreads, 
the sensitivity of the prediction to which credit spread is used 
indicates that the recent readings should be interpreted with care. 
 
 
1 Specifically, these two variables forecast recent recessions and expansions at 
least as well as alternative measures of term and credit spreads, based on both 
in- and out-of-sample tests.  See King, T. B.; Levin, A. T; and Perli, R., 
“Financial Market Perceptions of Recession Risk.”  Working paper, July 2007.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 49
risks sufficiently palpable to warrant a downward tilt to the balance of risks even after
a half-point rate cut.
(24) The draft statement for Alternative A is similar to that for Alternative B,
but with four main differences.  First, the reference to economic growth having been
moderate in the first half of the year is deleted, as this may be seen as no longer
relevant to the outlook, given the abrupt shift in circumstances.  Second, Alternative
A states that credit conditions and the housing correction “appear likely to exert
appreciable restraint” on growth, which is stronger than the statement that they have
“the potential  . . .  to restrain economic growth.”  Third, in addition to giving a more
gloomy modal assessment of the growth outlook, the draft language also cites the
potential for significant financial spillovers to business and household spending as
posing downside risks to that outlook.  Finally, the draft for Alternative A is explicit
that the downside risks to growth outweigh the upside risks to inflation.
(25) A 50 basis point rate cut and the adoption of the statement language in
Alternative A would cause short-term interest rates to decline appreciably, as investors
would be somewhat surprised by the magnitude of the policy action and would also
infer that policy probably would be eased further.  Longer-term interest rates likely
would decline modestly and the dollar would depreciate.  As with Alternative B, the
effect on equity, credit and term funding markets is ambiguous, but the negative
growth outlook in this alternative might well spook investors and cause stock prices
to fall and risk spreads to rise.
(26) The Greenbook forecast is predicated on an assumption of a quarter-point
easing in policy at this meeting and a second easing at the October meeting.  If the
Committee finds the staff forecast to be both plausible and likely to be the best
attainable outcome under the current difficult circumstances, then it may choose to
ease policy 25 basis points at this meeting and issue a statement pointing to downside
risks to the outlook, as in Alternative C.  Members may judge that the growth
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 49
outlook has deteriorated, but might not be convinced that the downside risks are
sufficient to justify a 50 basis point easing at this meeting.  Also, they may be unsure
of the magnitude of the macroeconomic fallout from recent financial turmoil, and
prefer to await more information before responding further.  Indeed, they may think
that financial market conditions could improve quickly, along the lines of the “Faster
rebound” Greenbook alternative simulation.  That view may be reinforced by the
general resilience of equity prices in the face of credit market disruptions, a pattern
that does not seem consistent with a serious financial crisis being underway.
Members may also be concerned that a half-point easing in monetary policy at this
time would be misconstrued by some investors as a sign that the Committee was
responding directly to asset prices, potentially exacerbating moral hazard by
encouraging excessive risk taking among market participants in the future.  Moreover,
some members may be concerned that investors could perceive a half-point easing at
this meeting as signaling a downweighting of the Committee’s price stability objective.
If so, they may prefer to implement a more modest cut in rates at this time while
expressing the judgment that the downside risks to growth outweigh the upside risks
to inflation, even after the policy easing.  Members may find this option especially
attractive if they are concerned about the speed with which the Committee could
reverse a larger rate cut should financial markets stabilize sooner than currently
expected. A quarter-point easing in policy at this meeting is also in line with the
prescription from optimal policy simulations with a 2 percent inflation goal (Chart 6).
(27) In the draft statement accompanying Alternative C, the assessment of the
outlook for growth and inflation would be identical to that in Alternative B, but the
balance of risks would point to the downside.
(28) With investors placing considerable weight on a 50 basis point cut at this
meeting, the adoption of Alternative C would probably cause short-term interest rates
to rise somewhat, even though the downside balance of risks would suggest that
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 49
further easing could well be forthcoming.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar
would likely appreciate modestly.  With the Federal Reserve perhaps perceived as
inclined to respond only gradually to the evolving circumstances―an impression that
might be amplified by the Committtee’s assessment that the risks are tilted to the
downside―investors might mark down their outlook for economic growth, leading
long-term yields and equity prices to fall and spreads in credit markets to widen
(29) Members may be especially concerned about the dangers of overreacting
to financial market developments and may not be convinced that the recent credit
market turmoil will persist or have large macroeconomic implications.  And, with the
unemployment rate unchanged since the August FOMC meeting, productivity having
decelerated considerably, core PCE inflation still close to 2 percent, and crude oil
prices surging to record levels, some members may continue to be quite concerned
about the inflation outlook.  If so, they may prefer to leave policy unchanged at this
meeting.  An unchanged stance of policy, coupled with an assessment that the risks
have moved into balance, as envisioned in Alternative D, would allow the Committee
more time to gauge the need for policy adjustments while leaving the flexibility for
policy to be eased at the next meeting, if such a move appears necessary at that time.
Members may be particularly attracted to this alternative if they see a risk that a
premature easing of policy could cause long-run inflation expectations to drift
upwards.  Indeed, optimal policy simulations with a 1½ percent inflation goal (Chart
(30) The draft statement accompanying Alternative D retains the observation
that economic growth was moderate during the first half of the year.  It adopts
language from the August 17 statement about recent financial developments and
weakness in residential investment is likely to be offset by solid growth in other
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 49
sectors of the economy and concludes that the economy is nonetheless likely to
continue to expand at a moderate pace.  The inflation paragraph is barely changed
from the August 7 statement, and the reference to pressures on resources is retained,
suggesting that nothing has changed to diminish concerns about inflation.  Given the
potential for financial developments to restrain growth and the essentially unchanged
inflation picture, the Committee would conclude that the risks to growth and inflation
are now roughly balanced.
(31) Although investors do not completely rule out an unchanged target funds
rate at this meeting, the adoption of Alternative D would come as a considerable
surprise.  Short-term interest rates would surely rise, and it is likely that equity prices
would fall substantially and the Treasury yield curve would flatten, particularly if
market participants marked up the odds of slow growth or a recession in light of the
decision to leave policy unchanged.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(32) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 growth is projected to average about
expand at roughly that rate in 2008 and 2009.  The projected growth rate of M2
through the end of this year is a bit faster than in the August Greenbook, reflecting
the easier path of policy now assumed.
(33) After having expanded at an annualized rate of 7½ percent in the first half
of the year, domestic nonfinancial sector debt is expected to decelerate to a 6¼
percent pace in the second half and about 5 percent in both 2008 and 2009.  The
weaker outlook for the housing sector this round has led the staff to project a steeper
decline in household borrowing than in the August forecast.  Corporate debt growth
is expected to slow later this year as the pace of merger and acquisition activity falls
back from its recent elevated level.  Owing to recent financial market stress, the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 49
Table 2
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
M2 M2
Monthly Growth Rates
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
* 25 basis point cut in the target federal funds rate at the September and October FOMC meetings.
This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 49
forecast for the level of commercial paper outstanding has been revised down in the
second half of the year but, offsetting this, the forecast for bank loans and corporate
bonds has been marked up.  These effects are mostly expected to unwind over
coming quarters.  Corporate bond spreads are forecast to edge down from their
current levels, but to remain higher than they were earlier this year throughout the
forecast period.  Terms and standards on bank loans are expected to tighten
moderately and those on mortgage loans to be substantially tighter for some
borrowers for an extended period.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 49
Directive and Balance of Risks Statement
Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those presented
in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around ________ 5¼ percent.
Risk Assessments
A.   Even after today’s action, the Committee judges that the downside risks
to economic growth outweigh the upside risks to inflation.  Future
policy adjustments will depend on the outlook for both inflation and
economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
B.   The Committee will continue to closely follow timely indicators of
economic prospects and will act as needed to foster price stability and
sustainable economic growth.
C.   Even after today’s action, the Committee judges that the downside risks
to economic growth outweigh the upside risks to inflation. Future policy
adjustments will depend on the outlook for both inflation and economic
growth, as implied by incoming information.
D.   In the current circumstances, the Committee judges that the downside
risks to economic growth are now roughly balanced by the upside risks
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 49
to inflation.  Future policy adjustments will depend on the outlook for
both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 49
