Content last modified 02/07/2013.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
AUGUST 2, 2007
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 2, 2007
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Increased concerns among investors about further deterioration in the U.S.
subprime mortgage market appear to have prompted a broad-based reassessment of
risk in financial markets over the intermeeting period.  In part, the reassessment seems
to have reflected greater uncertainty about the appropriate valuation of some U.S.
structured credit instruments, including collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) and
collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) used to fund both mortgage and business
credits.  Over the period, some corporate credit spreads widened substantially, equity
indexes were quite volatile, and safe-haven demands reportedly boosted government
bond prices in many industrialized countries.  Investors marked down their expected
path for U.S. monetary policy.
(2) Concern about signs of further deterioration in the quality of subprime
credits, and uncertainty about the extent and incidence of associated losses, gripped
investors over much of the intermeeting period.  Market participants reacted to
announcements by rating agencies of downgrades of some residential-mortgage-
backed securities and CDO tranches, the publication of significantly lower-than-
expected second-quarter earnings at a large mortgage originator, the release of
remittance data associated with subprime mortgage pools that pointed to a further rise
in delinquencies, and news that a mortgage lender had difficulty meeting margin calls
that were triggered by a decline in the value of its subprime mortgage collateral.
Weaker-than-expected data on recent home sales also appeared to contribute to
mounting expectations of losses on subprime loans.  Investors responded by pushing
up spreads on indexes of credit default swaps (CDS) on subprime mortgage
instruments and premiums on CDS of firms active in the sector (Chart 1).  (See box
entitled “Recent Developments in the Subprime Mortgage Market.”)
(3) Against this backdrop, and with an exceptionally large calendar of relatively
low-rated corporate financing deals related to leveraged buy-outs (LBOs), credit
concerns spread to encompass other risky instruments, and some corporate credit
spreads, especially in the high-yield sector, widened markedly.  Elevated market
volatility and uncertainty about valuations contributed to, and may have been
reinforced by, the delay or withdrawal of several leveraged loan deals and speculative-
grade bond issues and led to heightened jitters about the availability of LBO-related
financing going forward.  On balance over the intermeeting period, spreads of yields
on speculative-grade corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity Treasury
securities increased more than 100 basis points, while those on investment-grade
securities rose about 35 basis points.  Even so, these spreads generally remained
moderate by historical standards, and investment-grade yields were little changed over
the period.  Late in the period, there were reports of unsettled conditions in the asset-
backed commercial paper (ABCP) market, although ABCP issuance and published
ABCP yields did not appear to be much affected.  (See box entitled “Recent
Developments in Corporate Credit Markets.”)  Despite second-quarter earnings
reports that were generally solid, broad equity price indexes declined about 2½
percent, on net.  Stock prices of financial firms and homebuilders fell considerably
more, and CDS premiums on obligations of large investment banks and some major
mortgage insurers widened sharply.  The option-implied volatility of equity prices
jumped to levels that were above its long-run historical average.
(4) Federal Reserve communications left little imprint on market prices, on net,
over the period.  The FOMC’s decision at its June meeting to keep the target federal
funds rate unchanged at 5¼ percent was widely anticipated, but its assessment that
“sustained moderation in inflation pressures has yet to be convincingly demonstrated”
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 43
Chart 1
Asset Market Developments
BBB-   
A
Jan. Mar. May Jul.
Spread on Subprime Mortgage CDS
Indexes*
*References loans originated in the first half of 2006. The spread for
each segment of the index is translated from price quotes based on JP
Morgan’s prepayment model.
June
FOMC
Last daily observation is for August 1, 2007.
June
FOMC
Investment Bank CDS Spreads*
*Average of Lehman Brothers, Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs,
Bear Stearns, and Merrill Lynch.
Last daily observation is for August 1, 2007.
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Ten-Year High-Yield (right scale)
June
FOMC
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Last daily observation is for August 2, 2007.
Wilshire
Dow Jones Financial
June
FOMC
Equity Prices
Last daily observation is for August 2, 2007.
S&P 500 EPS
NIPA, economic
profits before tax
Corporate Earnings Growth* Percent
*Change from four quarters earlier.
Source. I/B/E/S for S&P 500 EPS.
Q2
Q1 e
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatilities
Daily June
FOMC
Last daily observation is for August 2, 2007.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 43
Recent Developments in the Subprime Mortgage Market 
 
Conditions in the subprime residential mortgage sector continued to deteriorate over the intermeeting 
period.  Rating agencies downgraded lower-rated tranches of a considerable number of subprime residential 
mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) deals and also some higher-rated tranches of collateralized debt 
obligations (CDOs) backed by recently issued subprime mortgages—including some AAA tranches that 
investors had believed to be very safe.  In addition, the rating agencies announced changes to their rating 
and surveillance methodologies for RMBS and CDOs.  Investors took note of the fact that the criteria to 
assign high ratings to future structures will be more stringent and apparently also interpreted the 
announcements as an indication that further downgrades of existing deals might be forthcoming.  As a 
consequence, spreads on even the AAA segments of the most recent vintages of the ABX subprime 
mortgage indexes, which previously had been largely immune from the negative news affecting the sector, 
jumped to levels well above 150 basis points—as shown in the left panel below.  ABX spreads also widened 
in response to remittance reports issued at the end of July showing that delinquency rates and defaults on 
the underlying pools of subprime residential mortgages had accelerated more than some had expected. 
 
The poor performance of existing loans negatively affected the second quarter earnings of firms active in 
both the subprime and Alt-A sectors.1  Countrywide reported second-quarter earnings well below 
expectations and indicated that delinquencies and defaults were rising in all its mortgage business lines, 
including second loans to households with relatively strong credit histories.  Earnings of other lenders and 
of investment banks that securitize and warehouse subprime mortgage loans also suffered.  With the market 
value of subprime and Alt-A MBS declining sharply, some well-known issuers of securities faced heavy 
margin calls and uncertain prospects.  In addition, several more hedge funds announced a steep drop in 
value. 
 
Large mortgage lenders, including Countrywide, Washington Mutual, and Wells Fargo, announced that they 
will stop offering some of the more popular and riskier subprime loan products, including those extended 
with limited or no documentation and those with low initial “teaser” rates.  Even before these 
announcements, issuance of subprime RMBS had slowed to a trickle in July—the right panel below.  
Reportedly, investors have sharply marked down their estimates of subprime RMBS issuance over the rest 
of the year.  With an estimated one million subprime borrowers facing substantial increases in mortgage 
payments before the end of the year as the teaser periods on their mortgages expire, the expected slowdown 
in subprime mortgage activity appears likely to put further upward pressure on delinquency and foreclosure 
rates.  
___________________ 
1 On June 29, 2007, the federal financial regulatory agencies issued their final statement on subprime mortgage lending to address issues relating 
to certain adjustable-rate mortgage products.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 43
Recent Developments in Corporate Credit Markets 
 
The continued deterioration of the subprime mortgage sector appeared to prompt a substantial 
tightening in conditions in speculative-grade corporate credit markets over the intermeeting period.  
Even though delinquency rates on lower-quality corporate credits remained low, spreads on a traded 
index comprising 100 relatively liquid speculative-grade CDS on corporate names rose about 180 basis 
points, as investors reassessed business credit risk and pulled back from riskier assets.  Spreads on CDS 
and loan CDS (LCDS) were also reportedly boosted by elevated hedging demands from market 
participants with exposure to the large pipeline of leveraged deals.  In cash markets, spreads on a broad 
index of speculative-grade bonds increased less, but still widened about 110 basis points.  Average bid 
prices on leveraged loans (particularly on riskier covenant-lite and second-lien loans) declined notably.  
Investment-grade credit markets were significantly calmer; nonetheless, CDS and bond spreads in that 
sector rose between 30 and 40 basis points.  Both speculative- and investment-grade bond spreads are 
now at the top of their ranges over the past few years, but they are still below their highs posted earlier 
this decade.  Even so, investment-grade yields are little changed over the intermeeting period.  Judging 
from options on CDS, uncertainty about the future level of corporate spreads has spiked since late June.  
   
In addition to the large pipeline of leveraged deals, one factor that may have contributed to the 
widening of spreads is investors’ increased uncertainty regarding the valuation of structured products 
such as CLOs and CDOs, perhaps in reaction to the recent ratings downgrades of CDOs backed by 
subprime RMBS.  Spreads on the lower-rated tranches of such products have widened considerably of 
late, and issuance apparently slowed substantially in July.  Such adjustments, if they persist, could sharply
reduce the supply of funds to the leveraged loan market, as CLOs and CDOs reportedly hold a 
substantial fraction of all leveraged loans outstanding.  In addition, asset price moves may have been 
exacerbated at times during the intermeeting period by concerns regarding possible forced sales by 
investors facing substantial liquidity pressures.  
  
To date, the impact of tighter conditions in corporate credit markets has been concentrated in 
financings slated for LBOs.  A number of high-yield bond and leveraged loan issues that were intended 
to finance LBOs, some of which were quite large, were delayed or restructured over the intermeeting 
period, reportedly due to investor demands for tighter terms.  In some cases, underwriters have 
provided bridge loans to finance large deals that could not be sold to investors.  Overall, issuance of 
high-yield bonds and, reportedly, of leveraged loans has slowed sharply recently.  Financings of higher-
rated firms appeared little affected, though one investment-grade firm postponed a deal scheduled to 
take place on July 26 amid volatile market conditions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 43
was reportedly interpreted by market participants as suggesting that the Committee
remained quite concerned about the upside risks to inflation.1  As a result, the
anticipated path of monetary policy for the second half of 2008 increased a few basis
points that day.  Policy expectations beyond the near term declined noticeably
following the Chairman’s semiannual monetary policy testimony, reportedly in
response to the downward revision to the FOMC’s central tendency projections for
real GDP growth in 2007 and 2008.  The subsequent publication of the minutes of
the June meeting elicited little market reaction.
(5) Concerns about the potential macroeconomic implications of a more
restrictive credit environment led investors to revise down the trajectory for the
federal funds rate implied by futures contracts, including in the near term.  Futures
quotes now imply about 30 percent odds of a 25 basis point easing in monetary policy
by the September meeting and put the expected funds rate at the end of 2007 at
around 5 percent (Chart 2).  Further out, policy expectations were lowered more; the
expected policy rate at the end of 2008 fell about 35 basis points to a bit above 4½
percent.  In the Desk’s recent survey, however, primary dealers indicated that they
anticipated little change in policy through the end of 2008, and their forecasts for
GDP growth were about the same as at the time of the June meeting.  Option-implied
measures of uncertainty around the expected path for policy widened considerably,
and the implied distribution of future federal funds rates became more skewed toward
the downside.
(6) Yields on two- and ten-year nominal Treasury coupon securities declined
around 30 basis points, on balance.  The drop in longer-term yields was concentrated
in one-year forward rates two to three years ahead.  Term structure models attribute
much of the decline to a reduction in term premiums, possibly indicating a heightened 
                                           
1 The effective federal funds rate averaged 5.26 percent over the intermeeting period.   
During the period, System holdings of Treasury securities were unchanged.  The volume of 
outstanding long-term RPs decreased by $1 billion, to $10 billion.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 43
Chart 2
Interest Rate Developments
August 2, 2007
June 27, 2007
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Implied Distribution of Federal Funds Rate Six 
Months Ahead*
Recent:  08/02/2007 
Last FOMC:  06/27/2007
*Derived from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, with term premium 
and other adjustments to estimate expectations for the federal funds rate.
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)*
Implied Volatilities
*Width of a 90 percent confidence interval estimated from the term
structures for the expected federal funds rate and implied volatility.
June
FOMC
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
June
FOMC
Basis points
Change in Implied One-Year Forward Treasury Rates
since Last FOMC Meeting*
Years Ahead
*Forward rates are the one-year rates maturing at the end of the year shown
on the horizontal axis that are implied by the smoothed Treasury yield curve.
Next Five Years (left axis)
Five-to-Ten Year Forward (left axis)
Spot WTI (right axis)
Inflation Compensation and Oil Prices*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
June
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 43
preference on the part of investors for the safety and liquidity of Treasuries.
Measures of uncertainty about Treasury yields rose markedly over the period.  Despite
a rise in the spot price of oil of more than $7 per barrel, TIPS yields moved down
about in line with their nominal counterparts, leaving TIPS-based measures of
inflation compensation little changed at both medium- and long-term maturities.  The
Reuters-Michigan survey-based measure of short-term inflation expectations was
unchanged, but the long-term measure increased slightly.
(7) Foreign financial markets, especially in Europe, also were affected by
heightened credit concerns.  The spread on the iTraxx Crossover index, a traded
index of fifty of the most liquid CDS on mainly sub-investment-grade nonfinancial
corporations in Europe, climbed about 165 basis points over the period to around
industrial countries dropped between 4 and 5 percent (Chart 3).  Yields on long-term
sovereign securities in these countries fell 10 to 30 basis points, somewhat less than
the declines recorded on comparable U.S. Treasury securities.  Policy expectations
generally moved down less as well; market participants appeared to interpret the upset
in financial markets as less likely to undermine foreign economic growth and thus less
likely to prompt a monetary policy response abroad.  Worries about credit quality in
U.S. markets weighed on the foreign exchange value of the dollar over much of the
intermeeting period, but amid reports that many market participants were seeking to
reduce risky positions late in the period, the dollar retraced some of its earlier declines.
On balance, the dollar declined about 1¾ percent against a trade-weighted index of
major foreign currencies.  Against individual currencies, the dollar fell about 3 percent
against the yen, 1¾ percent versus the euro, and 1 percent versus the Canadian dollar.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 43
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Industrial Countries
June FOMC
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields (Nominal)
June FOMC
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
June FOMC
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock Price Indexes
Emerging Market Economies
June FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 43
During the period, the Bank of England and the Bank of Canada raised their policy
interest rates 25 basis points.2
(8) Financial markets in emerging market economies were affected unevenly by
the bout of credit concerns in the United States and Europe.  In Mexico and Brazil,
spreads on EMBI+ and CDS premiums on sovereign debt widened, and stock prices
were little changed on balance.  In many Asian economies, by contrast, equity prices
recorded strong net gains over the period, including a 12½ percent rise in Chinese
stock prices.  The dollar moved down slightly over the intermeeting period versus an
index of currencies of our other important trading partners.  A 1¼ percent
appreciation of the dollar against the Mexican peso was more than offset by a nearly
¾ percent depreciation versus the Chinese renminbi and small declines in the dollar’s
value against many other emerging market currencies.  The People’s Bank of China
increased its policy rate another 27 basis points in July and raised reserve requirements
(9) Despite the heightened volatility, most financial markets around the globe
generally functioned well over the intermeeting period.  In the United States, trading
volumes in corporate CDS markets were reportedly very high but volumes in
corporate bond markets were about normal; bid-asked spreads in both markets
appeared to widen somewhat, especially in the market for single-name CDS.  Liquidity
in subprime credit derivatives markets, including those for the ABX indexes, was
reportedly poor, as most investors sought to buy credit protection.  Volumes were
very high in equity and Treasury markets, but trading was reportedly orderly, with bid-
asked spreads in their usual ranges.  Liquidity premiums for on-the-run Treasury
securities were little changed.  By contrast, in the interest-rate swap market, spreads
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 43
over Treasuries increased substantially, and price movements were discontinuous at
times, but on the whole the market continued to operate well.  Implied volatilities rose
significantly in all markets.3  In foreign exchange markets for the major currency pairs,
trading volumes were considerably elevated—especially for dollar-yen—but bid-asked
spreads remained in normal ranges and trading was orderly.  In corporate markets,
investment-grade bond issuance seemed to be little affected by the turmoil in other
segments of the capital markets.  C&I loans overall appear to have expanded at a brisk
pace during July, while commercial paper outstanding rose modestly.  Some
speculative-grade corporate bonds were also issued last month, but, as mentioned
above, a number of corporate financing deals, often related to LBOs and share
repurchase programs, were postponed or restructured, and the outlook for deals
planned for the next few weeks is unclear.  New issuance of CDOs, CLOs, and some
types of subprime mortgage-backed securities dropped off sharply.  Both seasoned
and initial public equity offerings continued at a moderate pace.
(10) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is estimated to have expanded at
a 6¼ percent pace in the second quarter, a bit slower than in the first quarter and
down substantially from 2006 (Chart 4).  This diminished growth trajectory is mainly
attributable to an ongoing moderation in household mortgage debt stemming from
the softening in house prices, higher mortgage rates, sluggish home sales, and tighter
mortgage lending standards.  By contrast, growth of the debt of nonfinancial
businesses is estimated to have picked up to about a 10¾ percent rate last quarter,
supported by substantial bond issuance, hefty growth in C&I loans, and a rise in
commercial paper outstanding; borrowing continued to be spurred by a large volume
of merger and acquisition activity.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 43
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Debt of Nonfinancial Sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Growth of Debt of Household Sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of House Prices
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
OFHEO Purchase-Only Index
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of Debt of
Nonfinancial Business*
Monthly rate
*Commercial paper and C&I loans are seasonally adjusted, bonds are not.
e Estimated.
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
e Estimated.
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 43
(11) M2 growth slowed to a modest 3 percent average annual rate over June and
July, reflecting a sharp deceleration of liquid deposits following surprisingly strong
growth earlier in the year.  Retail money funds continued to advance rapidly, while the
expansion of small time deposits slowed.  Currency growth remained modest, as
moderate expansion in domestic demand offset ongoing weakness in foreign demand.
In the second quarter of 2007, the velocity of M2 declined for the fourth straight
quarter, in part reflecting slightly narrower opportunity costs of holding M2.
However, M2 continued to expand more rapidly than would be expected based on its
historical relationship with income and opportunity costs.
Economic Outlook through 2008
(12) The Greenbook forecast continues to be predicated on the assumption that
the federal funds rate will be held at 5¼ percent through 2008.  Longer-term yields
are projected to climb about 25 basis points next year as investors’ policy expectations
come into line with staff assumptions and term premiums rise.  Equity prices are
expected to rise at a rate sufficient to generate risk-adjusted returns comparable to
those on fixed-income investments, but from a starting point 5½ percent below that
in the June Greenbook.  The trade-weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar is
assumed to depreciate at roughly a 2 percent annual rate over the forecast period.
The staff assumes that recent developments in financial markets will restrain growth
in aggregate demand by about ¼ percentage point at an annual rate over the period,
but significant uncertainty surrounds this assessment.
(13) The staff’s forecasts for resource utilization and core inflation are nearly
identical to those presented in the June Greenbook, although its projection for output
growth is noticeably lower.  The annual revisions to the National Income and Product
Account (NIPA) data released in July revealed somewhat less rapid output growth
from 2004 through the first quarter of 2007 than shown by previous data, implying
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 43
that productivity growth also was less rapid.  Accordingly, the staff lowered its
estimate of potential GDP growth over the past few years and carried that adjustment
forward.  Developments in financial markets in recent weeks, along with weaker-than-
expected housing indicators received during the intermeeting period, led the staff to
trim its forecast for growth in demand for goods and services somewhat more than
implied by the supply-side adjustments alone.  The staff now projects that real GDP
will expand at an average rate just under 2 percent through 2008, somewhat below its
revised estimate of 2.2 percent potential growth.  As in the June Greenbook, the
unemployment rate edges up to 4¾ percent next spring and then levels out, remaining
below 5 percent―the staff’s estimate of the NAIRU―throughout the forecast period.
With regard to the price outlook, the staff again expects core PCE inflation to average
a bit above 2 percent in the second half of 2007 and first half of 2008, and to edge
down to 2 percent in the second half of 2008, reflecting well-anchored inflation
expectations, a waning of feed-through from the recent run-up in energy and other
commodity prices, and some easing of pressures on resource utilization.  The staff
projects that total PCE inflation will slow from an average of nearly 4 percent in the
first half of this year to slightly more than 2 percent in the second half as oil prices
flatten out, and to just above 1¾ percent next year as oil prices start to edge down.
As usual, the assumed path of oil prices follows futures prices.
Update on Medium-Term Strategies
(14) This section provides an update of the materials on medium-term strategies
for monetary policy that were presented in the June Bluebook.  As shown in Chart 5,
the Greenbook-consistent measure of short-run r* remains about in line with the
actual real federal funds rate of 3.3 percent, reflecting the staff’s view that the current
real funds rate will induce aggregate demand to grow a bit more slowly than potential
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 43
Chart 5
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval
90 percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 43
GDP, thereby closing the small positive output gap over the next twelve quarters.4
In contrast, both the single-equation model and the FRB/US model imply estimates
of about 2½ percent for short-run r*, fairly close to the average value of the real
funds rate over the past few decades.  The small structural model yields an even
lower estimate of about 1¾ percent, mainly because this model embeds the staff’s
assessment of current potential GDP growth—which is a full percentage point below
its historical average—but does not incorporate other offsetting factors such as the
relatively high wealth-to-income ratio and ongoing real dollar depreciation.
(15) Chart 6 depicts optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model using
the staff’s extension of the Greenbook forecast beyond 2008.5  In these simulations,
policymakers place equal weights on keeping core PCE inflation close to a specified
goal, on keeping unemployment close to the long-run NAIRU, and on avoiding
changes in the nominal funds rate.6  With an inflation goal of 2 percent (the right-
hand set of charts), optimal policy is nearly identical to that shown in the June
Bluebook:  The funds rate path remains just above 5 percent through 2008 and
then declines gradually to 4¼ percent by the end of 2012.  With an inflation goal
of 1½ percent (the left-hand set of charts), the optimal path of the funds rate rises
a notch less than in June—reaching a peak of about 6 percent in mid-2008—and
then declines gradually to about 3¾ percent over the following half-decade.  For
each inflation goal, the outcomes for unemployment and core inflation are broadly
unchanged from June.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 43
(16) As shown in Chart 7, the outcome-based policy rule prescribes a funds rate
path that remains close to 5 percent through the remainder of the decade and
then declines to about 4¼ percent by the end of 2012, whereas forward contracts
indicate that financial market participants expect the funds rate to decline to about
Confidence intervals derived from interest rate caps exhibit somewhat greater
downward skewness than in the June Bluebook, and the upper bounds of these
intervals are noticeably lower than those implied by stochastic simulations of the
FRB/US model, especially over the next two years or so.  The simple policy rules
proposed by Taylor (1993, 1999)—as well as a variant of the Taylor (1999) rule with
a higher intercept—prescribe current settings of the funds rate that are about 10 to
staff’s estimate of the current level of the output gap.  By contrast, the first-difference
rule does not involve the staff’s assessment of the current level of the output gap
but instead responds to the projected one-year change in the output gap at a
three-quarter forecast horizon; this rule’s current prescriptions are a notch lower
than in the June Bluebook, mainly because the output gap is now expected to decline
a bit more quickly.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(17) This Bluebook presents three options, summarized in Table 1, for the
Committee’s consideration.  Alternative A would lower the target federal funds rate
funds rate at 5¼ percent.  Alternative C envisions raising the target to 5½ percent.
The draft language to characterize recent information on economic activity differs
across the three options:  Alternatives A and B refer explicitly or implicitly to recent
moderate economic expansion, while Alternative C emphasizes the second-quarter
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 43
Table 1: Alternative Language for the August 2007 FOMC Announcement
June FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for 
the federal funds rate 25 basis points 
to 5 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate 25 basis points to 
5½ percent.
Overall economic activity seems likely 
to continue to expand at a moderate 
pace over coming quarters.  However, 
increased weakness in the housing 
sector, along with reduced availability 
and higher cost of credit to some 
households and businesses, has raised 
the risk that economic activity might 
grow less than anticipated.
Economic growth was moderate 
during the first half of this year.  The 
adjustment in the housing sector is 
continuing, and credit conditions have 
become tighter for some households 
and businesses.  Nonetheless, the 
economy seems likely to continue to 
expand at a moderate pace over 
coming quarters.
Economic growth picked up in the 
second quarter.  The economy seems 
likely to expand at a moderate pace 
over coming quarters despite the 
ongoing adjustment in the housing 
sector.
Rationale 3. Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly in recent 
months.  However, a sustained 
moderation in inflation pressures 
has yet to be convincingly 
demonstrated.  Moreover, the high 
level of resource utilization has the 
potential to sustain those 
pressures.
Readings on core inflation have been 
relatively subdued in recent months 
and core inflation is expected to be 
moderate over coming quarters.  
However, the high level of resource 
utilization has the potential to sustain 
inflation pressures.
Readings on core inflation have been 
relatively subdued in recent months.  
However, a sustained moderation in 
inflation pressures has yet to be 
convincingly demonstrated.  
Moreover, the high level of resource 
utilization has the potential to sustain 
those pressures.
Readings on core inflation have been 
relatively subdued in recent months.  
However, a sustained moderation in 
inflation pressures has yet to be 
convincingly demonstrated.  Overall 
inflation has been elevated, boosted by 
increases in the prices of energy and 
other commodities.  The high level of 
resource utilization has the potential 
to sustain inflation pressures.
Assessment 
of Risk
After this action, the Committee 
judges that the downside risk to 
economic growth is roughly balanced 
by the upside risk to inflation.  Future 
policy adjustments will depend on the 
evolution of the outlook for both 
inflation and economic growth, as 
implied by incoming information.
In these circumstances, the 
Committee’s predominant policy 
concern remains the risk that inflation 
will fail to moderate as expected.  
Future policy adjustments will depend 
on the evolution of the outlook for 
both inflation and economic growth, 
as implied by incoming information.
Even after this action, the 
Committee’s predominant policy 
concern remains the risk that inflation 
will fail to moderate as expected.  
Future policy adjustments will depend 
on the evolution of the outlook for 
both inflation and economic growth, 
as implied by incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 43
rebound.  All three alternatives reiterate the view that the economy is likely to expand
at a moderate rate in coming quarters.  With regard to recent financial developments,
Alternative A cites tighter credit conditions for some borrowers as a source of greater
downside risk to growth, Alternative B notes the change in credit conditions without
explicitly stating that it is a cause of increased risk, and Alternative C is silent.  Data
received during the intermeeting period confirmed that core inflation has been fairly
low in recent months but also indicate that core inflation has not extended the decline
that occurred earlier.  Accordingly, all the alternatives refer to “relatively subdued”
readings on core inflation in recent months rather than repeating the June language
that core inflation “improved modestly in recent months.”  The alternatives differ in
their assessment of the severity of the upside risks to the outlook for inflation.  As
always, the Committee could combine elements from different alternatives.
(18) If the Committee continues to view the current stance of policy as likely to
foster sustainable growth and an acceptable trajectory for inflation, then it may wish
to choose Alternative B, under which its target for the federal funds rate would
remain at 5¼ percent for the time being.  The real federal funds rate is close to its
Greenbook-consistent equilibrium value (Chart 5), supporting a view that the current
stance of policy is likely to promote a gradual easing of pressures on resources.
Additionally, the current target for the funds rate remains close to prescriptions for
near-term policy obtained from optimal policy simulations with a 2 percent inflation
goal (Chart 6) and some of the policy rules shown in Chart 7.  The Committee might
agree with the staff’s assessment that recent developments in financial markets are
unlikely to impose substantial restraint on aggregate demand, given that credit remains
readily available to most households and businesses.  The Committee might also agree
with the staff’s view that, after a relatively brief interruption as the markets reassess
credit risk, normal flows of credit probably will resume, though with risk spreads
above the unusually low levels seen in the past few years.  Even if the Committee is
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 43
less sanguine than the staff, members might decide that more concrete information
about the economic effect of less readily available credit would be needed to warrant a
change in the stance of monetary policy.  Moreover, the Committee might judge that
maintaining its current policy stance would provide a reasonable weighting of the risks
to its dual objectives:  On the one hand, weakness in housing and strains in credit
markets could have a more pronounced effect on overall economic activity than
foreseen in the staff forecast; on the other, the moderation in inflation may not be
(19) The draft statement for Alternative B reiterates the view that the economy is
likely to continue expanding at a moderate pace over coming quarters.  However, by
citing tighter credit conditions for some households and businesses, it also suggests
somewhat greater downside risk to growth.  The draft acknowledges recent favorable
readings on core inflation, characterizing them as “relatively subdued.”  At the same
time, it points to continued upside inflation risk by repeating language from the June
statement that “a sustained moderation in inflation pressures has yet to be
convincingly demonstrated” and that “the high level of resource utilization has the
potential to sustain those pressures.”  Even if members judge that downside risks to
growth have increased in recent weeks and that upside risks to inflation have
diminished, they may still see the risks as unbalanced and thus want to indicate that
the Committee’s predominant policy concern remains the risk that inflation will fail to
moderate as expected.  Taken as a whole, the language in Alternative B is slightly
softer than the June statement, but it also suggests that the Committee does not
expect the less accommodative conditions in credit markets to have a significant
adverse effect on the economic expansion.
(20) Market participants see substantial odds of an easing of monetary policy in
coming months but little chance of a rate cut at this meeting.  In responding to the
Desk’s survey, most primary dealers said they expect no more than minor
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 43
modifications to the text of the accompanying statement, although one-third indicated
they expect the Committee to mention deteriorating financial conditions.  Alternative
B seems generally consistent with those expectations, so a sizable market reaction to a
statement such as that suggested in Alternative B appears unlikely.  But markets might
interpret the reference to tighter credit conditions for some households and
businesses as a first step toward a possible easing, in which case the perceived
probability of a rate cut in September would increase.
(21) The Committee might instead view recent data and developments as
indicating that the balance of risks has shifted enough to warrant cutting the target
federal funds rate by 25 basis points, as in Alternative A.  The housing market
appears to be weakening further, indicators of private spending outside of the housing
sector have been mixed of late, and credit spreads have widened—perhaps suggesting
that downside risks to growth have increased.  Moreover, members might be
concerned that recent financial strains could intensify, further reducing the availability
of credit to households and businesses and weakening consumer and investment
spending, as in the “Greater housing correction with spillovers to confidence and
financial markets” scenario in the Greenbook.  At the same time, recent subdued
readings on core inflation may have increased the Committee’s confidence that
inflation pressures are gradually ebbing.  Furthermore, with growth in labor
compensation remaining moderate, the Committee might think that the equilibrium
unemployment rate could be lower than currently estimated by the staff, as in the
“Lower NAIRU” Greenbook alternative scenario, suggesting that core inflation could
decline a bit more than in the staff forecast.  In these circumstances, the Committee
may judge that a slightly lower federal funds rate would more appropriately balance
the increased risk of sluggish economic growth against the reduced upside risk to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 43
(22) The draft statement in Alternative A continues to note that the economy
seems likely to expand at a moderate pace, but it also explicitly recognizes that greater
weakness in the housing sector and the diminished availability and higher cost of
credit to riskier borrowers have raised the odds that the economy will grow less than
expected.  In the inflation paragraph, the draft language not only indicates that core
inflation has been subdued in recent months, it also states that core inflation “is
expected to be moderate over coming quarters” rather than repeating the view that “a
sustained moderation in inflation pressures has yet to be convincingly demonstrated.”
But the statement would continue to indicate that the high level of resource utilization
poses an upside risk to inflation.  The statement could conclude by noting that, after
the 25 basis point easing, the Committee views the downside risk to growth as roughly
balanced by the upside risk to inflation.  Such an assessment would imply that the
Committee does not see the easing as likely to be the first of a sequence of moves.
(23) Although market participants think policy is likely to be eased in coming
months, they would be quite surprised by a rate cut at this meeting, and shorter-term
Treasury yields could decline somewhat.  Investors may be so worried about credit
exposures and downside risks to growth that they might interpret a rate cut and the
statement’s reference to tighter credit conditions as signaling that the Federal Reserve
is quite concerned about financial strains and their implications for the economy.  If
so, credit spreads might continue to widen, equity prices might fall, and investors
might anticipate further policy easing, causing medium-term Treasury yields to drop
more than shorter-term yields.  However, the statement’s relatively upbeat assessment
of growth prospects, and the implication that the Committee judges that the risk of
adverse macroeconomic consequences stemming from recent developments in credit
markets can be adequately mitigated by a modest rate cut, might reassure investors.  If
so, credit spreads might narrow and equity prices might increase.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 43
(24) Even if the Committee does not believe that a policy easing is warranted at
this meeting, it might judge, in light of the further weakening of the housing sector
and the recent deterioration in financial conditions, that downside risks to growth
have increased appreciably.  And given the continued subdued readings on core
inflation and moderate wage growth, the Committee might also see the upside risks to
inflation as having diminished slightly in recent weeks.  If the Committee judges that
the downside risks to growth and the upside risks to inflation are now roughly
balanced, it might wish to leave the stance of policy unchanged at this meeting but
release a statement that combines the Alternative A language on real activity (A.2)
with the Alternative B language on inflation (B.3) and the balanced risk assessment of
Alternative A (A.4)—of course, it would be necessary to drop the phrase, “After this
action.”  Investors likely would conclude from such a statement that the Federal
Reserve now sees significant downside risks to growth and is preparing to ease.
Yields on Treasury securities likely would decline.  If investors found the prospect of
an early easing reassuring, credit spreads could narrow and equity prices could rise.
But credit spreads could widen and equity prices could fall if the statement’s explicit
recognition of downside risks to growth were to make investors more worried about
the outlook.
(25) Although recent readings on core inflation have been subdued, overall
inflation has been elevated, boosted by increases in the prices of oil and other
commodities.  Members may be concerned that high headline inflation might soon
begin to boost inflation expectations, augmenting the upward pressure on core
inflation that is already emanating from the pass-through effects of higher energy and
commodity prices and perhaps from relatively tight labor and product markets.  If so,
the Committee might prefer to raise the funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting, as
in Alternative C.  Even under the baseline outlook, the optimal policy path shown in
Chart 6 indicates that policy would need to be tightened about 1 percentage point
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 43
over the next year should the Committee wish to bring core inflation down to 1½
percent.  Moreover, members might interpret the fairly strong rebound in second-
quarter real GDP growth and the solid job gains seen through the spring as
indications that there could be greater strength in aggregate demand going forward
than suggested in the staff forecast.  Another possible reason for expecting greater
strength in aggregate demand is that the NIPA revisions revealed that the personal
saving rate has been higher than previously estimated, perhaps suggesting, as in the
“Flat saving rate” alternative in the Greenbook, that households feel less need to
restrain growth in spending than envisioned in the staff forecast.  If members expect
stronger growth in aggregate demand than projected in the Greenbook, they may be
concerned that pressures on resource utilization will intensify—especially if they share
the staff’s view that the revised GDP data indicate that trend productivity growth and
the economy’s sustainable growth rate are lower than previously estimated.
(26) The statement accompanying Alternative C could reiterate the assessment
that the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace, but reorder the clauses
to underscore the view that the adjustment in the housing sector appears unlikely to
derail the economic expansion.  It could also point to the rebound in growth in the
second quarter rather than to moderate growth in the first half.  The inflation
paragraph could note the subdued readings on core inflation in recent months but
repeat June’s message that a few months of good inflation news does not convincingly
demonstrate a sustained moderation in inflation pressures.  The statement could also
point to the elevated level of overall inflation, in effect providing an additional
rationale for the Committee’s policy decision.  The statement could conclude by
noting that, even after the increase in the funds rate, the Committee’s predominant
policy concern remains the upside risk to inflation.
(27) A tightening of monetary policy at this meeting would come as a complete
surprise to market participants.  Shorter-term market interest rates would rise, but
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 43
forward yields could fall as the announcement likely would lower investors’ outlook
for medium-term inflation and economic growth.  The net effect on longer-term
Treasury yields is thus ambiguous.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar would
probably appreciate, spreads on private credit obligations likely would widen, and
equity prices likely would decline.  Given the apparent reduction in investors’ appetite
for risky assets in recent weeks, and the large movements in asset prices in response to
news that suggested greater downside risk, the market reaction to a tightening move at
this time could well be unusually sharp.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(28) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 is projected to expand about
percentage point slower than in the June forecast, reflecting the downward revision in
the Greenbook forecast for nominal GDP growth.  Opportunity costs of holding
money are expected to edge down further over the remainder of this year, as deposit
rates continue to catch up with earlier increases in short-term interest rates, and
accordingly M2 grows a bit faster than nominal GDP.
(29) Growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to slow from
projections are a shade below those in the June forecast, primarily reflecting the
downward revisions to residential investment and business fixed investment in the
staff forecast.  Growth of household debt is projected to slow from 8¾ percent
during 2006 to 5¼ percent in 2007 and 4½ percent in 2008.  Flat house prices, higher
mortgage rates, and tighter credit standards all are expected to contribute to slower
growth of mortgage debt this year and next.  As in June, the staff predicts that
corporate borrowing will slow in the second half of this year, as the pace of funding
for merger and acquisition activity and share repurchases moves down from its recent
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 43
No Change/
Greenbook Forecast* 25 bp Tightening
Monthly Growth Rates
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
Table 2
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
* No change in the target federal funds rate at this meeting.  This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and
interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 43
elevated level.  Even so, corporate debt is projected to rise at an average 6½ percent
annual rate over the forecast period, as companies are anticipated to rely less on
profits and more on credit markets to finance moderate growth in capital
expenditures.  The staff projects that higher credit spreads will have some restraining
effect on growth in corporate debt, and that recent turmoil in financial markets will
result in some debt issuance being postponed to later this year, but it does not expect
these developments to hold back business investment appreciably.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 43
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those presented
in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around ________ 5¼ percent.
Risk Assessments
A.   After this action, the Committee judges that the downside risk to
economic growth is roughly balanced by the upside risk to inflation.
Future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook
for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming
B.   In these circumstances, the Committee’s predominant policy concern
remains the risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected.  Future
policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
C.   Even after this action, the Committee’s predominant policy concern
remains the risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected.  Future
policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 43
