Content last modified 02/07/2013.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MAY 3, 2007
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR)     May 3, 2007
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The FOMC’s decision at its March meeting to leave the federal funds rate
target unchanged at 5¼ percent accorded with market expectations.  However,
investors read the accompanying statement as signaling that policy easing might begin
sooner than had been anticipated, given the replacement of the reference to
“additional firming” with more balanced language and the somewhat weaker-than-
expected characterization of recent economic indicators.  Even though there was little
apparent net impetus from economic data released over the intermeeting period, on
balance, money market futures rates subsequently more than reversed their initial
decline.  The upward pressure on futures quotes probably owed in part to monetary
policy communications—including the Chairman’s testimony to the Joint Economic
Committee, speeches by FOMC members, and the release of the minutes of the
March meeting—that were seen as affirming that upside risk to inflation remained the
Committee’s predominant concern.  Futures quotes now indicate that market
participants generally expect the target rate to be left unchanged at the May and June
meetings and to be eased about ¾ percentage point by the end of 2008 (Chart 1).
Respondents to the Desk’s survey of primary dealers generally anticipate no change in
the policy rate and few changes to the statement at next week’s meeting, and they
expect about 50 basis points of easing by the end of 2008, somewhat less than futures
quotes imply.  Option-implied measures of uncertainty about the near-term path of
policy were little changed over the intermeeting period, and the implied probability
distribution for the target rate six months ahead shows about the same skew toward
lower rates as it did at the time of the March meeting.  Despite the large flows of
individual nonwithheld tax payments to the Treasury toward the end of the
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
May 3, 2007
March 20, 2007
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Implied Distribution of Federal Funds Rate Six 
Months Ahead*
Recent:  05/03/2007 
Last FOMC:  03/20/2007
*Derived from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, with term premium 
and other adjustments to estimate expectations for the federal funds rate.
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)*
Implied Volatilities
*Width of a 90 percent confidence interval estimated from the term
structures for the expected federal funds rate and implied volatility.
March
FOMC
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
March
FOMC
Change in Implied One-Year Forward Treasury Rates
since Last FOMC Meeting*
Years Ahead
*Forward rates are the one-year rates maturing at the end of the year shown
on the horizontal axis that are implied by the smoothed Treasury yield curve.
Next Five Years (left axis)
Five-to-Ten Year Forward (left axis)
Spot WTI (right axis)
Inflation Compensation and Oil Prices*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
March
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 36
intermeeting period, the federal funds rate did not deviate from the target more than
is typical (see box entitled “Tax Receipts and Open Market Operations”).1
(2) In the Treasury market, two- and ten-year nominal yields rose modestly
over the intermeeting period.  TIPS-based inflation compensation edged up amid a
noticeable rise in oil prices, and consumer survey responses also suggested slightly
higher short- and long-term inflation expectations.  Broad equity indexes have risen
about 6 percent since the March FOMC meeting and 8 percent since the publication
of the March Greenbook (Chart 2).  The gains came on the heels of somewhat better-
than-expected first-quarter earnings reports and a lessening of the concerns about the
outlook that gripped markets in late February.  Spreads of yields on investment-grade
corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities were about
unchanged, while those on speculative-grade bonds narrowed somewhat.
(3) Domestic financial market conditions have broadly recovered from the
sharp increase in volatility and the associated withdrawal from risk-taking that
occurred in late February and the first half of March.  Markets functioned well over
the intermeeting period, and implied volatilities in various markets retraced all or part
of their earlier increases.  After several large investment banks with substantial
exposures to subprime mortgages reported strong first-quarter earnings, equity and
credit market anxiety about spillovers from that sector appeared to ease.
Nevertheless, credit default swap (CDS) spreads on some of these investment banks
remained somewhat above their levels early this year, although well within the range
observed over the previous three years.  There were other signs that investors had
reassessed the risk inherent in some positions relative to earlier in the year:  Spreads
on lower-rated indexes of credit default swaps written on subprime mortgages 
                                           
1 The effective federal funds rate averaged 5.25 percent over the intermeeting period.  During the 
period, System holdings of Treasury coupon securities increased by $7.4 billion.  The volume of 
outstanding long-term RPs decreased by $9 billion, to $12 billion, as the Desk relied on short-term 
operations to address fluctuations in balances due to tax flows.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 36
fall 
 
Tax Receipts and Open Market Operations
The Desk faced significant reserve management challenges late in the 
intermeeting period, as large individual income tax payments boosted the Treasury’s 
operating cash balance to unusually high levels.  Typically, the Treasury invests the 
bulk of its operating balance in the Treasury Tax and Loan (TT&L) system and 
targets a balance of $5 billion in the Treasury General Account (TGA) at the Federal 
Reserve.  Tax receipts for April and May are estimated to be about 13 percent higher 
than last year, and the Treasury’s operating balance—the dotted line in the chart 
below—exceeded the capacity of the TT&L system—the solid line—on a few days 
beginning on April 30.  As a result, the TGA—the dashed line—rose above its $5 
billion target level, reaching nearly $30 billion.
In general, an increase in the TGA reduces the banking sector’s balances at the 
Fed.  To maintain the target federal funds rate, the Desk must add balances through 
open market operations, traditionally using repurchase agreements (RPs) because the 
need to add these balances is temporary.  However, propositions from primary 
dealers for RPs can be limited on the month end, so the Desk was confronted with 
the challenge of adding a substantial amount of balances on a day when its ability to 
conduct a short-term adding operation could be limited.
The Desk addressed this problem in a number of ways.  First, on April 25, the 
Desk arranged a forward repurchase agreement to settle on April 30.  This forward 
operation gave the primary dealers the opportunity to obtain collateral to pledge to 
the Desk that might otherwise have become scarce on the month end.  In addition, 
the Desk performed term RP operations on several days leading up to the month end.  
To avoid providing more balances than demanded on the days immediately preceding 
the month end, the Desk conducted reverse RP operations on April 26 and 27, the 
first such operations since 2004.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 36
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
March
FOMC
Wilshire 5000 Index
S&P 500 EPS
NIPA, economic
profits before tax
Corporate Earnings Growth* Percent
*Change from four quarters earlier.
Source. I/B/E/S for S&P 500 EPS.
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
March
FOMC
Corporate Bond Spreads*
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatilities
Daily March
FOMC
March
FOMC
Investment Bank CDS Spreads*
*Average of Lehman Brothers, Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs,
Bear Stearns, and Merrill Lynch.
BBB-   
A
Spread on Subprime Mortgage CDS
Indexes*
*References loans originated in the first half of 2006. The spread for
each segment of the index is translated from price quotes based on JP
Morgan’s prepayment model.
March
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 36
remained very high over the intermeeting period, and corporate CDS spreads for a
number of firms at the low end of the credit-quality spectrum were still quite a bit
above their levels early in the year.
(4) Economic prospects abroad brightened relative to those in the United
States, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar moved down 2 percent on balance
over the intermeeting period against a trade-weighted index of major foreign
currencies (Chart 3).  Market participants’ reaction to signs of firmer growth in the
euro area, most notably in Germany, led the euro to appreciate almost 2 percent
against the dollar.  Concerns about inflationary pressures in the United Kingdom and
Canada, and heightened expectations of a policy response, contributed to
appreciations of 1½ percent and 4½ percent, respectively, for those countries’
currencies against the dollar.  Data showing that U.K. inflation exceeded 3 percent in
the twelve months ending in March required the Governor of the Bank of England to
submit a letter of explanation to the Chancellor of the Exchequer.  The yen proved to
be an exception to the general pattern of dollar weakness:  The dollar increased more
than 2 percent against the yen, reportedly in part on the re-establishment of carry
trades as market participants’ concerns about volatility waned.  Yields on long-term
sovereign debt in Europe rose about 30 basis points; increases in Canadian and
Japanese long-term yields were smaller and closer to those on comparable U.S.
securities.  Broad stock price indexes in major foreign industrial countries recorded
gains of 4 to 7 percent over the intermeeting period, except in Japan where the
TOPIX was down slightly on balance.2
(5) The dollar fell about 1 percent against an index of currencies of our other
important trading partners.  Currency values and asset prices in many emerging
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 36
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Mar. FOMC
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields (Nominal)
Mar. FOMC
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Industrial Countries
Mar. FOMC
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock Price Indexes
Emerging Market Economies
Mar. FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 36
market countries appeared to benefit from investors returning to positions with
greater risk.  EMBI+ spreads in Mexico and Brazil narrowed to record lows during
the period, and yields on their local currency long-term sovereign securities recorded
substantial declines.  Mexican-peso yields retraced their decline in recent days after the
Bank of Mexico surprised the market by tightening in late April, citing concerns about
inflation.  Most stock price indexes in Latin America and Asia registered hefty gains
over the intermeeting period, led by an increase of more than 25 percent in China.
(6) Expansion of domestic nonfinancial sector debt slowed to an annual rate of
households, and state and local governments (Chart 4).  Nonfinancial business debt
slowed somewhat from its rapid fourth-quarter pace, but still expanded at a 9 percent
rate in the first quarter as merger and acquisition activity continued to underpin
substantial bond issuance.  On a period-average basis, strong growth of commercial
real estate loans partly offset a slowdown in the growth of C&I loans in the first
quarter.  The pace of C&I lending picked up in April, consistent with the further
narrowing of spreads on such loans reported in the April Senior Loan Officer
Opinion Survey.  With house prices likely decelerating a bit further, growth of home
mortgage debt likely slowed to a 5¾ percent rate in the first quarter.  On net,
respondents to the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey reported a tightening of
mortgage lending standards, especially for subprime and nontraditional loans, and a
moderate net weakening in mortgage demand.  Consumer credit growth in the first
quarter is estimated to have slowed slightly to an annual rate of 4 percent.  The
Treasury scaled back its regular bill issuance significantly in view of large anticipated
tax inflows over the latter half of April and early May.  Given favorable deficit trends,
the Treasury announced, as expected, that it plans to discontinue the three-year note
from its regular auction schedule beginning with the August refunding.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 36
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Debt of Nonfinancial Sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
e Estimated.
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of Debt of
Nonfinancial Business*
Monthly rate
*Commercial paper and C&I loans are seasonally adjusted,
bonds are not.
p Preliminary.
Growth of Debt of Household Sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of House Prices*
Percent
*Four-quarter growth rate.
OFHEO Purchase-Only Index (s.a.)
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 36
(7) At a 9 percent annual rate, M2 growth was brisk in March and April.
Retail money funds surged in March following the financial market volatility at the
end of February.  Growth of liquid deposits is estimated to have been somewhat
elevated in April as households accumulated balances in anticipation of making final
payments of individual nonwithheld taxes.  Overall, growth in M2 has remained more
robust than historical relationships with opportunity cost and nominal output would
indicate, and M2 velocity is estimated to have dropped further over the first quarter.
Economic Outlook through 2008
(8) The broad contours of the staff’s forecast for economic activity and
inflation are little changed since the March Greenbook, as the drag of a softer housing
market and the jump in oil prices about offset the impetus from higher equity prices
and a weaker dollar.  The pace of economic expansion is projected to pick up from its
first-quarter soft patch and to match the staff’s estimate of potential output growth by
with the unemployment rate not expected to rise to the staff’s estimate of the NAIRU
of about 5 percent until the end of 2008.  This projection is predicated on the
Committee holding policy unchanged over the next two years, rather than easing
slightly in mid-2008 as assumed in the previous Greenbook.  Longer-term yields are
again projected to firm a bit over the forecast period and equity prices to rise at about
a 6½ percent annual rate, albeit from a starting point 6½ percent higher than in
March.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar depreciates gradually as in previous
forecasts, but along a track that is 1½ percent lower than in March.  The path of oil
prices has been marked up about $5 per barrel in light of the rise in both spot and
futures quotes.  The projected flattening out of energy and other commodity prices
helps to nudge core PCE inflation down from 2¼ percent in 2007 to a little over
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 36
Headline PCE inflation is expected to run close to 3 percent in 2007, boosted by
higher energy prices, before slowing to around 2 percent in 2008.
Update on Medium-Term Strategies
(9) This section provides an update of the materials on medium-term
strategies for monetary policy that were presented in the March Bluebook.  As shown
in Chart 5, in light of the changes to the staff’s outlook, the Greenbook-consistent
measure of short-run r*—the value that would close the output gap over the next
twelve quarters—has shifted up about 20 basis points.  This measure of short-run r*
remains in line with the actual real federal funds rate—constructed as the current
nominal rate less the average core PCE inflation rate over the past year—and is about
¾ percentage point above the upper range of model-based estimates.3
(10) Chart 6 depicts the results of optimal control simulations of the FRB/US
model that are based on the staff’s extension of the Greenbook forecast beyond
inflation close to a specified goal, on keeping unemployment close to the long-run
NAIRU, and on avoiding changes in the nominal funds rate.5  With an inflation goal
of 2 percent (the right-hand set of charts), the optimal policy prescribes a funds rate
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 36
Chart 5
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval
90 percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 36
path that remains close to 5¼ percent through mid-2008 and then declines gradually
to just above 4 percent by the end of 2012.  With an inflation goal of 1½ percent (the
left-hand set of charts), the optimal path of the funds rate rises to about 6 percent
over the next few quarters and then declines gradually to about 3¾ percent by 2012.
For either inflation goal, the optimal funds rate path from mid-2008 through the end
of 2012 is roughly ¼ percentage point higher than in the March Bluebook, while the
outcomes for unemployment and inflation are broadly unchanged.  These patterns
largely reflect the staff’s modest downward revision to potential output and the
projection of more robust underlying aggregate demand, the same factors that
generate the upward shift in the Greenbook-consistent measure of short-run r*.
(11) As shown in Chart 7, the estimated outcome-based rule prescribes a funds
rate path that stays in a range of 5 to 5¼ percent over the next several years. The
near-term prescriptions from the simple policy rules proposed by Taylor (1993, 1999)
are a notch tighter than in March, reflecting the staff’s assessment of a modestly larger
output gap.  As in March, these rules generally stipulate a downward-sloping path of
policy, whereas the first-difference rule—which does not involve the level of the
output gap—now points to a flat or upward-sloping funds rate path, depending on
the inflation goal.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(12) This Bluebook presents three policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized in Table 1.  Under Alternative A, the Committee lowers
the intended federal funds rate 25 basis points to 5 percent.  Alternative B maintains
the target for the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.  Under Alternative C, the
Committee tightens by 25 basis points, bringing the target rate to 5½ percent.  With
GDP growth estimated to have been weak in the first quarter, the characterization in
the March statement that “the economy seems likely to continue to expand at a
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 36
Table 1: Alternative Language for the May 2007 FOMC Announcement
March FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for 
the federal funds rate 25 basis points 
to 5 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise its 
target for the federal funds rate 25 
basis points to 5½ percent.
The economy seems most likely to 
expand at a moderate pace over 
coming quarters.  But weakness in 
housing and capital spending imply a 
significant risk that economic activity 
might grow more slowly than 
anticipated.
Economic growth slowed in the first 
part of this year and the adjustment in 
the housing sector is ongoing.  
Nevertheless, the economy seems 
likely to expand at a moderate pace 
over coming quarters.
Despite the ongoing adjustment in 
the housing sector, the economy 
seems likely to expand at a 
moderate pace over coming 
quarters.
Rationale 
3. Recent readings on core inflation
have been somewhat elevated.  
Although inflation pressures seem 
likely to moderate over time, the 
high level of resource utilization has 
the potential to sustain those 
pressures.
Core inflation remains somewhat 
elevated on balance.  Although the 
high level of resource utilization has 
the potential to sustain inflation 
pressures, those pressures seem likely 
to moderate over time.
Core inflation remains somewhat 
elevated on balance.  Although 
inflation pressures seem likely to 
moderate over time, the high level of 
resource utilization has the potential to 
sustain those pressures.
Core inflation remains somewhat 
elevated on balance.  Inflation 
pressures seem likely to moderate 
over time, but considerable 
uncertainty surrounds that 
judgment.  Moreover, the high level 
of resource utilization, in 
combination with the recent 
increases in energy and other 
commodity prices, has the potential 
to sustain those pressures.
Assessment 
of Risk
In these circumstances, future policy 
adjustments will depend on the 
evolution of the outlook for both 
inflation and economic growth, as 
implied by incoming information.
Even after this action, the 
Committee’s predominant policy 
concern remains the risk that 
inflation will fail to moderate as 
expected.  Future policy 
adjustments will depend on the 
evolution of the outlook for both 
inflation and economic growth, as 
implied by incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 36
moderate pace” no longer seems appropriate.  Moreover, given the dip in core
inflation in March, the reference in the previous statement to recent inflation readings
being elevated has been replaced with the more general observation that “core
inflation remains somewhat elevated on balance.”  The formulation used in the March
risk assessment that “future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the
outlook for both inflation and economic growth” is retained in all three alternatives.
With the April employment report to be released on Friday, after the Bluebook closes,
the wording of the draft statements should be viewed as more tentative than usual,
and there is always the opportunity to combine rows from the different columns of
the table.
(13) In March, members apparently judged that maintaining the current target
federal funds rate provided the best chance of fostering moderate economic growth
and a gradual ebbing in core inflation.  The incoming data over the intermeeting
period have not altered significantly the staff’s assessment of the prospects for growth
and inflation.  If the Committee similarly has not substantially changed its assessment
of the economic outlook, it may be attracted to Alternative B, under which the
federal funds rate is maintained at 5¼ percent and the statement continues to
highlight concern about inflation.  Indeed, members may believe that both the upside
and downside risks associated with maintaining the current target rate have
diminished somewhat, given that the turmoil in the subprime market does not appear
to have spread to the rest of the mortgage market or to have led to a more general
retrenchment in financial markets and that readings on core inflation in March were
more favorable.  In the staff’s analysis, the real federal funds rate is close to the
Greenbook-consistent measure of its equilibrium value, suggesting that the current
stance of policy, if maintained, is likely to return output to a more sustainable level
over time.  While members may harbor concerns about the glacial pace of the
projected moderation in core inflation, they may nevertheless prefer a patient
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 36
approach rather than incur the risks associated with fostering a more rapid disinflation
in an environment of soft economic growth.  In such circumstances, the Committee
might wish to be particularly clear that its patience does not represent a down-
weighting of its long-run inflation objective.
(14) The statement accompanying Alternative B could acknowledge that
economic growth slowed in the first part of the year, but indicate that the economy
still seems likely to expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters.  The statement
would reiterate the risks to inflation posed by the high level of resource utilization and
conclude, as in March, that the Committee’s predominant policy concern remains the
risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected.
(15) Investors see virtually no chance of a policy change at this meeting.
Likewise, given the revisions to the language in the statement in March, the Desk’s
survey suggests that most primary dealers do not expect substantive changes to the
statement.  Thus, implementing Alternative B is likely to provoke little market
(16) Even if the Committee views the staff’s central outlook as broadly
plausible and desirable, members may judge that the risk of persistently weaker
economic growth is unacceptably large.  If so, the Committee might wish to reduce
the chance of a more pronounced economic slowdown by easing policy 25 basis
points as in Alternative A.  The recent disappointing data on home sales and
inventories of new homes for sale may heighten concern that the extent of the
ongoing adjustment in the housing market and associated spillovers to household and
business spending could be greater than currently anticipated.  Moreover, members
might worry that the economic fundamentals supporting the expansion going forward
could be less robust than envisaged by the staff.  In particular, the recent weakness in
business spending may indicate that firms have grown less optimistic about future
returns, which could continue to weigh on investment plans in coming quarters.  This
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 36
relative pessimism could also conceivably color firms’ hiring decisions—especially if
the recent strength of employment is a lagging phenomenon reflecting labor
hoarding—and so damp prospects for households’ income and consumption.  And
financial conditions might turn less favorable; in particular, long rates may move
significantly higher if monetary policy is not eased as expected, and equity prices could
fall short of the Greenbook projection if corporate earnings slow as anticipated by the
staff.  The possibility that the fundamentals supporting the economic expansion might
prove to be weaker than expected is explored in the Greenbook alternative simulation
“Business caution with financial spillovers.”
(17) The rationale for Alternative A would note that, although the economy
seems most likely to expand at a moderate pace, the weakness in housing and capital
spending implies a significant risk that economic activity might grow more slowly than
anticipated.  Given the moderation in inflation in March, the Committee might wish
to switch the ordering of the clauses in the second sentence of the inflation paragraph
to suggest a slightly more benign outlook for inflation.  Even so, with opposing risks
to activity and inflation, the statement would indicate that the Committee has no clear
predilection concerning the likely future direction of policy and that policy
adjustments will depend on the evolution of the economic outlook.
(18) Although investors apparently expect the Committee to begin easing
policy later this year, an immediate quarter-point rate cut would catch financial market
participants unawares, likely leading to a substantial downward revision to the
expected path for policy.  Long-term yields might also fall if investors surmised that
the real interest rate consistent with maintaining moderate growth had declined.  But
that fall might be tempered, or even reversed, if the surprise cut caused investors to
revise up their expected medium-term path for inflation and economic growth.  The
foreign exchange value of the dollar likely would weaken in response to the
unexpected easing, and equity prices probably would rally.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 36
(19) In contrast, members might be concerned that inflation will not moderate
as the staff expects, and that the costs of inflation persisting at elevated levels for a
prolonged period could be substantial.  If so, the Committee might prefer to foster a
more decisive slowing in inflation by tightening 25 basis points at this meeting, as in
Alternative C.  Price pressures might not yet be viewed as convincingly on a
downward trend, and the softening in the dollar and increases in energy and other
commodity prices since the March meeting may have heightened the Committee’s
concerns about the inflation outlook.  Moreover, with the staff forecast suggesting
that the pace of moderation in core inflation might be even slower than previously
anticipated, members may perceive an increasing risk that long-run inflation
expectations might drift up, as illustrated by the Greenbook alternative scenario
“Unanchored inflation expectations.”
(20) The statement accompanying Alternative C could reiterate the
Committee’s judgment that the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace.
The Committee’s concern about the prospects for inflation could be stressed by
noting that “considerable uncertainty” surrounds the judgment that inflation is likely
to moderate.  The sources of upside risk to inflation could be broadened to include
reference to the recent increases in energy and other commodity prices.   The
statement could conclude by noting that, even after the policy tightening, the
Committee’s predominant concern remains the upside risks to inflation.
(21) A decision to firm policy at this meeting would stun financial markets,
particularly given the changes made to the risk assessment in the March statement.
Market participants would mark up substantially their short-term outlook for policy,
and similarly increase the uncertainty attached to that outlook.  Short- and
intermediate-term interest rates would move up significantly.  The response of longer-
term rates would depend on whether the surprise tightening caused participants to
lower their expected path for medium-term inflation and economic growth, and
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 36
whether that change was sufficient to offset the impact of the upward revision to the
short-term policy outlook.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar probably would
increase in response to the hike in short rates, while equity prices likely would fall.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(22) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 is expected to expand about
decline in M2 velocity in each year, consistent with a modest reduction in opportunity
cost.  The projection for M2 growth this year is a little above that in March, reflecting
the unexpected strength of incoming data.  Within M2, liquid deposits grow
moderately, and rapid expansion in retail money funds offsets sluggish advances in
both small time deposits and currency.
(23) The growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to fall from
last year’s increase of nearly 8 percent to 6½ percent in 2007 and 5¾ percent in 2008.
In the household sector, flat housing prices are expected to dampen mortgage
borrowing over the forecast period.  Corporate borrowing is also anticipated to slow,
as the recent strong pace of merger-related debt issuance ebbs.  Federal debt growth is
projected to pick up gradually this year and next.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 36
No change/ Greenbook
Monthly Growth Rates
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
(percent, annual rate)
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
Table 2
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 36
Directive and Balance of Risks Statement
(24) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to
those presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around ________ 5¼ percent.
Risk Assessments
A.   In these circumstances, future policy adjustments will depend on the
evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as
implied by incoming information.
B.   In these circumstances, the Committee’s predominant policy concern
remains the risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected.  Future
policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
C.   Even after this action, the Committee’s predominant policy concern
remains the risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected.  Future
policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 36
