Content last modified 02/07/2013.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MARCH 15, 2007
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 15, 2007
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The FOMC’s decision at its January meeting to leave the federal funds rate
target unchanged at 5¼ percent accorded with market expectations, but the
accompanying statement was reportedly read as a sign that the Committee was more
sanguine about inflation prospects than in December, and the expected path for
monetary policy later this year and beyond edged lower that day.1  Policy expectations
declined a bit more in the wake of the Chairman’s semiannual monetary policy
testimony, which apparently reinforced investors’ beliefs that the FOMC anticipated
contained inflation pressures as well as subdued GDP growth.  The subsequent
release of the minutes of the January meeting elicited little reaction.  Economic data
releases were somewhat weaker than expected on balance over the first few weeks of
the intermeeting period and, by mid-February, policy expectations had moved
appreciably lower (Chart 1).
(2) Financial market volatility increased sharply in the second half of the
intermeeting period amid an apparent pullback from risk-taking that was reportedly
spurred by mixed news on domestic economic activity, mounting concerns about the
subprime mortgage sector, and significant declines in foreign equity prices.  The first
downdraft in U.S. stock prices occurred on February 27, kicked off by a sharp
correction in the Chinese equity market.  U.S. equity markets fell sharply from recent
highs, Treasury yields dropped, credit spreads widened, and the expected path of the
federal funds rate rotated down (Chart 2).  Despite sharp increases in volatility on a
1 The effective federal funds rate averaged 5.26 percent over the intermeeting period.  
During the period, the Desk purchased $1.9 billion of Treasury coupon securities in the 
market.  The volume of outstanding long-term RPs increased by $6 billion, to $21 billion, 
reflecting a temporary increase in the foreign RP pool.
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
2007 2008
4.0
6.0
Percent
March 15, 2007
January 30, 2007
February 26,2007
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Implied Distribution of Federal Funds Rate about 
Six Months Ahead*
Recent:  03/15/2007 
Last FOMC:  01/30/2007
40
Percent
*Derived from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, with term premium 
and other adjustments to estimate expectations for the federal funds rate.
240
Percent Basis points
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)*
Implied Volatilities
*Width of a 90 percent confidence interval estimated from the term
structures for the expected federal funds rate and implied volatility.
Jan.
FOMC
7
Percent
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Jan.
FOMC
0
Basis points
Change in Implied One-Year Forward Treasury Rates
since Last FOMC Meeting*
Years Ahead
*Forward rates are the one-year rates maturing at the end of the year shown
on the horizontal axis that are implied by the smoothed Treasury yield curve.
90
Percent $/barrel
Next Five Years (left axis)
Five-to-Ten Year Forward (left axis)
Spot WTI (right axis)
Inflation Compensation and Oil Prices*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Jan
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 41
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
140
Index(12/31/03=100)
Jan.
FOMC
Wilshire 5000 Index
S&P 500 EPS
NIPA, economic
profits before tax
Corporate Earnings Growth Percent
*Change from four quarters earlier.
    Source. I/B/E/S for S&P 500 EPS.
40
Percent
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatilities
Daily Jan.
FOMC
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Jan.
FOMC
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Bond Default and C&I Loan Delinquency Rates
Percent of outstandings
C&I loan delinquency rate
    (Call Report)
Bond default rate*
*Six-month moving average, from Moody’s Investors Service.
Percent of liabilities
Expected Year-Ahead Defaults*
*Firm-level estimates of year-ahead defaults from KMV corporation, weighted
by firm liabilities as a percent of total liabilities, excluding defaulted firms.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 41
range of financial assets, markets operated smoothly, apart from some capacity-related
technical difficulties that day at Dow Jones and the NYSE.  In the Treasury market,
bid-asked spreads remained in their recent ranges, and premiums for on-the-run two-
and ten-year nominal Treasury securities relative to their off-the-run counterparts
widened only modestly.  Subsequently, some positive economic data releases and
comments by Federal Reserve officials that were viewed as reassuring prompted a
partial recovery in some financial asset prices, but, in recent days, stock prices, yields,
and policy expectations took another step down as news of strains in the subprime
mortgage market accumulated and investors pondered their implications for economic
(3) On net over the intermeeting period, investors tilted their anticipated path
for monetary policy down substantially.  For the upcoming FOMC meeting, however,
federal funds futures quotes and the Desk’s survey of dealers indicate that the
Committee is expected to remain on hold.  Most dealers expect only modest changes
to the rationale portion of the statement.  Just a few noted a possibility that, in the risk
assessment, the Committee would cite the emergence of downside risks to growth.
According to options prices, the probability of at least 25 basis points of easing by
June now stands at almost one-third.  Over the longer term, Eurodollar futures point
to an expectation of about 100 basis points of cumulative easing by the end of 2008,
about 50 basis points more than had been anticipated prior to the January meeting
and markedly more than foreseen by respondents to the most recent Desk survey.
The distribution of short-term interest rate expectations shows considerably more
skew to the downside than at the time of the January meeting.
(4) Two- and ten-year nominal Treasury yields fell around 35 basis points on
balance over the intermeeting period.  Most of the decline in yields was concentrated
in one-year forward rates ending in two to three years, consistent with market reports
pointing to a reappraisal of the robustness of aggregate spending.  TIPS yields
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 41
generally declined somewhat less than their nominal counterparts, leaving inflation
compensation 5 to 10 basis points lower across the term structure.
(5) Broad stock price indexes were off about 2 percent on net.  Concern about
deteriorating conditions in the subprime mortgage market weighed on the valuations
of firms with significant exposures to that segment of the housing sector, and some
subprime lenders curtailed or ceased operations (see box, “Developments in the
Subprime Mortgage Market”).  However, the handful of large financial firms reporting
with a February first-quarter end—some of which were perceived to have substantial
exposure to subprime mortgages—posted solid earnings.  Yields on investment-grade
corporate bonds fell about in line with those on Treasury securities of comparable
maturity.  In contrast, yields on speculative-grade bonds declined only modestly,
leaving risk spreads nearly 40 basis points wider, but still low by historical standards.
Corporate credit quality remained strong, with default rates staying low.
(6) The foreign exchange value of the dollar dropped 1¼ percent against a
trade-weighted index of major foreign currencies but was little changed against an
index of currencies of other important U.S. trading partners (Chart 3).  Market
participants reportedly reacted to indications of somewhat softer growth in the United
States and continued firmer expansion in key foreign countries.  Both the Bank of
Japan and the European Central Bank raised their policy rates 25 basis points during
the period.2  Since the January FOMC meeting, the dollar has dropped more than
3 percent versus the yen, about 2 percent against the euro, and only slightly against the
Canadian dollar.  Currencies linked to the funding leg of the carry trade, particularly
the yen and the Swiss franc, appeared to be most affected by the market turbulence in
the week of February 27, and volatilities in yen-dollar trading remained somewhat
above the low levels that prevailed earlier in the period (see box, “Risk and Return on 
                                           
2
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 41
ExtenExad fall Developments in the Subprime Mortgage Market
 
Despite generally benign macroeconomic conditions, delinquencies on subprime variable-rate 
mortgages—shown in the left panel below—rose sharply in 2006 as some borrowers faced large 
upward adjustments to their monthly payments and house prices stalled or, in some areas, declined.  
Subprime mortgages originated in 2006 are performing especially poorly this year, consistent with 
reports that lenders loosened underwriting standards last year amid strong competition.  Originators 
who had sold subprime mortgages to securitizers have in many cases been contractually obligated to 
buy back the loans that became delinquent shortly after origination.  Difficulties in funding these 
repurchases, as well as generally weaker mortgage demand, have led a number of monoline 
subprime lenders to file for bankruptcy in recent months and others to withdraw from the market.  
Stock prices of major subprime lenders have dropped markedly in recent weeks. 
 
Reflecting these events as well as fears that the recent trend will continue or even worsen, spreads 
on indexes of credit default swaps (CDS) written on pools of subprime mortgages have widened 
dramatically since last November.  These indexes started trading in January of last year, and a new 
index vintage is created every six months to track the performance of CDS written on subprime 
mortgages originated in the previous six months.  Thus, for example, the January 2007 vintage of 
the index references CDS on mortgages originated in the second half of 2006.  Each index is divided 
into five segments (AAA, AA, A, BBB, and BBB-) that are designed to mimic the performance of 
corresponding tranches of subprime residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS).  As shown in 
the panel at the right, index spreads for CDS on mortgages originated in 2006—the July 2006 and 
the January 2007 vintages—have widened much more than index spreads for CDS on mortgages 
originated in the second half of 2005—the January 2006 vintage.  Bid-asked spreads on these index 
products have reportedly jumped in recent weeks, as demand has been predominantly on the 
protection-buying side.   
 
Issuance of subprime RMBS continued to slow in the first two months of 2007, and spreads on 
newly issued BBB- tranches have risen this year from about 300 to about 700 basis points.  Buyers 
of subprime RMBS have increased their scrutiny of the underlying loans, and investment banks are 
finding it more difficult to securitize some of the riskiest mortgages.  In early March, bank 
supervisors issued for comment expanded guidance to address safety and soundness and consumer 
protection issues that stem from some types of subprime mortgage lending.  In response to this 
pressure from buyers and regulators alike, originators are reportedly tightening their standards for 
subprime loans.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 41
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Jan. FOMC
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields (Nominal)
Jan. FOMC
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Industrial Countries
Jan. FOMC
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock Price Indexes
Emerging Market Economies
Jan. FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 41
ExtenExad fall Risk and Return on Japanese Yen Carry Trades 
 
Even before the recent period of heightened financial market volatility, the business press and Wall 
Street commentators had focused considerable attention on “carry trades” as a source of potential 
risk in global financial markets.  In the generic example of such a trade, funds borrowed in a low-
interest-rate currency, such as the Japanese yen or the Swiss franc, are invested in a high-interest-rate 
currency, such as the Australian, New Zealand, or U.S. dollars, or various emerging market 
currencies.  Note that a carry trade exposes the investor to exchange rate fluctuations and is 
therefore not a riskless arbitrage. 
 
Indeed, some market participants who had engaged in yen-funded carry trades the week of 
February 27 sustained substantial losses.  That week’s return from one popular trade—borrowing 
Japanese yen at one-week LIBOR denominated in yen and lending Australian dollars at the 
corresponding one-week rate for Australian dollars—was about -4.5 percent, the ninth worst weekly 
return over a sample beginning in mid-December 1997.  Borrowing yen and lending other 
currencies against which the yen appreciated more sharply would have produced even less favorable 
results, and to compound some investors’ difficulties, global stock indexes and the prices of many 
other risky assets tumbled that week.   
 
Nonetheless, analyses of historical returns over a longer term suggest that, on average at least, the 
strategy generally appears to have favorable risk, return, and covariance characteristics.  The 
distribution of returns on a very simple application of the strategy—the yen/Australian dollar 
example discussed previously—has been fairly symmetric rather than particularly negatively skewed, 
as shown to the lower left.  Over this sample, the average carry-trade return is roughly equal to the 
mean interest rate differential, and the Sharpe ratio of the strategy (the mean return divided by the 
standard deviation) compares favorably with other broad asset classes.  In addition, although the 
week of February 27 was an exception, carry-trade returns have had a very low correlation with 
most other asset returns, which suggests that the strategy might actually enhance portfolio 
diversification.  Indeed, investors likely conduct carry trades within a broader set of strategies.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 41
Japanese Yen Carry Trades”).  The Australian dollar, the New Zealand dollar, and
some emerging-market currencies, which have been prominent lately in the
investment leg of the carry trade, registered sharp downdrafts during the recent spate
of volatility.
(7) The announcement in late February by Chinese authorities of steps to
curtail illegal stock trading and subsequent rumors of additional measures to control
speculation provoked a sharp decline in Chinese equity prices in the week of February
global stock prices steadied briefly thereafter, they have declined further on balance in
recent days, and most headline stock price indexes are down 1 to 5 percent over the
intermeeting period.  The global shift away from risky assets likely also contributed to
the widening of spreads on emerging-market bonds and to declines of about 10 to
20 basis points in yields on long-term government bonds in industrial countries.
(8) Borrowing by businesses, households, and state and local governments
appears to be slowing somewhat in the current quarter (Chart 4).  Nonfinancial
corporate debt, which expanded at an 11 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of
2006, is projected to moderate to an 8 percent pace this quarter as merger and
acquisition financing steps down.  Business debt growth slowed in January, but picked
back up in February; on average, business borrowing remained solid by historical
standards.  Despite the recent turmoil in financial markets, funding in the corporate
bond and syndicated loan markets appears to have remained ample.  In the household
sector, mortgage debt growth dropped to a 6½ percent rate in the fourth quarter and
is expected to edge down a bit further to a 6 percent pace in the first quarter, with the
slowing in large part associated with the cooling in home price appreciation.
Consumer credit growth in the first quarter is projected to remain at a moderate rate
of 4¾ percent, the same as its average in 2006.  In contrast to the slower expansion of
debt in the private sector, federal debt is estimated to be accelerating, putting total
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 41
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Debt of Nonfinancial Sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
p Projected.
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of Debt of
Nonfinancial Business
2005 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Jan Feb
2006 2007
Monthly rate
Growth of Debt of Household Sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of House Prices
Percent
OFHEO Purchase-Only Index (s.a.)
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
2005 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Jan Feb
2006 2007
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 41
debt of the domestic nonfinancial sectors on track for a 7¾ percent annual growth
pace this quarter, about the same as last quarter.
(9) M2 growth slowed in February after four months of very strong advances.
The growth of liquid deposits, by far the largest portion of M2, moderated to
4 percent from its outsized fourth-quarter pace.  Retail money funds and small time
deposits also had been expanding rapidly through the end of last year, but have
decelerated as their rates of return became relatively less attractive.  The currency
component of M2 was essentially flat over the past two months.  Domestic demand
for currency has likely expanded at a modest pace, while international demand for
U.S. currency has continued to fall off in light of improving economic and political
stability abroad as well as an apparent expansion of the use of euro banknotes as a
store of value.  Taken as a whole, the level of M2 remains significantly higher than
would be indicated by the long-run relationship between velocity and the opportunity
cost of M2.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 41
Economic Outlook through 2008
(10) The staff has read weaker-than-expected incoming data, higher spot and
futures prices for oil, lower equity prices, and increasing strains in the subprime
mortgage sector as reasons to mark down its projection for real growth.  Real GDP is
projected to grow at a 1½ percent rate during the current quarter; the sluggish growth
primarily reflects the ongoing adjustment in the housing sector and a partial reversal
of last quarter’s large improvement in net exports.  The staff expects that real GDP
growth will pick up to 2¼ percent during the remainder of the forecast period as the
housing adjustment moves toward completion.  This pace of expansion would be
somewhat below the staff’s estimate of potential growth, which averages a bit above
2½ percent, so the unemployment rate is projected to climb above 5 percent by the
end of 2008.  The increase in energy prices since January led the staff to revise up its
forecast for headline PCE inflation during the first half of this year.  As in January,
however, the staff sees core PCE inflation edging down from just under 2¼ percent
in 2007 to 2 percent during 2008.  Against this backdrop, the forecast assumes that
the Committee will cut the target federal funds rate to 5 percent in the middle of
2008, whereas no such easing was assumed in January.  The Greenbook forecast is
again predicated on broad U.S. equity price indexes rising at a rate of 6½ percent,
albeit from a somewhat lower level than at the time of the January FOMC meeting.
Long-term Treasury yields are assumed to rise about 25 basis points as market
participants gradually conclude that policy will not be eased as quickly as they
currently expect.  The dollar is projected to depreciate very slightly against foreign
currencies.  The path of oil prices has been raised about $5 per barrel relative to the
previous Greenbook.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 41
Medium-Term Strategies
(11) To shed additional light on the economic outlook and possible monetary
policy strategies at a longer horizon, the FRB/US model was used to construct
an illustrative extension of the Greenbook forecast beyond 2008, based on a set of
medium-term assumptions together with some judgmental adjustments.  Important
influences on the outlook include the assumptions of trend multifactor productivity
growth at about 1¾ percent per year, approximately flat energy prices, and a pickup
in the pace of depreciation of the real foreign exchange value of the dollar to an
average rate of 3 percent per year.  Given the impetus to inflation from dollar
depreciation, the unemployment rate would need to be a bit above the staff’s assumed
long-run NAIRU of 5 percent to keep core PCE inflation stable at around
2 percent—the inflation rate consistent, in the staff’s estimation, with recent survey
measures of long-run inflation expectations.  The contours of aggregate demand are
influenced by the unified federal budget deficit, which rises from 1¾ percent of GDP
next year to about 2½ percent by 2012, and by the current account deficit, which
widens slightly to nearly 7 percent of GDP in 2012 despite depreciation of the dollar
and steady growth abroad.  Further assuming that term, credit, and equity risk
premiums gradually revert to historical norms, the real federal funds rate would need
to move below 2 percent by 2012 to keep output expanding along the path of its
(12) As shown in Chart 5, the current level of the real funds rate, 3 percent, is
a touch higher than the Greenbook-consistent estimate of short-run r*—the value
of the real federal funds rate that would put the level of real GDP at its potential
twelve quarters ahead—and about 50 basis points higher than the three model-based
estimates of short-run r*.  The Greenbook-consistent measure has been marked down
about 40 basis points relative to the previous Bluebook in response to incoming data
pointing to somewhat weaker business fixed investment as well as a lower path
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 41
Chart 5
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
8
Percent
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval
90 percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.4 2.4
   Small structural model 2.4 2.4
   Large model (FRB/US) 2.4 2.6
   Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (0.9 - 3.8(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.1 - 4.7(
Greenbook-consistent measure 2.9 3.3
Medium-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.3 2.3
   Small structural model 2.2 2.3
   Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.4 - 3.2(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.8 - 3.8(
TIPS-based factor model 2.1 2.1
Memo
   Actual real federal funds rate 3.0 3.0
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 41
of residential expenditures due to the recent rise in energy prices, the decline
in stock market wealth, and problems in the subprime mortgage sector.  The model-
based estimates of medium-run r*—the value of the real funds rate consistent with
keeping output at potential at a seven-year horizon—are both close to 2¼ percent,
just above the TIPS-based measure of about 2 percent.
(13) Outcomes obtained from optimal control simulations of the FRB/US
model, shown in Chart 6, are importantly influenced by the somewhat weaker outlook
for aggregate demand and slightly greater inflation pressures anticipated through the
end of the decade.  In these simulations, policymakers are assumed to place equal
weight on three stabilization objectives:  keeping core PCE inflation close to a
specified goal of either 1½ or 2 percent, keeping unemployment close to the long-run
NAIRU, and avoiding changes in the nominal funds rate.3  With policy aiming at
an inflation goal of 2 percent (the right-hand set of charts), the optimal path of the
federal funds rate over the next few years is about ¼ percentage point lower than
in the January Bluebook—reflecting the softer near-term outlook for aggregate
demand—but levels off at the same plateau of about 4 percent.  Given the slight
increase in inflation pressures, the optimal policy does not completely offset the
decline in aggregate demand; as a result, the unemployment rate and core inflation
over the next few years are both a touch higher than in January.  Similarly, with
an inflation goal of 1½ percent (the left-hand set of charts), the optimal funds rate
follows a trajectory over the next several years that is roughly ¼ percentage point
lower than in the previous Bluebook.  In this case, the unemployment rate peaks at
about 5½ percent early in the next decade while core inflation declines very slowly
to about 1.8 percent by 2012.  The pace of this disinflation primarily reflects the slow
adjustment of wage and price setters’ long-run inflation expectations, which in turn 
                                           
3 It is also assumed that policymakers and participants in financial markets understand fully 
the forces shaping the economic outlook whereas the expectations of households and firms 
are formed using more limited information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 41
owes to the gradual evolution of their perceptions of policymakers’ inflation goal
(see box on “Inflation Expectations and Optimal Control Policies”).
(14) The upper panels of Chart 7 depict model- and market-based assessments
of the policy outlook through the end of 2012.  In the absence of shocks, the
outcome-based rule prescribes a funds rate path that declines gradually—though
slightly faster than in the January Bluebook—to about 4 percent by the end of 2012.
Stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model indicate a 70 percent probability that
the prescriptions of the outcome-based rule will fall in a range of 2½ to 6¼ percent
during 2012.  Information from at-the-money interest rate caps also indicates
considerable uncertainty in financial markets regarding the prospective path of
policy at longer horizons.
(15) The lower portion of Chart 7 reports near-term prescriptions of simple
policy rules embedding an inflation goal of either 1½ or 2 percent.  The rule proposed
by Taylor (1999) calls for a funds rate of about 4½ to 5 percent for the current
quarter, whereas a funds rate of about 5½ percent is stipulated by a variant of that
rule incorporating a higher value of r*.  In each of these cases, the rule is consistent
with a downward-sloping path of the federal funds rate going forward, with a cut
next quarter of about 25 basis points.  In contrast to the Taylor rules, the first-
difference rule—which does not require estimates of the levels of the output gap
or the equilibrium real interest rate—prescribes setting the nominal federal funds
rate at about 5½ percent if the inflation goal is 1½ percent or at about 5 percent if
the inflation goal is 2 percent.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 41
Inflation Expectations and Optimal Control Policies1
For an inflation goal of 1½ percent, the optimal control policy  
shown in Chart 6 is associated with glacial convergence of actual 
inflation toward the goal.  This feature does not primarily reflect  
the specification of short-run wage and price dynamics in the 
FRB/US model, but rather the slow adjustment of the long-run 
inflation expectations of wage and price setters.  Those agents’ 
expectations—which are determined by their understanding of the 
inflation goal specified by policymakers—decline from a current  
level of around 2 percent toward the true goal at a pace calibrated  
to approximate the empirical behavior of survey measures of  
long-run inflation expectations.  To highlight the role of this  
aspect of inflation expectations in shaping optimal policy, this  
box compares the benchmark specification with two alternative 
assumptions regarding the evolution of public perceptions of 
policymakers’ inflation goal. 
 
In the benchmark specification of the FRB/US model (the solid line  
in each panel to the right), it is assumed that wage and price setters 
gradually update their beliefs about the inflation goal in response to 
actual inflation outcomes.  As a result, policymakers need to tighten 
policy substantially in order to elevate the unemployment rate and 
generate sufficient downward pressure on actual inflation.  In this 
scenario, long-run inflation expectations (not shown) decline by 
only about ¼ percentage point through 2012.  
 
In contrast, in the case of immediate recognition, wage and price setters 
are assumed to perceive the 1½ percent inflation goal starting in  
the current quarter (dashed red lines).  In this scenario, core inflation 
declines rapidly and approaches the goal by the end of 2008, while  
the unemployment rate remains close to its natural rate over the  
next few years.2  
 
In the final scenario—learning from policy actions—wage and price  
setters infer the inflation goal from surprises in policymakers’ 
setting of the federal funds rate (dotted blue lines).  In this case, 
policymakers signal their commitment to a disinflation through  
a substantial initial increase in the funds rate, which pushes the 
unemployment rate about ¼ percentage point above its natural rate  
later this decade.  As a result, long-run inflation expectations  
decline more rapidly than in the benchmark specification, and  
core inflation converges to the 1½ percent goal by 2012.  ______________________________ 
1 This box draws on the analysis provided in the memo to the  
Committee by David Reifschneider and Robert Tetlow, “FRB/US Inflation 
Dynamics, Policy Credibility, and Bluebook Optimal Control Simulations,” 
March 8, 2007. 
2 In principle, the speed of disinflation could be influenced by the baseline 
assumption that agents do not form model-consistent expectations but 
instead generate forecasts based on a small-scale VAR. However, the memo 
reports roughly identical simulation paths under these two alternative 
approaches, conditional on the same credibility of monetary policy.
6.5
Percent
Federal funds rate
6.0
Percent
Unemployment rate
3.0
Percent
Core PCE inflation
Four-quarter average
Benchmark specification
Immediate recognition
    of    π    * = 1.5
Learning from policy
    actions
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 41
Monetary Policy Alternatives
(16) This Bluebook presents three policy alternatives, summarized in Table 1, as
a starting point for the Committee’s deliberations.  Under Alternative A, the
Committee would lower the intended federal funds rate 25 basis points, to 5 percent.
Alternative B would leave the target for the federal funds rate unchanged.  Under
Alternative C, the Committee would tighten policy 25 basis points, bringing the target
to 5½ percent.  The statement associated with Alternative A mentions factors that
suggest upside risks to inflation and retains the phrase “some inflation risks remain;”
it also mentions factors that suggest downside risks to growth and offers an explicit
assessment that the risks to growth are tilted to the downside.  In addition, Alternative
A replaces the phrase “the extent and timing of any additional firming” with the more
general “future policy adjustments.”  Alternative B, too, notes factors that suggest
downside risks to growth as well as factors that suggest upside risks to inflation, but
states explicitly that the risk that inflation will fail to moderate remains the
Committee’s principal concern.  Alternative B also adopts more symmetric language
regarding future policy adjustments.  Language for Alternative C not only states that
the risk that inflation will fail to moderate remains the Committee’s predominant
concern, it does not mention downside risks to growth and retains directional
language referring to “the extent and timing of any additional firming.”  With the
report on consumer prices in February to be released on Friday, after the Bluebook
closes, the rationale portion of Alternative B includes language in brackets that may be
appropriate if inflation is disappointingly high.
(17) In the staff’s analysis, the real federal funds rate is essentially equal to the
Greenbook-consistent estimate of its equilibrium value (Chart 5), suggesting that the
current stance of policy likely would be consistent with closing the small estimated
output gap over the next several years.  Moreover, the current target for the funds rate
is very close to prescriptions for near-term policy from the optimal policy path
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 41
Table 1: Alternative Language for the March 2007 FOMC Announcement
January FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for the 
federal funds rate 25 basis points to 
5 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 
5½ percent.
The economy seems likely to expand at 
a moderate pace over coming quarters, 
supported in part by gains in personal 
income and consumer spending.  
However, sluggish business investment 
and ongoing weakness in the housing 
sector likely will exert a drag on growth.
Despite the ongoing adjustment in the 
housing sector, the economy seems 
likely to continue to expand at a 
moderate pace over coming quarters, 
supported in part by gains in personal 
income and consumer spending.
The economy appears to be expanding 
at a moderate pace and likely will 
continue to do so in coming quarters, 
supported in part by solid gains in 
personal income and consumer 
spending.
Rationale 
3.  Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly in recent months, 
and inflation pressures seem likely to 
moderate over time.  However, the 
high level of resource utilization has 
the potential to sustain inflation 
pressures.
Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly in recent months, 
and inflation pressures seem likely to 
moderate over time.  However, the 
high level of resource utilization has the 
potential to sustain inflation pressures.
Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly in recent months, 
and inflation pressures seem likely to 
moderate over time. [Or:  Readings on 
core inflation have been somewhat 
elevated.  Inflation pressures seem likely 
to moderate over time.]  However, the 
high level of resource utilization has the 
potential to sustain inflation pressures.
Core inflation remains somewhat 
elevated.  Inflation pressures seem 
likely to moderate over time, but 
considerable uncertainty surrounds 
that judgment.  Moreover, the high 
level of resource utilization has the 
potential to sustain inflation pressures.
Assessment of 
Risk
The Committee judges that the risks to 
growth are tilted to the downside, even 
after this policy action.  However, 
upside risks to inflation remain. Future 
policy adjustments will depend on the 
evolution of the outlook for both 
inflation and economic growth, as 
implied by incoming information.
In these circumstances, the Committee’s 
principal policy concern remains the 
risk that inflation will fail to moderate as 
expected.  Future policy adjustments 
will depend on the evolution of the 
outlook for both inflation and 
economic growth, as implied by 
incoming information.
In these circumstances, the 
Committee’s predominant policy 
concern remains the risk that inflation 
will fail to moderate as expected.  The 
extent and timing of any additional 
firming that may be needed to address 
this risk will depend on the evolution 
of the outlook for both inflation and 
economic growth, as implied by 
incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 41
simulations of the FRB/US model for a 2 percent inflation goal (Chart 6).  If the
Committee sees the combination of gradual convergence to potential output and a
2 percent inflation rate by the end of 2008 as a reasonable and desirable outcome,
given current conditions, it might favor no change in policy, as in Alternative B.  In
that regard, the central tendency of the forecasts submitted by the Governors and
Reserve Bank presidents around the time of the January FOMC meeting suggested
that the Committee was more optimistic than the staff about potential output,
perhaps implying that keeping the funds rate constant is likely to generate both brisker
growth and a larger decline in core inflation than the staff projects.  Although
members may think that dislocations in the subprime mortgage market will reduce
funding for home purchases in that sector, tending to deepen the slide in housing
construction, they may also be of the view that the drop in market yields in recent
weeks will mean lower mortgage rates for prime borrowers going forward, perhaps
spurring an earlier recovery in construction and sales of new homes.  Given these
potentially offsetting forces, the Committee may be inclined to wait for more
information on consumer spending and housing demand before adjusting the stance
of policy.
(18) The language associated with Alternative B could point to gains in personal
income and consumer spending as helping to sustain output in the face of weakness
in housing and business investment.  If the Committee’s view on inflation has not
changed appreciably of late, it could choose to repeat the backward-looking language
that “readings on core inflation have improved modestly in recent months” along
with the forward-looking language that “inflation pressures seem likely to moderate
over time” and the qualification that high resource utilization could sustain inflation
pressures.   The assessment of risk language for Alternative B contains no explicit
judgment about the balance of risks.  However, by stating that the risk that inflation
will fail to moderate as expected remains its principal policy concern, the Committee
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 41
would implicitly acknowledge risks to growth.  The proposed wording in Alternative
B replaces the reference to “additional firming” that was in the January statement with
a balanced characterization of “future policy adjustments,” thereby removing the
presumption that the next change in policy will be a tightening and providing greater
policy flexibility going forward.
(19) Although economic and financial news during the intermeeting period
increased the perceived probability of a cut in the funds rate later this year, market
participants continue to see no chance of easing at this meeting.  Market commentary
and surveys also suggest that participants would not be surprised if the statement were
to recognize downside risks to growth, but they see a lesser chance of a change in the
“tilt” in the assessment of risks.  Thus, pointing to a “principal concern” might be
read as a more forceful assertion than the wording in January’s statement.  Dropping
the reference to “additional firming” from the risk assessment should convey more
balanced odds on the direction of future policy changes and thus weigh against that
reading.  On balance, the language for Alternative B seems likely to elicit little
reaction, but with markets apparently skittish, this judgment should be viewed as
more tentative than usual.
(20) In contrast to the fairly benign scenario described in the staff forecast, the
Committee might be concerned that widening disruptions in the subprime market
point to greater weakness in housing and that lower equity prices will slow the growth
of consumer spending.  The Committee also might see recent economic data as
indicating that weakness has spread from housing and motor vehicles to other goods-
producing sectors, perhaps along the lines of the “weak investment” alternative in the
Greenbook.  If so, members might prefer the quarter-point policy easing in
Alternative A.  This alternative offers an explicit judgment that risks to growth would
remain tilted to the downside even after this policy action, thereby conveying greater
concern about those risks than Alternative B.  At the same time, it would continue to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 41
point to upside risks to inflation.  Members who consider 2 percent inflation an
appropriate goal might note that most of the policy rules shown in Chart 7 point to a
reduction in the target funds rate in the second quarter.
(21) The rationale for Alternative A points to sluggish business investment and
ongoing weakness in housing as likely to exert a drag on growth, thus supporting a
judgment that risks to growth remain tilted to the downside even after a quarter-
point rate cut.  By also pointing to remaining inflation risks and adopting a symmetric
characterization of possible future adjustments in the policy rate, the assessment of
risk in Alternative A is meant to convey that this policy action will not necessarily
commence a sequence of rate cuts.
(22) Although investors apparently expect the Committee to begin easing by
mid-year, the immediate quarter-point rate cut envisioned in Alternative A would be a
considerable surprise and likely would lead to a significant easing of financial
conditions.  Long-term yields might follow short-term rates down if markets conclude
that the Committee believes that prospects for growth have weakened appreciably,
reducing the equilibrium real interest rate consistent with sustainable growth.  The
drop in longer-term yields could be small if markets conclude that the Committee is
easing sooner than expected but will not cut rates more over the next few years than
is already incorporated in financial quotes.  But markets might read an announcement
along the lines of Alternative A as an indication that the Committee is willing to
forego a medium-term moderation in inflation in order to sustain economic growth.
In that case, measures of inflation compensation might rise.
(23) Though much of the market commentary during the intermeeting period
focused on developments pointing to weaker-than-expected growth, the Committee
might see the recent data releases as only a bit weaker than expected and judge that
the fallout from developments in the subprime mortgage sector will be limited,
perhaps for the reasons given in Part I of the Greenbook.  If so, the Committee might
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 41
place greater weight on the step-up in core inflation in January and the recent
depreciation of the dollar.  Especially if Friday’s inflation report proves markedly
higher than expected, the Committee may be less confident than the staff that core
inflation will decline from its uncomfortably high level with no further increase in the
federal funds rate, inclining members toward the quarter-point policy firming of
Alternative C.  A judgment that tighter policy is appropriate might be buttressed by
concerns about the extent to which the labor market currently is stretched thin and
the slow pace at which those pressures lessen in the staff forecast.
(24) The rationale for Alternative C could indicate the Committee’s
fundamentally unchanged outlook for growth by stating that the economy “appears to
be expanding at a moderate pace and likely will continue to do so in coming quarters,
supported by solid growth in consumer spending” without mentioning areas of
weakness.  The rationale could emphasize the Committee’s discomfort with inflation
by stating not only that “core inflation remains somewhat elevated,” but also that
“considerable uncertainty surrounds” the judgment that inflation will moderate and
that “the high level of resource utilization has the potential to sustain inflation
pressures.”  If the Committee wished to make clear that the 25 basis point increase in
the funds rate did not entirely assuage its concern about inflation risks, the Committee
could replace the first sentence of January’s assessment of risk with language stating
that “the Committee’s predominant policy concern remains the risk that inflation will
fail to moderate as expected” while retaining the second sentence.
(25) A decision to adopt Alternative C would come as a complete surprise to the
financial markets, likely leading to a sharp upward revision of investors’ expectations
for the federal funds rate over the next few quarters and thus an increase in short-
term interest rates.  Longer-term rates might also jump if market participants were to
conclude that the inflation outlook is less benign than they had thought and that
short-term real rates will have to be persistently higher to keep inflation contained.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 41
Upward pressure on long-term rates would be lessened if investors conclude that the
FOMC’s focus on reducing inflation will mean faster progress toward price stability.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(26) Under the Greenbook baseline, M2 is expected to grow about 5¼ percent
in 2007 and 5 percent in 2008, a touch slower on average than in the January forecast,
consistent with the modest downward revision in nominal GDP growth in the staff
forecast.  The opportunity cost of holding M2 edges down this year as deposit rates
continue to catch up to earlier increases in short-term interest rates.  As a result, M2 is
projected to grow a bit faster than nominal income.  In the forecast, liquid deposits
expand moderately and rapid growth in retail money funds offsets more sluggish
growth in small time deposits.  Currency growth, however, continues to be restrained
by weak foreign demand.
(27) The growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to fall from
nearly 8 percent last year to 6½ percent in 2007 and 6 percent in 2008.  In the
household sector, nearly flat housing prices likely will dampen mortgage borrowing
over the forecast horizon.  Corporate debt is also projected to slow somewhat, as the
recent strong pace of merger-related debt issuance ebbs.  With the unified budget
deficit expected to widen, federal debt growth is projected to step up this year and
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 41
25 bp Easing No Change 25 bp Tightening Greenbook Forecast*
Monthly Growth Rates
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Table 2
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 41
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
(28) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around _______________ 5¼ percent.
Risk Assessments
A. The Committee judges that the risks to growth are tilted to the
downside, even after this policy action.  However, upside risks to
inflation remain.  Future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution
of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by
incoming information.
B. In these circumstances, the Committee’s principal policy concern
remains the risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected.  Future
policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
C. In these circumstances, the Committee’s predominant policy concern
remains the risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected.  The
extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to
address this risk will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 41
