Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Content last modified 03/07/2014.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
APRIL 24, 2008
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 24, 2008
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Over the intermeeting period, conditions in financial markets generally
improved but nonetheless remained strained.  Many indicators of financial stress
spiked in the days immediately before and after the March FOMC meeting amid a
widespread flight to quality and liquidity.1  However, stresses subsequently eased in
the wake of the FOMC’s policy action and the Federal Reserve’s extraordinary
measures to boost liquidity, which helped to calm fears of a worsening of the
crisis.  Equity prices rose considerably.  Investment-grade bond spreads moved a
bit lower and speculative-grade credit spreads declined more substantially.  Bid
prices in the secondary market for leveraged loans recovered somewhat.
Investment-grade bond issuance held up well.  Treasury cash and repo market
functioning improved.  However, spreads in interbank term funding markets
increased, approaching their December highs, and commercial paper (CP) spreads
also widened.  Banks reported further tightening of terms and standards across a
range of loan categories in the most recent Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.
Spreads of rates on conforming mortgage products over those on comparable-
maturity Treasury securities narrowed somewhat but remained high.  Although
issuance of agency residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) continued to be
strong, issuance of non-agency RMBS and commercial mortgage-backed securities 
                                           
1 Unless otherwise noted, intermeeting changes in U.S. asset prices and yields are calculated 
under the normal practice of using the closing prices on the day before the previous FOMC 
meeting and on Bluebook publication day.  In cases for which sharp movements close to the 
March FOMC meeting make this convention potentially misleading, we provide greater 
detail on price developments.
(CMBS) remained close to nil.  Against this backdrop, market participants
significantly revised upward the expected path for the federal funds rate and
currently price in only a 10 percent chance of a cut of more than 25 basis points at
the upcoming FOMC meeting.
Monetary Policy Expectations and Treasury Yields
(2) The 75 basis point cut in the target federal funds rate in March was
somewhat smaller than markets had expected; near-dated federal funds futures
rates rose 10 to 15 basis points on the announcement.2  Market reports also
pointed to the two dissenting votes and to FOMC statement language conveying
somewhat more concern about inflation than had been expected as factors
contributing to an increase in the expected future path of interest rates.  The
Chairman’s testimony on April 2 was viewed as somewhat more optimistic about
the outlook for economic growth than markets had expected, and rates edged up
further that day.  Indicators of economic activity and inflation were mixed over the
intermeeting period, but overall they were apparently viewed in markets as a bit
stronger than expected.  Investors appeared to mark down the odds on an adverse
tail event in the near future.  Market participants now expect the federal funds rate
to decline to about 1.95 percent by late summer, about 60 basis points higher than
at the time of the March meeting, before rising to 3 percent by the end of 2009
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 38
(Chart 1).3  Judging from options on federal funds futures, investors place about
two-thirds odds on a 25 basis point cut at the upcoming FOMC meeting, with
most of the remaining probability on no move.  Investors see high odds on rates
being left unchanged at the June FOMC meeting, and the market-based probability
of reaching very low interest rates in the next six months has declined significantly.
The Desk’s survey of primary dealers also indicates that a 25 basis point cut is the
most likely outcome at the April meeting, but dealers place somewhat higher odds
on a 50 basis point cut than is implied by market quotes.  Also in contrast to
options prices, dealers place significant odds on cuts at the June and August
FOMC meetings and do not anticipate a shift to tighter policy until 2009.
(3) Yields on Treasury securities declined in the days immediately preceding
the March FOMC meeting, most notably on shorter-maturity instruments.  Yields
have since rebounded sharply, with 2- and 10-year yields climbing 95 and 50 basis
points, respectively, over the intermeeting period.  These increases are consistent
with both the higher expected path for policy and an easing of investor demands
for safety and liquidity.  Conditions in the Treasury coupon market had
deteriorated markedly around the time of the March FOMC meeting, as bid-asked
spreads widened and shorter-term yields plunged.  Although those conditions have
since improved, liquidity remains somewhat impaired relative to historical
averages.  In the TIPS market, the yield on 10-year issues rose in line with its
nominal counterpart.  Inflation compensation derived from TIPS was very volatile
around the time of the March FOMC meeting.  Over the intermeeting period, ten-
year inflation compensation was little changed on net, as a moderate increase in
inflation compensation over the next 5 years was roughly offset by a moderate
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 38
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
April 24, 2008
March 17, 2008
Expected federal funds rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Futures market*
  Desk’s survey**
<1.75_ 2.00 >2.25_
Probability density for target funds rate
after the April meeting
*Derived from options on federal funds futures.
**Survey of primary dealer economists on April 21, 2008.
Implied distribution of federal funds rate six 
months ahead*
Recent: 4/24/2008
Last FOMC: 3/17/2008
*Derived from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, with term premium 
 and other adjustments to estimate expectations for the federal funds rate.
Ten-year
Two-year
Nominal Treasury yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Mar.
FOMC
Index of inflation expectations and uncertainty*
*Measured as the first principal component of fourteen forward-looking 
inflation indicators.
Spot WTI (left scale)
Next five years (right scale)
Five-to-ten year forward (right scale)
Inflation compensation and oil prices*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
 Treasury yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Mar.
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 38
decrease in compensation from 5 to 10 years ahead.4  Compared to the levels
prevailing earlier in March, both the 5-year and 5-to-10-year forward measures of
inflation compensation have declined, as firmer policy expectations and reduced
uncertainty may have lowered inflation expectations and risk premiums.  However,
some other indicators of inflation expectations have increased in recent weeks.
The staff’s index of inflation expectations and uncertainty, distilled from a
collection of market and survey data on future inflation levels and risks, edged
above the top of its 10-year range in March and is estimated to have remained
there in April, primarily reflecting increases in the Michigan survey of inflation
expectations at both short and long horizons.
Money Markets
(4) The overnight Treasury general collateral (GC) repo rate plummeted on
the day of the March FOMC meeting and hit a low of 20 basis points for several
days thereafter, as investors exhibited a strong preference for Treasury securities
over other collateral (Chart 2).  The overnight GC repo rate recovered to near the
federal funds target immediately after the first Term Securities Lending Facility
(TSLF) auction on March 27 and it has remained around that level since.  Dealer
haircuts on non-Treasury repos—which had widened significantly in the weeks
before the March FOMC meeting—edged higher on most collateral types over the
period.  (See box “Developments in Central Banks’ Liquidity Facilities.”)
(5) Spreads of interbank term funding rates over comparable-maturity
overnight index swap (OIS) rates have trended up over the intermeeting period,
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 38
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Spreads of Libor over OIS
Daily Mar.
FOMC
ABCP
A2/P2
Spreads on thirty-day commercial paper
Mar.
FOMC
Target federal funds rate
Treasury
MBS
Overnight repo rates
Source. Bloomberg
Mar.
FOMC
Banks*
Broker/dealers**
*Median spread of 23 banking organizations.
**Median spread of 10 broker-dealers.
Note. Last observation is for Apr. 23, 2008.
CDS spreads at selected financial institutions
Daily Mar.
FOMC
Wilshire
Dow Jones Financial
Equity prices
Daily Mar.
FOMC
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Ten-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate bond spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Mar.
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 38
Developments in Central Banks’ Liquidity Facilities
The Federal Reserve’s liquidity facilities appear to   have eased some of the strains in term funding 
markets.  Dislocations r emain in interbank markets, but liquidity provision to securities dealers 
seems to have satisfied a substantial portion of their need for funding.
Stress in bank funding markets, combined with the narrowing of the spread between the primary 
credit rate and the target federal funds rate, has led to substantial overnight and term borrowing 
from the primary credit facility.  Most of the borrowing institutions have used the window for their 
own funding needs, but some institutions appear to have used the window to arbitrage the market.  
Many depository institutions, however, apparently are still reluctant to access the discount window, 
and the overnight federal funds market has remained volatile, with trading frequently taking place 
above the primary credit rate, and pronounced tiering of rates across borrowers.
By contrast, depository institutions have not shied away from the Term Auction Facility (TAF).  
Demand was strong at the March and April TAF auctions; there was a large number of bidders, and 
bid-to-cover ratios were around 1.8 even with auction sizes that were increased to $50 billion.  
Indeed, the stop-out rates at the two auctions in April were well above the primary credit rate and 
near or above term Libor rates.
Borrowing under the Primary Dealer Credit Facility peaked at around $40 billion in late March and 
has since declined to around $20 billion.  The series of single-tranche term repos operations has 
cumulated to $75 billion, easing funding needs for primary dealers, especially for MBS collateral.
To maintain the overnight federal funds rate close to its target, the Desk has drained balances to 
offset the liquidity provided through the facilities described above, including outright sales of 
Treasury securities that totaled $91 billion over the intermeeting period.
Operation of the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) commenced on March 27.  Under the 
TSLF, the Desk lends Treasury securities in exchange for a substantially broader set of collateral 
than accepted in the traditional securities lending facility.  To date, there have been five TSLF 
auctions, offering between $25 billion and $75 billion each.  The April 10 and April 24 schedule 2 
auctions were undersubscribed, apparently reflecting reduced stresses for dealers in funding lower-
quality collateral.  With the increased supply of Treasuries, repo market functioning improved 
notably, Treasury general collateral repo rates rose substantially, and spreads of Treasury repo rates 
over other repo rates narrowed.
Other central banks have also provided extra liquidity to markets in both domestic currencies and 
in dollars.  The Bank of England conducted two three-month repo auctions during the intermeeting 
period and unveiled a temporary scheme that will allow U.K. banks to swap MBS backed by U.K. 
and European residential mortgages that had been issued before the end of 2007 and other asset-
backed securities in exchange for government bonds for a period of up to three years. The ECB 
and SNB drew upon their swap lines with the Fed to provide dollar funding in conjunction with 
TAF auctions.  The ECB auctioned $15 billion each on March 24, April 7, and April 21, and the 
SNB auctioned $6 billion each on March 25 and April 22.  On March 28, the ECB announced new 
long-term refinancing operations (LTROs) with a six-month maturity; the first LTRO auction on 
April 2 was met with high demand.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 38
and they are approaching the highs reached last December.5  Term funding spreads
also widened in sterling and euro despite several steps taken by foreign central
banks to ease funding pressures.  The strains in these markets apparently reflect
mounting pressures on bank balance sheets, continued uncertainty regarding the
size and distribution of losses on mortgage-related and other assets, and a general
desire on the part of financial firms to reduce leverage.  The premium on rates
paid by banks of perceived lower credit quality has increased notably in recent
(6) Spreads of rates on asset-backed, financial, and lower-rated nonfinancial
CP over the yield on higher-rated nonfinancial paper all rose in the weeks leading
up to the March FOMC meeting and they have remained elevated since then.
However, with the yield on higher-rated paper moving down as a result of policy
easing, most CP rates are down significantly from last year.  The level of
outstanding unsecured CP have shown little trend in recent months.  The amount
of outstanding asset-backed CP continued to decline gradually in the United States
and Europe.
Capital Markets
(7) Broad equity price indexes were volatile at times but rose about 9
percent on net over the intermeeting period.  Financial sector stocks outperformed
the broad indexes.  First-quarter results at large financial firms were generally poor
but roughly in line with market expectations.  However, steps announced by some
firms to raise new capital and to dispose of troubled assets encouraged investors
and may have reduced concerns about possible failures of important institutions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 38
Outside of the financial sector, first-quarter earnings reports have been quite solid
over the intermeeting period.  The spread between the twelve-month forward
trend earnings-price ratio for S&P 500 firms and the real long-term Treasury
yield—a rough gauge of the equity risk premium—has edged down in recent
weeks but remains near the upper end of its range over the past two decades.
Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index declined substantially, and, while
still above its range in recent years, it is now near its longer-term average.
(8) Yields on investment-grade corporate bonds rose less than comparable-
maturity Treasury yields, implying some narrowing of spreads from recent high
levels.  For speculative-grade bonds, yields actually fell, leaving spreads down
notably from the peaks reached around the time of the March FOMC meeting.
Credit default swap (CDS) spreads were also down, most notably for large banks
and broker-dealers.  However, the median CDS spread of a group of regional
banks, which jumped last month, in part on concerns about deteriorating asset
quality, has not fallen back.  Issuance of investment-grade bonds continued to be
robust in March and the first half of April.  After a few months of near-zero
issuance, speculative-grade bond issuance has picked up slightly of late.  Leveraged
loan issuance weakened further in the first quarter.  However, secondary market
bid prices for the most liquid loans extended their rebound from February lows,
reflecting improved market sentiment as banks reduced their backlogs of
underwritten deals (Chart 3).  Similarly, implied spreads on the LCDX indexes
dropped considerably.  Implied volatility in the CDS market remain higher than
(9)     Concerns about the impact of stresses at financial guarantors on the
municipal bond market appear to have diminished in recent months.  Ratios of
municipal bond yields to comparable-maturity Treasury yields eased somewhat in
April after spiking last month, but remain quite high.  Recently, the state of
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 38
Chart 3
Asset Market Developments
Average bid price on most liquid leveraged loans
Mar.
FOMC
Twenty-year
One-year
Municipal bond yield ratios
Mar.
FOMC
Growth of house prices
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
OFHEO Purchase-Only Index
p Projected.
FRM
One-Year ARM
Mortgage rate spreads
Mar.
FOMC
Fannie Mae
Ginnie Mae
Agency option-adjusted spreads
Mar.
FOMC
AAA    
BBB
Ten-year investment grade CMBS spreads
Mar.
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 38
California announced that it would no longer seek insurance for its bonds from
financial guarantors.  Issuance of long-term municipal bonds was very strong in
March and that strength appears to have carried into April.  Some of this issuance
reflected the refinancing of auction rate securities (ARS) whose auctions failed
earlier this year.  The troubles in the ARS market have also damped funding for
student loans.  In addition, the student loan market has been affected by a
tightening of government-mandated lending terms and a general aversion to
structured finance products.  Lenders accounting for more than 10 percent of the
volume of government-guaranteed student lending have exited the market, and
other large originators announced that they would curtail lending to students
attending schools with poorer repayment records.
(10) Interest rates on 30-year fixed-rate conforming mortgages, which had
shot up in February, declined significantly in the days before the March FOMC
meeting.  Over the intermeeting period these rates remained fairly steady.  Posted
offer rates on 30-year jumbo mortgages have declined slightly on balance since the
March FOMC meeting.  Overall, spreads between prime mortgage rates and
comparable-maturity Treasury securities narrowed substantially over the
intermeeting period, though they remain high relative to historical norms.  Option-
adjusted yield spreads on agency MBS relative to Treasury securities fell back
somewhat from their peak just before the March FOMC meeting, but they too
remain elevated.  Issuance of agency RMBS stayed strong, but issuance of private-
label RMBS backed by nonconforming loans remained very light.  Likewise,
issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) continued to be
negligible and spreads on CMBS over swaps remain at historically high levels.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 38
Foreign Developments
(11) The trade-weighted index of the exchange value of the dollar against the
major foreign currencies increased 2¼ percent over the intermeeting period (Chart
and rebounded soon afterward; it has been moving up in recent days.6  In line with
improvements in market sentiment in the United States, major headline equity
indexes in Europe and Japan ended the period up 6 to 13 percent on net.
Financial sector share prices generally rose even more, despite announcements of
further writedowns by a number of large foreign banks.  Market analysts appeared
to be focused on earnings reports by several U.S. banks and broker-dealers that
were seen as reassuring, as well as both actual and planned capital raising at some
U.S. and foreign banks.  The Bank of England and the Bank of Canada lowered
their policy interest rates during the intermeeting period by 25 and 50 basis points,
respectively, while the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan left their
policy rates unchanged.  Ten-year nominal sovereign yields were up about 15 to 45
basis points in the advanced foreign economies.
(12) The exchange value of the dollar against the currencies of our other
important trading partners fell about 1 percent over the intermeeting period, as
readings on both economic activity and financial markets held up reasonably well
in most Asian and Latin American economies.  Emerging market risk spreads
generally narrowed and most stock price indexes moved up.  A notable exception
was China, where, notwithstanding indications of continued strong economic
growth, the Shanghai equity index dropped 2 percent.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 38
Chart 4
International Financial Indicators
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal trade-weighted dollar indexes
Mar. FOMC
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-year government bond yields (nominal)
Mar. FOMC
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock price indexes
industrial countries
Mar. FOMC
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock price indexes
emerging market economies
Mar. FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 38
Debt and Money
(13) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is estimated to have expanded
at an annual rate of 5¾ percent in the first quarter, more than 2 percentage points
below last year’s rate (Chart 5).  Nonfinancial business sector debt decelerated
again in the first quarter, as growth in both C&I loans and bonds slowed.  In part,
this slowdown reflects the cooling of mergers and acquisitions and a reduction in
equity repurchases.  In the household sector, home mortgage debt and consumer
credit are estimated to have continued their recent slowdowns into the first
quarter.  Falling house prices are a major factor holding down household credit.
(14) In the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, the net percentages of
respondents that reported tightening credit standards over the past three months
increased further, and for the domestic respondents these measures are at or close
to record levels for most major loan categories.  Nonetheless, commercial bank
credit grew robustly in March, led by banks’ acquisitions of securities and strength
in business lending and residential real estate loans.  C&I loans at large banks
continued to expand smartly, as some nonfinancial firms reportedly drew on
existing lines of credit.  Consistent with these reports, the Senior Loan Officer
Opinion Survey indicated that demand for C&I loans has been bolstered by shifts
from other sources of business credit.  For the first quarter as a whole, bank credit
expanded at a moderate pace, down notably from the very rapid advance posted in
the second half of last year.
(15) M2 expanded at a robust 12½ percent annual rate in March, bringing
growth for the first quarter to a 9½ percent pace.  Retail money market funds and
liquid deposits continued to rise rapidly as investors sought safety and liquidity.  In
addition, growth of liquid deposits was boosted by recent declines in opportunity
costs.  Currency increased moderately after several quarters of very slow growth,
but most of this rebound appears to reflect difficulties in seasonal adjustment
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 38
Chart 5
Debt and Money
Growth of debt of nonfinancial sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1 e
e Estimated.
C&I loans
Commercial paper
Bonds
Changes in selected components of debt of
nonfinancial business*
Monthly rate
*Commercial paper and C&I loans are seasonally adjusted, bonds are not.
Growth of debt of household sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
e Estimated.
Consumer
credit
Home
mortgage
Net percentage of banks tightening standards
for business loans Percent
*Loans to large and medium-sized firms.
Commercial real estate
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
M2 velocity and opportunity cost
VelocityPercentage points
Opportunity cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
p Projected.
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 38
owing to an unusually early Easter.  Small time deposits contracted sharply in
March, the first decline since 2004, and the spreads of rates paid on these deposits
relative to other deposits narrowed.  These spreads had been somewhat elevated in
recent months as some institutions had been bidding aggressively for these
deposits as a funding source.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 38
Economic Outlook
(16) Incoming information has been broadly consistent with the staff’s
expectations at the time of the March Greenbook.  Consequently, the Greenbook
projection for both economic activity and inflation is little changed from March.
The staff forecast continues to be conditioned on the assumption that the target
federal funds rate is reduced to 2 percent at the April FOMC meeting and to 1¾
percent at the June meeting and is then maintained at that level through the end of
influence of the particularly low short-term interest rates expected over this period
wanes.  Equity prices start from a level about 5 percent higher than anticipated in
the previous staff forecast but otherwise follow a similar contour, increasing at an
annual rate of about 7 percent over the remainder of this year, before accelerating
to a rate of around 11½ percent in 2009 as the equity premium declines toward
more normal levels.  The trade-weighted dollar is again assumed to depreciate at an
annual rate of 3 percent over the projection period.  In line with futures quotes,
the price of WTI crude oil is expected to average around $116 per barrel through
the remainder of 2008 and $111 per barrel in 2009, about $10 per barrel higher
than in the previous Greenbook.
(17) The staff continues to judge that the economy is in recession, with real
GDP projected to contract at an annual rate of about 1½ percent in the second
quarter of this year.  Fiscal stimulus and the lagged effects of monetary policy
easing engender a shallow recovery in the latter half of 2008.  As in the March
Greenbook, the level of GDP is projected to be almost unchanged over 2008 as a
whole.  Thereafter, as the functioning of financial markets gradually improves and
the drag on demand from past increases in oil prices lessens, the recovery gathers
momentum, with GDP advancing by around 2¾ percent in 2009, about ½
percentage point faster than the staff’s estimate of the expansion in the productive
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 38
potential of the economy.  As in the March projection, the sub-par economic
growth over the next few quarters causes the unemployment rate to rise to 5¾
percent by the end of this year.  The unemployment rate edges down only slightly
during 2009 and is still around ¾ of a percentage point above the staff’s estimate
of the NAIRU at the end of next year.  Total PCE inflation is projected to remain
elevated through much of this year, boosted by increases in both energy and
nonfuel import prices.  As in March, the staff’s inflation forecast assumes that the
public’s long-term inflation expectations have moved up a little since the end of
last year.  However, the projected leveling-out of oil and other commodity prices,
combined with an anticipated deceleration in import prices and increasing slack in
labor and product markets, push headline inflation down to around 1¾ percent in
slowing from an average of 2¼ percent in 2008 to 2 percent in 2009.
(18) The Greenbook forecast has been extended beyond 2009 using the
FRB/US model with adjustments to ensure consistency with the staff’s assessment
of longer-run trends.  The extended forecast embeds several key assumptions:
Monetary policy aims to stabilize PCE inflation in the long run at a level of 1¾
percent; trend multifactor productivity grows a bit faster than 1 percent per year;
relative energy prices edge down; the real value of the dollar depreciates steadily at
about 1 percent per year; and fiscal policy is essentially neutral.  With the
unemployment rate notably above the NAIRU and core inflation running at about
tightening in monetary policy; the federal funds rate rises from less than 2 percent
on average in 2010 to 4 percent by the end of 2012.  Policy is nonetheless
sufficiently accommodative that the unemployment rate declines to 4¾ percent—
the staff’s assessment of the NAIRU—by 2012.  Under the pressure of persistent
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 38
slack, core PCE inflation edges down over time, while headline inflation stays
close to 1¾ percent.
Monetary Policy Strategies
(19) Consistent with the minor revisions to the staff’s outlook for real activity
and actual and projected financial conditions, the Greenbook-consistent estimate
of short-run r* is -0.5 percent, essentially unchanged from the March Bluebook
(Chart 6).  The FRB/US model-based estimate of short-run r* is 0.3 percent,
which is a bit higher than the current real funds rate.  The estimate of short-run r*
from the small structural model is -0.8 percent, slightly above the March estimate.
The single-equation model estimate of short-run r* is about unchanged from the
previous Bluebook.
(20) Chart 7 depicts optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model using
the long-run Greenbook forecast beyond 2009.  In these simulations, policymakers
place equal weight on keeping core PCE inflation close to a specified goal, on
keeping unemployment close to the long-run NAIRU, and on avoiding changes in
the nominal federal funds rate.7  For an inflation goal of 1½ percent (the left-hand
set of charts), the simulation prescribes a nominal federal funds rate that declines
to around 2 percent by the end of next year and then rises toward 4 percent by late
optimal funds rate falls more sharply, dipping to near 1 percent by late 2009 before
rising to about 4¼ percent by 2012.  Under either inflation goal, these
prescriptions for the funds rate, as well as the associated outcomes for the
unemployment rate, are little changed from those shown in the previous
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 38
Chart 6
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 Percent confidence interval
90 Percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
Single-equation model (2.1 (2.0
Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
Medium-Run Measures
Single-equation model (2.2 (2.2
Small structural model (1.7 (1.7
Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
Actual real federal funds rate (0.1 (0.8
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 38
Bluebook, consistent with the small revisions to the Greenbook projection.
However, the very near-term paths for the core inflation rate have been revised
down because of the transitory effects of the favorable news on non-energy prices
received since the close of the March Bluebook; core inflation is a touch higher in
more to core prices through much of next year.
(21) The outcome-based monetary policy rule prescribes a funds rate path
that moves down to 2 percent by the fourth quarter of this year, rises gradually
throughout 2009, and then stays between 2¾ and 3 percent (Chart 8).  On average
in 2008, this projection is around 30 basis points lower than the trajectory in the
March Bluebook, mostly reflecting a lower funds rate at the start of the projection.
According to financial market quotes, investors anticipate that the funds rate will
remain around 2¼ percent through the end of this year and then progressively rise
to slightly above 4 percent by the end of 2012.  This path is slightly higher than in
the previous Bluebook.  The confidence intervals obtained from stochastic
simulations of the FRB/US model indicate a substantial probability that the funds
rate falls below 1 percent within the next few quarters, whereas the probability
implied by options on interest rate caps is relatively low.  (See box “The
Likelihood of Reaching Very Low Interest Rates.”)  The near-term prescriptions
from the simple policy rules proposed by Taylor (1993, 1999) are lower than those
shown in the March Bluebook, but remain well above the current target rate or the
prescriptions of the estimated outcome-based rule.  These prescriptions are
relatively high because they do not include any role for policy inertia and do not
take into account current financial market pressures and other forward-looking
information captured by market expectations and the staff forecast.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 38
Federal funds rate
Recession Scenario
Taylor Rule
Full Preemption
Risk Management
Civilian unemployment rate
Core PCE inflation
The Likelihood of Reaching Very Low Interest Rates 
 
The staff’s outlook assumes that the federal  
funds rate will fall to 1¾ percent in mid-2008  
and then remain at that level through the  
end of next year.  The discussion in this box  
gauges the likelihood of reaching very low interest 
rates—that is, rates below 1 percent.  Such low  
rates might occur if further policy easing  
were needed to counteract ongoing strains  
in financial markets or other adverse shocks to  
the economy.  The box ends with a discussion 
of the implications of very low interest rates 
for monetary policy strategy.
The upper panel depicts the recent evolution of  
model-based probabilities that the target funds  
rate will fall below 1 percent at a horizon of  
one year (solid line) or two years (dashed line).  
These probabilities have been computed from  
stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model.   
The stochastic simulations are computed using 
real time data; in particular, the model baseline          
is given by the corresponding vintage of the  
Greenbook outlook.  The shocks are drawn from the Great Moderation period, and 
the path of policy is determined by the empirical outcome-based rule.  These model-
based measures indicate that the probability of reaching very low interest rates has 
risen substantially since last year and now exceeds 20 percent at a one-year horizon 
and 25 percent at a two-year horizon.
The lower panel depicts market-based probabilities derived from options on 
Eurodollar futures contracts.  Evidently, financial market participants perceived  
the likelihood of very low interest rates to be negligible over the second half of 2007; 
by late February, however, investors saw odds of about 1 in 3 that the target funds 
rate would be below 1 percent at the end of this year, but odds of only 1 in 10 that the 
funds rate would be that low a year later.  In recent weeks, these market-based 
probabilities have fallen back to very low levels, partly because investors appeared to 
reduce the odds on an adverse tail event in the near future.
Very low interest rates pose challenges for policy makers, partly because of 
uncertainty about the efficacy of unconventional policy tools that might be employed 
if further reductions in the federal funds rate became infeasible because of the zero 
bound.
Market-Based Probability
Daily
Model-Based Probability
FOMC Intervals
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 38
If policymakers perceive a substantial probability of further weakness in aggregate  
demand sufficient to call for a very low target funds rate in coming quarters, then  
existing research would prescribe policy adjustment that is more aggressive than usual  
to provide insurance against the risk of a protracted recession.1  However, in contrast 
to the policy situation in 2003, the current rate of expected inflation is somewhat 
elevated.  This observation may give policymakers some comfort that they can 
provide considerable stimulus to real activity if needed through very low real short-
term interest rates and so do not need to act more aggressively.  Moreover, if 
policymakers place relatively low odds on a very low funds rate, then a shift to more 
aggressive policy adjustment may be less compelling.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 38
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(22) This Bluebook presents three policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized in Table 1.  Under Alternative A, the Committee would
reduce the target federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 1¾ percent, under
Alternative B the federal funds rate target would be cut by 25 basis points to 2
percent, and under Alternative C the Committee would maintain the federal funds
rate target at 2¼ percent.  In contrast to the FOMC statement in March, the risk
assessments in Alternatives A and B no longer emphasize the downside risks to
growth and so convey a more neutral policy stance.  Alternative B indicates that
the pace of interest rate reductions may need to slow in order for the Committee
to assess better the effects of policy actions taken to date, whereas Alternative A
reiterates that the Committee stands ready to act in a timely manner.  Alternative C
retains the judgment that downside risks to growth remain and explains that the
Committee’s decision to pause at this meeting was to allow more time to assess the
effects of past policy actions.  As usual, the Committee could formulate its
statement using language from more than one alternative.  Table 1 may need to be
modified once participants have submitted their economic projections in order to
ensure that the draft statements are consistent with the projections and the
accompanying narratives.
(23) If the Committee judges that the target funds rate is nearing a level that
would appropriately balance the risks to its dual objectives of fostering maximum
employment and price stability, it may wish to reduce the target federal funds rate
by 25 basis points, as in Alternative B, a relatively modest action compared with
those taken over the past several months.  Members may view the incoming data
as broadly consistent with their earlier assessments concerning the underlying
weakness of economic activity and the likely need for further monetary stimulus at
this meeting to promote a timely resumption of moderate economic growth.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 38
Table 1: Alternative Language for the April 2008 FOMC Announcement
March FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for 
the federal funds rate 50 basis points 
to 1-3/4 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for 
the federal funds rate 25 basis points 
to 2 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 2-1/4 percent.
Recent information indicates that 
economic activity remains weak.  
Household and business spending has 
been subdued and labor markets have 
softened further.  Financial markets 
remain under considerable stress, and 
tight credit conditions and the 
deepening housing contraction are 
likely to weigh on economic growth 
over the next few quarters.
Recent information indicates that 
economic activity remains weak.  
Household and business spending has 
been subdued and labor markets have 
softened further.  Financial markets 
remain under considerable stress, and 
tight credit conditions and the 
deepening housing contraction are 
likely to weigh on economic growth 
over the next few quarters.
Recent information indicates that 
economic activity remains weak.  
Household and business spending has 
been subdued and labor markets have 
softened further.  Financial markets 
remain under considerable stress, and 
tight credit conditions and the 
deepening housing contraction are 
likely to weigh on economic growth 
over the next few quarters.
Rationale 3. Inflation has been elevated, and some 
indicators of inflation expectations have 
risen.  The Committee expects inflation 
to moderate in coming quarters, 
reflecting a projected leveling-out of 
energy and other commodity prices and 
an easing of pressures on resource 
utilization.  Still, uncertainty about the 
inflation outlook has increased.  It will 
be necessary to continue to monitor 
inflation developments carefully.
Inflation has been elevated, and some 
indicators of inflation expectations 
have risen in recent months.  The 
Committee expects inflation to 
moderate in coming quarters, 
reflecting a projected leveling-out of 
energy and other commodity prices 
and an easing of pressures on resource 
utilization.  Still, uncertainty about the 
inflation outlook remains high.  It will 
be necessary to continue to monitor 
inflation developments carefully.
Inflation has been elevated, and some 
indicators of inflation expectations 
have risen in recent months.  The 
Committee expects inflation to 
moderate in coming quarters, 
reflecting a projected leveling-out of 
energy and other commodity prices 
and an easing of pressures on resource 
utilization.  Still, uncertainty about the 
inflation outlook remains high.  It will 
be necessary to continue to monitor 
inflation developments carefully.
Inflation has been elevated, and some 
indicators of inflation expectations 
have risen in recent months.  The 
Committee expects inflation to 
moderate in coming quarters, but 
uncertainty about the inflation outlook 
remains high.  It will be necessary to 
continue to monitor inflation 
developments carefully.
Assessment 
of Risk
The Committee judged that a further 
reduction in interest rates was 
appropriate to foster moderate growth 
over time and to mitigate the risks to 
economic activity.  The Committee 
will act in a timely manner as needed 
to promote sustainable economic 
growth and price stability.
The Committee judged that a further 
reduction in interest rates was 
appropriate to foster moderate growth 
over time and to mitigate the risks to 
economic activity.  At this juncture, 
some time may be needed to better 
assess the effects of the policy actions 
taken to date.  However, the 
Committee remains prepared to act as 
needed to promote sustainable 
economic growth and price stability.
The Committee judges that downside 
risks to growth remain but concluded 
that more time is needed to better 
assess economic prospects and the 
effects of the policy actions taken to 
date.  The Committee will act in a 
timely manner as needed to promote 
sustainable economic growth and price 
stability.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 38
Indeed, the Greenbook-consistent measure of the equilibrium funds rate is about
½ percentage point below the Bluebook estimate of the current real funds rate,
suggesting that policy likely still needs to be eased fairly significantly in order to
bring output back to its potential over the medium term.  However, the
Committee may view the calibration of the appropriate level of the funds rate as
particularly problematic given the difficulty of assessing the effects of the
substantial easing of policy to date and the myriad uncertainties surrounding the
outlook for output and inflation.  In light of this difficulty and with the gap
between the real federal funds rate and its equilibrium rate now estimated to have
narrowed, members may prefer to adjust policy more gradually than hitherto.  The
deterioration in the near-term outlook for inflation over recent months may also
be viewed as supporting the adoption of a more incremental approach.  In
particular, members might be concerned that a more aggressive policy easing at
this meeting would encourage a perception that the Committee has a greater
tolerance for inflation than previously thought, with the potential for adverse
effects on longer-term inflation expectations.  Members might also worry that
another substantial reduction in the funds rate would increase the likelihood of a
steep decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar or possibly even a further
run-up in commodity prices, developments that would put additional upward
pressure on inflation.
(24) The discussion of the outlook for economic activity and inflation in the
proposed statement accompanying Alternative B is little changed from the March
FOMC statement.  The characterization of the real economy has been amended to
contrast to the March statement in which the outlook for economic activity was
judged to have “weakened further.”  Similarly, in light of the mixed developments
in financial markets, credit conditions are described as “tight” as opposed to the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 38
“tightening” highlighted in March.  The paragraph about inflation is essentially
unaltered from the previous statement, save for some modest adjustments to the
references to the apparent rise in inflation expectations and to the increase in the
uncertainty attending the inflation outlook in order to avoid giving the impression
that either of these concerns has escalated over the intermeeting period.  Even
though the economic outlook has not changed materially, the draft risk assessment
appropriate to foster moderate growth over time and to mitigate the risks to
economic activity.”  In contrast to the March statement, the risk assessment no
longer highlights the downside risks to growth and thus implies that policy has
moved to a more neutral stance.  The proposed risk assessment also indicates that
“some time may be needed to better assess the effects of the policy actions taken
to date.”  As such, the statement is likely to be interpreted as suggesting that policy
may be on hold for a while.  Nonetheless, the statement concludes by noting that
the Committee “remains prepared” to act as needed to promote economic growth
and price stability.
(25)  Alternative B would likely be viewed by market participants as being
broadly consistent with their expectations.  Investors’ modal expectation as
implied by financial futures and options prices appears to be for a 25 basis point
easing at this meeting and for the target funds rate to be maintained at 2 percent at
the June meeting.  Taken at face value, these financial market quotes suggest that
the reaction of financial asset prices to Alternative B is likely to be relatively
muted.  However, respondents to the Desk’s survey of primary dealers expected a
notably lower path for the federal funds rate than that implied by futures prices,
and this divergence makes the reaction to Alternative B somewhat harder to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 38
(26) If the Committee believes that the substantial easing of monetary
policy to date together with the fiscal stimulus package is likely to provide
considerable support to economic activity and is concerned that inflation might
not moderate at an acceptable pace, it may prefer to keep rates unchanged at this
meeting, as in Alternative C.  With the real federal funds rate close to historically
low levels, the Committee may anticipate that the economy will avoid a
pronounced downturn.  The Committee may not view the incoming data as
suggesting the sort of broad weakening in spending that the staff expects as a
result of the economy shifting to a “recessionary state,” and hence may put some
weight on the “Near-Term Upside Risk” scenario in the Greenbook.  Members
might also be worried that inflation may follow a higher trajectory than in the staff
forecast.  Energy and commodity prices have repeatedly surprised to the upside in
recent years and members might attach some likelihood to this pattern continuing,
as illustrated in the “Greater Inflationary Pressure” scenario in the Greenbook.
Moreover, members might feel that the pass-through of past cost increases into
retail prices could be greater than anticipated by the staff.  In addition, some
indicators of inflation expectations have risen in recent months and members
might worry that long-term inflation expectations could drift up further if inflation
remains around its current elevated level, a development that would be costly to
reverse.  In that regard, members might be troubled that core PCE inflation has
averaged more than 2 percent in every year since 2004 and is forecast by the staff
to do so again in 2008.  In a similar vein, members might be concerned that the
apparent deterioration in inflation expectations could cause inflation to settle at an
unacceptably high level once economic activity returns to more normal level and
the downward contribution to inflation from the projected slack in resource
markets dissipates.  These considerations might suggest that the Committee stay its
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 38
hand at this meeting in order to allow more information to accumulate on
prospects for both growth and inflation.
(27) The discussion of economic activity in the proposed statement for
Alternative C is identical to that in the statement suggested for Alternative B.
And, as in Alternative B, the draft inflation paragraph continues to indicate that
inflation seems likely to moderate in coming quarters.  However, in contrast to the
FOMC statement in March, the factors expected to contribute to that moderation
are not explicitly identified in order to emphasize the uncertainty attending the
Committee’s outlook for inflation.  The proposed risk assessment notes that
although “downside risks to growth remain,” the Committee judged that “more
time is needed to better assess economic prospects and the effects of the policy
actions taken to date,” thereby explaining why the stance of policy was left
unchanged at this meeting.  Although the statement concludes by reiterating that
the Committee will act “as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and
price stability,” market participants may see the statement as suggesting that the
pause in policy actions could continue for a while.
(28) Alternative C would come as a surprise to market participants, who
appear fairly confident that the funds rate target will be cut by at least 25 basis
points at this meeting.  This surprise would be compounded if the accompanying
statement is interpreted as suggesting that policy may remain on hold over the next
few meetings.  Investors would likely mark up their expectations for the path of
policy over the next few quarters, leading to an increase in short- and intermediate-
term interest rates.  Pressures in short-term funding markets could worsen.  Long-
term nominal Treasury yields would rise by less or could even fall if the
Committee’s decision caused investors to revise down their expected trajectory of
future inflation.  With real rates higher, equities would probably fall, credit spreads
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 38
on corporate debt might widen, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar might
be expected to rise.
(29) In contrast, if the Committee continues to view the outlook for
economic activity as unacceptably weak, it may prefer to reduce the target funds
rate by 50 basis points at this meeting, as proposed in Alternative A.  The
Committee might judge that financial headwinds could continue to exert a
significant drag on economic growth through much of next year and thus policy
may eventually have to be eased by more than envisaged by the staff, a possibility
explored in the “Greater Financial Stress” scenario in the Greenbook.
Alternatively, the Committee might share the staff’s assessment of the underlying
forces shaping the economy and the probable extent to which policy will need to
be eased in order to foster a return to more normal levels of activity, but judge that
the downside risks to growth are such that it is preferable to adjust rates more
promptly than suggested by the staff forecast.  In particular, the Committee might
feel that an adverse feedback loop—in which weakness in the real economy
exacerbates strains in financial markets which in turn feed back onto economic
activity—remains a distinct possibility and that it is prudent for policy to respond
decisively to reduce the risk of this dynamic taking hold.  In this case, members
might be willing to tolerate the likelihood of a somewhat higher path for inflation
than in the staff forecast in order to respond more aggressively to the possibility of
significant weakness in output.  In that regard, the optimal-control simulation with
an inflation goal of 2 percent prescribes a trajectory for the target funds rate that
drops close to 1 percent by the end of 2009, notably softer than the policy path
assumed in the Greenbook.
(30) The discussion of the outlook for economic activity and inflation in the
draft statement accompanying Alternative A is identical to that proposed for
Alternative B.  The draft risk assessment also follows Alternative B in omitting the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 38
judgment from the March FOMC statement that “downside risks to growth
remain,” and so indicates that policy has moved to a more neutral stance.  The
statement concludes by reiterating that the Committee “will act in a timely
manner” to promote economic growth and price stability.
(31) With investors attaching little weight to the possibility of a 50 basis point
cut in the target funds rate at this meeting, Alternative A would come as a
considerable surprise to financial markets.  Short- and intermediate-term interest
rates would move lower.  Long-term nominal Treasury yields and measures of
inflation compensation could increase if the Committee’s action was interpreted as
implying that it was willing to tolerate a higher trajectory for inflation than
investors had previously thought.  Equity prices would probably rise and the
foreign exchange value of the dollar could weaken further.  However, these
responses would be damped somewhat to the extent that the accompanying
statement was read as suggesting that the Committee was not inclined to ease rates
further after this meeting.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(32) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 is expected to grow around 9½
percent this year, significantly faster than the projected expansion of nominal
GDP.  The resulting decline in the velocity of M2 is largely due to a substantial fall
in the opportunity cost of M2 assets that reflects the easing of monetary policy.
Growth of M2 is also likely to be boosted by a further shift in the composition of
households’ portfolios towards safe and liquid monetary assets in response to the
ongoing financial turmoil.  The expansion of M2 is expected to slow to around 5½
percent in 2009, reflecting the anticipated leveling-off in the opportunity cost of
M2 assets and the return to more-normal financial market conditions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 38
Table 2
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
Monthly Growth Rates
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 38
(33) After advancing at an annual rate of around 8 percent in 2007, the
growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to slow to around 4½
percent in 2008 and to remain around that pace in 2009.  The deceleration reflects
a broad-based slowdown in borrowing by households, nonfinancial businesses,
and state and local governments.  In the household sector, the ongoing weakness
in housing market activity and prices is expected to weigh on mortgage borrowing
through this year and next.  Similarly, advances in consumer credit are likely to
remain relatively subdued given sluggish gains in household spending on durables
and tighter standards and terms on consumer loans.  The slowing in business
borrowing is consistent with the sharp tailing-off in M&A and share repurchase
activity.  State and local government borrowing has decelerated in response to a
drop in issuance for long-term capital projects and advance refunding.  In addition,
the ongoing difficulties of major bond insurers are likely to restrain municipal
bond issuance somewhat this year.  In contrast, the growth of federal debt is
expected to pick up to around 7½ percent in 2008, boosted in part by borrowing
to fund the economic stimulus package.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 38
(34) Draft language for the directive is provided below.
Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial 
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth 
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the 
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with 
MAINTAINING/INCREASING/reducing the federal funds rate 
AT/to an average of around ________ 2¼ percent.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 38
