Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Content last modified 03/07/2014.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
SEPTEMBER 11, 2008
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 11, 2008
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1)  Measures of financial market stress intensified on net over the intermeeting
period, reflecting heightened concern about the condition of U.S. financial
institutions.  Late in the period, while news that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac had
been placed into conservatorship reduced some uncertainty and eased strains in some
financial markets, concerns about other institutions intensified.  On net, the concerns
about financial institutions, a less optimistic outlook for economic growth, and a
substantial fall in oil prices led investors to push back the anticipated onset of
monetary policy tightening, with policy seen as possibly easing a bit in the near term
and then remaining on hold well into next year.  Nominal Treasury yields declined,
consistent with the change in policy expectations and the softer economic outlook,
and TIPS-based measures of inflation compensation moved lower at all horizons.
Broad equity price indexes were about unchanged on balance over the intermeeting
period.  Yields on investment-grade corporate bonds dropped less than those on
comparable-maturity Treasury securities and those on speculative-grade bonds edged
up, leaving spreads wider.  Borrowing by nonfinancial business corporations slowed.
The dollar appreciated against many currencies, reportedly reflecting a more
pronounced downward revision in investors’ outlook for growth abroad than for
growth in the U.S.
Financial Institutions
(2) Investors continued to focus on major financial institutions and the possible
implications of strains on these firms for credit availability and the macroeconomic
outlook.  Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were a particular focus of attention.  After the
Treasury and the Federal Housing Finance Agency announced the placement of these
companies into conservatorship, their stock prices dropped sharply (Chart 1).  In
contrast, spreads on senior and subordinated agency debt narrowed as investors
became confident that the Treasury would support Fannie’s and Freddie’s obligations,
and option-adjusted spreads on agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) plunged.
(See the box “Market Effects of Conservatorship for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.”)
(3)  At a number of other financial institutions, difficulties continued and even
intensified.  Equity prices of U.S. investment banks were quite volatile over the
intermeeting period, moving lower on concerns about writedowns of mortgage-
related assets, and CDS spreads on these entities widened noticeably.  Developments
at Lehman Brothers attracted considerable attention.  Analysts speculated that the
firm would take significant additional writedowns of mortgage-related assets in the
current quarter, and, towards the end of the period, Lehman announced that a
$3.9 billion loss was likely for the third quarter, that it expected to spin off its
commercial real estate assets, and that it planned to sell a majority stake in its asset-
management unit.  Lehman’s share price has dropped sharply, as market participants
awaited news regarding a possible a capital injection or sale of the firm.
(4) Investors also appeared to be worried about conditions at depository
institutions.  Although bank stocks rose on the announcement of the conservatorship
of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac—evidently on the view that the Treasury’s actions
would bolster mortgage markets and credit markets more broadly—they were down
modestly on net over the intermeeting period.  Moreover, CDS spreads on
subordinated debt at bank holding companies widened again, reaching levels not seen
since March.  Market participants also grew more concerned about regional banks’
credit losses, and the already-elevated CDS spreads on these entities rose a bit further.
Three commercial banks failed over the intermeeting period, bringing the total
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 41
Market Effects of Conservatorship for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac 
 
On September 7 the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) placed Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac into conservatorship.  In conjunction with this action, the Treasury 
Department established agreements to acquire up to $100 billion of new senior preferred 
stock from each firm.  The Treasury will receive $1 billion of senior preferred stock in each 
GSE initially (without compensation) and will make subsequent purchases as necessary to 
ensure that the GSEs maintain a positive net worth.  The Treasury also obtained warrants to 
purchase new shares of common stock at a “nominal” price, representing up to 79.9 percent 
of the common shares of each firm on a fully-diluted basis.  Dividends on the common and 
existing preferred stock of Fannie and Freddie have been terminated, and holders of 
common and existing preferred stock will absorb any future losses before the Treasury 
sustains losses on senior preferred stock.  In addition, the Treasury created two new 
temporary programs to support housing finance through the end of 2009.  The first new 
program is a secured lending facility under which the Treasury may extend credit to Fannie 
Mae, Freddie Mac, and the Federal Home Loan Banks.  The second consists of direct 
purchases of GSE MBS by the Treasury, at its discretion, based on developments in the 
capital and housing markets. 
 
On the day following the announcement, broad equity price indexes in the United States and 
abroad rallied, with the S&P 500 index rising about 2 percent.  Treasury yields and the 
foreign exchange value of the dollar were little changed.  The government’s actions were 
viewed as positive news for the financial sector, and the S&P 500 bank sub-index rose nearly 
4 percent on the day after the announcement.
However, prices of common and preferred stock in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac fell as 
much as 90 percent on the day after the announcement.  Supervisory data suggest that 23 
depository institutions with roughly $20 billion in assets would be significantly affected by a 
write-off of Fannie and Freddie common and preferred stock.  The federal banking agencies 
issued a joint statement that they are prepared to work with such institutions to develop 
capital-restoration plans. 
 
Spreads between yields on the two GSEs’ ten-year senior bonds and those on ten-year 
Treasury notes narrowed about 25 basis points, and spreads on their subordinated debt 
narrowed more than 200 basis points.  The two-year note issued by Fannie Mae this week 
attracted heavy demand, but market participants indicated that liquidity in the secondary 
market for GSE debt remains somewhat lower than normal.  Option-adjusted spreads on 
MBS guaranteed by Fannie and Freddie dropped more than 60 basis points on the day after 
the announcement.  Yields on new fixed-rate conforming mortgages dropped about 20 basis 
points and trended down further over the next two days.  The stopout rates at Freddie Mac’s 
auction of three- and six-month notes held on the day after the announcement declined 
about 45 basis points relative to OIS rates.  In the repo market, spreads on agency and
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 41
agency MBS repos over Treasury general collateral repos were little changed for short 
maturities, but agency repo spreads reportedly fell somewhat for maturities beyond one 
month. 
 
The International Swaps and Derivatives Association declared that the conservatorship 
announcement constitutes a “credit event” for CDS written on Fannie’s and Freddie’s debt, 
and it is likely to be the largest credit event in the history of the CDS market in terms of the 
notional value of outstanding contracts.  Trading in existing contracts has halted, and, for 
those who choose to participate, an auction to determine the cash settlement value of CDS 
contracts on the two GSEs is expected to be held in early October.  Uncertainty 
surrounding the settlement of these contracts is reported to have been a factor behind the 
reduced liquidity of GSE debt this week.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 41
number of failed banks in 2008 to 11.   In addition, the FDIC announced that the
number of banks on its problem bank list jumped by almost a third from the first to
the second quarter, and now stands at 117 institutions.  (See the box “Recent
Developments at Commercial Banks.”)  Some evidence of strains at thrift institutions
was also evident over the intermeeting period, with developments at Washington
Mutual garnering particular attention.  Washington Mutual’s share price plummeted
and its CDS spread widened markedly amid reports that market participants expect
further losses at the firm.  The condition of corporate credit unions (CCUs) also came
under scrutiny, as several large CCUs have unrealized losses on securities in their
investment portfolios that exceed their regulatory capital; concerns about the solvency
of some of these firms have impaired their ability to obtain short-term funding,
particularly in the commercial paper market.
Monetary Policy Expectations and Treasury Yields
(5) The FOMC’s decision at its August meeting to leave the target federal funds
rate unchanged at 2 percent had been broadly anticipated.  The accompanying policy
statement, which many market participants interpreted as essentially balanced with
respect to upside risks to inflation and downside risks to growth, was also in line with
expectations.  Accordingly, the expected path for policy was little changed in the wake
of the announcement, and the response in broader financial markets was minimal.1
Over the remainder of the intermeeting period, market reactions to speeches by
FOMC members and the release of the minutes of the August FOMC meeting were
also muted.  Markets generally shrugged off incoming economic data.  Instead, market
participants took direction from the pressures on the condition of a number of major  
                                           
1 The effective federal funds rate averaged 1.99 percent over the intermeeting period.  The 
volatility of the funds rate, though it remained slightly elevated by historical standards, was 
lower than it had been over the last several intermeeting periods.  Over this intermeeting 
period, the volume of long-term repurchase agreements was unchanged and the Desk did 
not redeem any Treasury securities.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 41
Recent Developments at Commercial Banks 
 
The profitability of U.S. commercial banks declined sharply in the second quarter of 
2008. Industry return on assets fell to about 0.4 percent at an annual rate, its lowest 
level in more than 15 years.  Substantially higher provisions for loan losses accounted 
for most of the decline in profitability in the second quarter, and writedowns of the 
values of other assets—including securities, leveraged loans, goodwill, and leveraged 
lease transactions—also reduced reported earnings.   
 
Significant losses at several large commercial banks contributed importantly to the 
drop in profitability and prompted their bank holding company parents to raise 
capital in order to shore up the banks’ regulatory capital ratios.  Partly as a result of 
those equity infusions, regulatory capital ratios for the industry as a whole have 
remained well above the thresholds required for well-capitalized banks.  
 
Despite the rapid pace of loan-loss provisioning, the ratio of loan-loss reserves to net 
charge-offs—a rough gauge of reserve adequacy—has fallen to its lowest level in 
more than two decades.  Moreover, the overall delinquency rate at commercial banks 
is still trending up significantly—it reached its highest level since the end of 1993 in 
the second quarter—as the performance of residential mortgages and construction 
and land development loans continues to deteriorate sharply.  Consequently, loan-loss 
provisions will likely remain elevated for some time, dampening bank profits.  Given 
this adverse outlook for profitability, and with the macroeconomic and financial 
outlook quite uncertain, banking organizations may continue to find it costly to raise 
additional capital going forward.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 41
financial institutions and the associated concerns about the economic outlook, and
marked down their expected path for policy significantly, on net.  Futures quotes now
suggest an expected path of the funds rate that is then flat at 2 percent through at
least the middle of 2009, with a modest probability of easing through the end of this
year.  Subsequently, the path rises to about 3 percent by the end of 2010, a level more
than 60 basis points below that anticipated at the time of the August meeting (Chart
on an unchanged target at next week’s FOMC meeting, as do respondents to the
Desk’s policy survey.  Option-implied measures of uncertainty about the federal funds
rate six and twelve months ahead moved lower.
(6) Two-year nominal Treasury yields declined 30 basis points over the
intermeeting period and ten-year yields moved down about 35 basis points.   (See the
box “Treasury Yields and Probability of Low GSE Share Prices.”)  Five-year inflation
compensation fell 50 basis points, while five-year inflation compensation five years
forward dropped 6 basis points.  The most recent survey measures of short-term
inflation expectations from both the Michigan Survey and the Survey of Professional
Forecasters were also lower than previous readings:  The drops in short-term
expectations likely reflected the sharp decline in oil prices, as well as the softer
economic outlook, with greater economic slack presumably now foreseen by the
market.  On balance, respondents to the Desk’s primary dealer survey revised up their
forecasts for near-term core PCE inflation, but their average forecasts for 2009 were
unchanged.  Long-term survey measures of inflation expectations were unchanged
from previous readings and dealer forecasts for headline CPI inflation from five to
ten years ahead were also little changed.  However, the dispersion of long-term
inflation forecasts in the Survey of Professional Forecasters declined a bit.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 41
Treasury Yields and the Probability of Low GSE Share Prices
Over the intermeeting period, uncertainty about the capital positions of the GSEs and 
speculation about the timing and structure of potential government intervention to support the 
firms induced investors to reassess the prospects for the two agencies and for financial stability.  
The chart below shows market-implied probabilities that the share prices of Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac would fall to very low levels over the next few months, calculated from put options 
on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac shares expiring in January.1  These estimated probabilities fell in 
mid-July after the Treasury asked Congress to pass legislation that would authorize it to inject 
capital into the agencies and the Federal Reserve Board authorized the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York to lend to the firms if necessary.  The probabilities seesawed during the second half of 
August amid heightened uncertainty about the conditions of the GSEs and prospects for 
government intervention.  On September 8, when the stock prices of both Fannie Mae and 
Freddie Mac collapsed following the announcement that the two GSEs would be put into 
conservatorship, the probabilities shot up. 
 
The table shows correlations between movements in these probabilities and two- and ten-year 
Treasury yields over the intermeeting period.  All of these correlations are negative and 
statistically significant.2  Although such correlations do not indicate causation, these results 
suggest that investor sentiment about the prospects for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and, given 
their systemic importance, for the broad financial sector, may have been an important driver of 
Treasury yields of late.  The negative correlation appeared to break down on Monday as Treasury 
yields did not decline following the conservatorship announcement, likely because the GSEs’ 
stock prices no longer reflect information about mortgage credit availability, given the structure 
of the government’s intervention.      
 
1  Specifically, the chart shows the probabilities that the stock prices of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac will be below 
the lowest strike available (constant at $2.5 and $3 respectively) on January 16, 2009. 
2 As shown in the table, estimates of the probability of low share prices for Lehman Brothers also showed negative 
and significant correlations with Treasury yields.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 41
Money Markets
(7) Interbank funding markets remained strained over the intermeeting period
as banks reportedly continued to shy away from lending term funds.  The spread of
one-month Libor over comparable-maturity OIS rates rose modestly and the three-
month spread widened a bit more (Chart 3).  Amid poor liquidity, rates on six-month
and one-year Libor—reference rates for a wide variety of contracts, including floating-
rate mortgages—rose over the intermeeting period, while comparable-maturity OIS
rates fell, leaving spreads at record levels.  Depositories continued to bid aggressively
at the Term Auction Facility (TAF) auctions held during the intermeeting period.  In
particular, while demand was elevated for both of the 84-day TAF auctions, with
stop-out rates just below three-month Libor, demand at the second auction was
reportedly damped by institutions’ desire to reserve the eligible collateral for later
auctions covering year-end.  On average, depository institutions’ use of overnight
primary credit was about unchanged at a high level over the intermeeting period,
while term primary credit continued to rise.  Total primary credit outstanding
currently stands at a near-record $23.5 billion.
(8) Foreign money market conditions deteriorated a bit over the intermeeting
period.  Spreads between three-month sterling Libor and OIS rates widened more
than 10 basis points as U.K. house prices continued to fall and concerns about
valuations of asset-backed securities intensified.  Spreads of euro Libor to OIS were
little changed, but the demand for funding apparently remained substantial.  The first
few ECB and Swiss National Bank (SNB) auctions of 84-day U.S dollar funds were
significantly oversubscribed, and the two 28-day dollar auctions held by the ECB and
SNB also drew substantial bids.  Following statements by ECB Council Members
expressing concern that some participants might be taking advantage of the ECB’s
broad collateral rules, the ECB announced several changes effective February 2009,
including substantial increases in its haircuts on asset-backed securities.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 41
(9) Conditions in some repo markets deteriorated a little over the intermeeting
period, and liquidity in non-Treasury, non-agency term repo markets remained poor.
Following the GSE conservatorship announcement, the spread between agency debt
repo rates and repo rates on Treasury general collateral at horizons longer than one
month reportedly narrowed, while those on agency MBS were little changed on net.
Haircuts on agency debt held steady over the intermeeting period, but haircuts on
agency MBS collateral, private-label alt-A, and subprime MBS collateral increased a bit
further.  The Desk’s single-tranche, 28-day repos continued to attract strong demand,
and Schedule 1 Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) auctions were generally
oversubscribed, reflecting the relatively favorable terms the auctions offered relative
to market spreads for financing agency collateral.  By contrast, Schedule 2 auctions
continued to be undersubscribed.  Two auctions of options on Schedule 2 TSLF
borrowing over the September quarter-end were held during the intermeeting period;
both were oversubscribed.  The stop-out rate was 1 basis point above the minimum
fee rate at the first auction and 2 basis points above the minimum fee rate at the
second.  There were no credit extensions through the Primary Dealer Credit Facility
(PDCF) during the intermeeting period to date.
(10) Liquidity in the Treasury bill market remained fairly good over the
intermeeting period, amid robust supply.  Conditions in the commercial paper market
continued to be strained.  Spreads on lower-rated nonfinancial and asset-backed
commercial paper stayed at high levels, and spreads on higher-rated financial paper
were volatile, generally remaining near the top of their recent range.  Quarter-end
pressures in money markets reportedly tightened somewhat in recent days, in part
reflecting broader market conditions.  Anecdotal reports suggest that market
participants are growing more concerned about the upcoming year-end.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 41
Capital Markets
(11) Broad equity price indexes were about flat, on net, over the intermeeting
period, with the retail sector outperforming the broader market and lower oil prices
dragging down the shares of energy firms.  Financial sector indexes were quite volatile
and ended the period somewhat lower.  During the current quarter, analysts expect no
growth in earnings from four quarters earlier for S&P 500 firms, as forecasted energy
sector gains are offset by financial sector losses.  Analysts trimmed their forecasts of
year-ahead expected earnings, reflecting a more pessimistic outlook for the financial
sector.  Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 rose slightly, on net, and remains at
an elevated level.  The spread between the twelve-month forward trend earnings-price
ratio for S&P 500 firms and the real long-term Treasury yield – a rough gauge of the
equity premium – continued to climb and is now at its highest level since the early
(12) Conditions in corporate debt markets tightened further over the
intermeeting period.  Risk spreads rose from already elevated levels, as yields on
investment-grade bonds fell less than those on comparable-maturity Treasury
securities, while yields on speculative-grade bonds were roughly unchanged.  Spreads
on investment-grade bonds are now at their highest levels since 2002, and their
speculative-grade counterparts backed up to levels last seen in the spring.  Conditions
in the leveraged loan market worsened somewhat over the intermeeting period:
Secondary market bid prices fell to the bottom of recent ranges, perhaps due in part
to concerns about a deterioration in credit quality.  Indeed, the implied spread on an
index of loan credit default swaps (the LCDX) widened some over the period.
However, according to the August Survey of Terms of Business Lending, the spread
of loan rates on newly originated C&I loans over comparable-maturity market rates
was little changed relative to May.  The ratio of municipal bond yields to comparable-
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 41
maturity Treasury yields rose to a historically elevated level, but issuance remained
strong and market functioning appeared smooth.
(13) Some indicators of conditions in the mortgage market worsened over the
intermeeting period, while others remained steady.  Issuance of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac MBS in August is estimated to be about in line with July’s pace but
below the average rates seen in the first two quarters of the year.  By contrast,
issuance by Ginnie Mae has stayed elevated, owing to originations of mortgages
insured by the Federal Housing Administration or guaranteed by the Department of
Veterans Affairs.  Market participants report that there have been no major
disruptions to their ability to securitize conforming mortgages after Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac were placed into conservatorship, and interest rates on fixed-rate
conforming mortgages fell markedly after the announcement.  Jumbo mortgages
remained both costly and difficult to obtain.  Issuance of both private-label RMBS
backed by nonconforming loans and of commercial mortgage-backed securities was
essentially zero over the intermeeting period.  Rates and spreads on all types of
consumer ABS rose over the intermeeting period, consistent with higher delinquency
rates on the underlying loans in recent months.  Issuance of student loan asset-backed
securities (ABS) was moderate in August, while there was no issuance of automobile
loan-backed ABS.
Foreign Developments
(14) The dollar appreciated broadly and sharply over the intermeeting period,
chiefly reflecting the deterioration of the foreign economic outlook relative to that in
the United States.  The major currencies index rose by 6 percent, with gains exceeding
(Chart 4).  Data on macroeconomic activity in Europe continued to point to a
softening economic outlook, and the Bank of England (BoE), the European Central
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 41
Bank (ECB) and the OECD all revised down their forecasts for growth in Europe.
Still, the BoE and the ECB left their policy rates unchanged over the intermeeting
period, noting that inflation was well above target.  Medium-term policy expectations
have, however, declined since the August FOMC, particularly for the United
Kingdom.  In line with expected easing by central banks, sovereign bond yields have
fallen, mainly reflecting declines in inflation compensation.  Amid substantial
volatility, stock markets around the world moved down as prospects for economic
growth deteriorated.
(15) The index of the dollar’s value against the currencies of our other important
trading partners rose about 4 percent over the intermeeting period.  The increase
likely reflected concerns about the prospects for weaker economic growth in
emerging market economies, even as many central banks in the region tightened
policy in an attempt to curb mounting inflation.  Notably, the dollar was little changed
against the Chinese renminbi.  In an about-face from their policies of recent years,
several other central banks in emerging market countries reportedly intervened in
foreign exchange markets to support their currencies in the face of sharp downward
Debt and Money
(16) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to expand at a
below the 8½ percent rise posted in 2007 (Chart 5).  The pickup is attributable to
increased borrowing by state and local governments and the federal government, as
the rate of growth in the business and household sectors is estimated to be slowing.
In the nonfinancial business sector, commercial paper issuance was quite robust in
August, with some of the issuance reportedly intended to fund a large acquisition and
dividend payments.  By contrast, investment-grade bond issuance was moderate and
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 41
speculative-grade bond issuance remained weak, likely because of relatively high
interest rates and risk spreads.  Smoothing through the month-to-month fluctuations,
commercial bank credit has advanced at about the same pace in the current quarter as
in the second quarter, as tepid loan growth has about offset more rapid gains in
securities holdings.  Leveraged loan issuance reportedly has continued to be very
subdued.  Household debt growth is estimated to have slowed further in the third
quarter, with essentially no growth projected for home mortgage debt amid tighter
terms for borrowers and declining prices and slow activity in the housing market.
(17)  M2 contracted at a 1½ percent annual rate in August, as large outflows
from liquid deposits and money funds more than offset robust growth in small time
deposits.  Currency growth was moderate.  (See the box “Recent Behavior of the
Components of M2.”)  Since April, M2 has advanced at an average annual rate of just
slightly faster than the growth of nominal GDP, despite a steep drop in the
opportunity cost of holding M2 late last year and early this year.  Typically, the lagged
effects of the decline in opportunity cost over the past year would have been expected
to boost money growth substantially, but the effect of opportunity cost on the
demand for M2 appears to have been damped in recent years.  Based on the sharp
decline in opportunity cost, the staff’s standard money demand models predict a
significant acceleration in M2 this year.  However, in light of the recent sluggish
growth, M2 is projected to expand at a rate about ¾ percentage point less in 2008
than in 2007.
Economic Outlook
(18) The staff forecast presented in the September Greenbook is conditioned on
an assumption that the target federal funds rate is held at 2 percent until mid-year
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 41
Recent Behavior of the Components of M2 
 
The behavior of important components of M2 has been somewhat atypical during the current 
easing cycle.  The charts below compare the levels of selected M2 components over the first twelve 
months of the easing cycles that began in January 2001 and August 2007. 
 
During periods of policy easing, rates available on small time deposits tend to track rates on other 
money market instruments with only short lags and therefore typically fall relative to those on liquid 
deposits, which are generally adjusted much more sluggishly.  As a result, during periods of easing, 
liquid deposits generally expand rapidly and small time deposits run off; this pattern was clearly 
evident in the 2001 easing episode.  During the current easing cycle, however, liquid deposits have 
expanded rather slowly while small time deposits have recorded positive growth. 
 
The relatively rapid expansion of small time deposits in the current episode appears to reflect 
importantly bank funding decisions.  Some depository institutions have been offering relatively high 
interest rates on small time deposits to strengthen their core deposit base or, in some cases, to offset 
liquid deposit outflows in the wake of depositors’ concerns about depository institutions’ solvency.  
Last month, small time deposits expanded at a 25 percent annual rate—the fastest monthly growth 
rate since 1995, a period of monetary policy tightening.  Roughly a third of this increase was due to 
three institutions:  Bank of America, Wachovia, and Washington Mutual; these institutions offered 
especially attractive rates on small time deposits in August.  For Bank of America and Wachovia, the 
increase in small time deposits resulted in a net increase in total deposits.  However, Washington 
Mutual’s total deposits contracted over the month as outflows from liquid deposits overwhelmed 
increases in small time deposits.  For all depository institutions taken together, increases in small 
time deposits fell short of outflows from liquid deposits.  
 
Retail money market mutual funds, though growing only sluggishly in recent months, grew more 
than 17 percent from August 2007 to August 2008, much faster than the 6 percent expansion posted 
during the comparable period of the January 2001 easing cycle.  In part, the robust growth of retail 
money funds likely reflects household demand for safe and liquid assets during the financial turmoil.
 
Currency has expanded just 2 percent over the year since August 2007, with moderately strong 
domestic demand partially offset by weak foreign demand for U.S. dollars.  In June and July, 
however, there was a noticeable surge in foreign demand, likely due to strong demand for dollars in 
Argentina, which has been experiencing significant political and economic uncertainty.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 41
rises to 3 percent by the end of 2010, 25 basis points lower than previously assumed.
Long-term Treasury yields are projected to edge up over the forecast period, owing to
the rising short-term rates, but beginning from a modestly lower level.  Fixed
mortgage rates have been marked down, in part to reflect the drop that occurred in
response to the government’s takeover of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, bringing
forward nearly all of the decline in rates that had previously been projected to take
place over the next two years.  Stock prices, which start from a level that is
rate of 11½ percent, as the equity risk premium retraces about half of the widening
that has occurred during the financial turmoil.  The real foreign exchange value of the
dollar is again assumed to depreciate at an annual rate of 2½ percent, but from a level
that is about 5 percent higher than in the last Greenbook.  The price of West Texas
intermediate crude oil is expected edge up from its current level of $103 per barrel –
about $20 per barrel less than in the previous projection – to $107 by the end of 2009
and to hold to that level in 2010.  In the forecast, the continued deterioration of the
housing sector, restraint from the earlier increase in energy prices, weak consumer
sentiment, and the considerable strains in financial conditions hold down growth in
the near term, and a gradual improvement in these factors leads to modest
acceleration in economic activity over time.  On balance, real GDP growth is
projected to average about ¾ percent at an annual rate over the second half of 2008,
but to pick up to 2 percent next year and to 2¾ percent in 2010, a bit above the staff’s
estimate of the growth rate of potential GDP of 2½ percent.  This trajectory for
growth is slightly weaker on average than forecasted last time, owing partly to the
recent strength of the dollar.  The unemployment rate is projected to average 6¼
percent in 2009 – ¼ percentage point higher than in the previous forecast and
significantly above the staff’s estimate of the NAIRU – and then to edge down in
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 41
forecast of overall PCE inflation in the current quarter nearly a percentage point to
inflation down to ½ percent in the fourth quarter.  The forecast for current-quarter
core PCE inflation is 3 percent, but core inflation is projected to fall to 2½ percent in
the fourth quarter.  Both total and core PCE inflation are projected to be a little over
Update on Monetary Policy Strategies
(19) As shown in Chart 6, the Greenbook-consistent measure of short-run r*
now stands at -0.3 percent, about 40 basis points lower than in the previous
Bluebook.  The estimates from the small structural model and the FRB/US model has
dropped more sharply and now stand at about -1¾ percent.  These declines mainly
reflect the higher path for the foreign exchange value of the dollar and the increase in
the equity premium in the current forecast.  The actual real federal funds rate—
constructed using lagged core PCE inflation as a proxy for inflation expectations—
now stands at -0.4 percent, about 20 basis points lower than in the previous Bluebook
(see the box “Estimates of the Real Funds Rate and Optimal Monetary Policy”).
(20) Chart 7 depicts optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model using
the long-run Greenbook forecast beyond 2010. In these simulations, policymakers
place equal weight on keeping core PCE inflation close to a specified goal, on keeping
unemployment close to the NAIRU, and on avoiding changes in the nominal federal
funds rate.2  For an inflation goal of 1½ percent (the left-hand set of charts), the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 41
(as summarized by the extended Greenbook projection), whereas households and firms are 
assumed to form their expectations using more limited information.
Estimates of the Real Funds Rate and Optimal Monetary Policy 
 
The estimates shown in Chart 6 for the equilibrium real federal funds rate and the 
actual real funds rate are constructed using trailing core inflation as the proxy for 
expected inflation.  As portrayed in the figure below, the estimated value of the real 
funds rate can vary substantially depending on the choice of proxy for expected 
inflation.  When computed using either trailing core inflation or projected headline 
inflation, the actual real funds rate is around zero, close to the troughs reached in each 
of the previous two downturns.  In contrast, when measured using trailing headline 
inflation, the current real funds rate stands at about -2½ percent, its lowest level in 
more than three decades.
In evaluating the macroeconomic and policy implications of these real funds rate 
measures, it is important to consider the extent to which they are affected by 
transitory fluctuations in overall inflation.  For example, the staff projects a sharp 
decline in headline PCE inflation from 3½ percent in 2008 to about 2¼ percent  
in 2009.  Under this projection, the corresponding measure of the real funds rate will 
rise by roughly 125 basis points next year even if the nominal funds rate remains at its 
current level. 
 
Regardless of the choice of proxy for expected inflation, no measure of the actual  
real funds rate can, by itself, provide an adequate metric for assessing the stance of 
monetary policy without reference to other factors influencing the outlook and to the 
Committee’s objectives.  Such an assessment must take account of expected future 
policy rates; term premiums; the risk premiums embedded in mortgage rates, 
corporate yields, and equity prices; and bank lending terms and standards.  It must 
also take account of shocks to variables such as residential investment and commodity 
prices, as well as other financial and nonfinancial influences on the overall economic 
outlook.  Indeed, staff analysis indicates that the economic and financial 
developments since last summer have shifted down the optimal-control path of the 
federal funds rate since that time by a magnitude similar to the decline in the actual 
funds rate.1 
1 See the September 9 memo to the Committee, “Gauging the Effective Stance of Monetary Policy,”  
by Jean-Philippe Laforte, Dave Reifschneider, John Roberts, and Tom Tallarini.  The estimates of the real 
federal funds rate in this memo are based on the July/August Greenbook.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 41
optimal funds rate stays near 2¼ percent through early 2010; this trajectory is about
late 2009 and then rises gradually to 4¾ percent by 2013.  These prescriptions mostly
reflect the reduction in the Greenbook consistent measure of r*.  For either inflation
goal, the optimal-control policy generates outcomes for the unemployment rate over
the next several years that are about ¼ percentage point higher than the last
Bluebook, while the outcomes for core inflation are little changed beyond mid-2009.
(21) As depicted in Chart 8, the outcome-based monetary policy rule prescribes a
funds rate path that rises steadily to about 3 percent by the middle of 2009 before
flattening out.  This trajectory is noticeably higher than currently embedded in
financial market quotes, which imply a roughly unchanged funds rate until the middle
of next year.  Stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model indicate a 70 percent
probability that the prescriptions of the outcome-based rule will fall in a range of
points higher than that implied by interest rate caps.  The near-term prescriptions
from the Taylor (1993, 1999) rules are a notch higher than in the previous Bluebook,
reflecting a modest increase in recent readings on core inflation.  As has been the case
for some time, the rates implied by these rules are relatively high because they do not
take into account the effects of financial market pressures, the persisting weakness of
the housing market, and other forward-looking information captured by market
expectations and the staff forecast.  The first-difference rule under an inflation goal of
point tightening for 2009Q1.  In contrast, under an inflation goal of 2 percent, it calls
for about one quarter percentage point of easing over the next two quarters.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 41
Policy Alternatives
(22) This Bluebook presents three alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized by the draft statements in Table 1.  Under Alternatives A
and B, the target federal funds rate would be maintained at 2 percent at this meeting.
Alternative C includes a 25 basis point tightening.  Compared with the statement
released after the August meeting, all three alternatives would still note that inflation
has been high, but the focus of the discussion of economic activity has shifted from
the expansion in the second quarter to the slowdown evident in recent months.  In
addition, a slowing in export growth is included as a factor likely to weigh on the pace
of economic activity over the next few quarters.  Apart from these changes,
Alternative B is little different from the Committee’s statement in August.  Alternative
C expresses the Committee’s “significant concern” that inflation may not moderate as
anticipated, and states that the policy action was intended to better promote
acceptable progress toward price stability.  Alternative A indicates greater confidence
that inflation will moderate and suggests that downside risks to growth and upside
risks to inflation are now roughly balanced.
(23) If the Committee views the staff forecast, which is conditioned on
unchanged policy through the middle of next year, as reasonable and acceptable in the
circumstances and sees no compelling reason to change the statement materially, it
may wish to leave the policy rate unchanged and issue a statement along the lines of
that in Alternative B.  Although inflation is currently high, the Committee may
expect inflation to decline to acceptable levels given the recent appreciation of the
dollar, the decline in oil prices, and the outlook for persistent economic slack.  And
even though members may believe that the next policy move is likely to be a
tightening, they may also judge that holding the funds rate steady for now is
appropriate given the Committee’s dual objectives.  Indeed, the optimal policy
simulations based on a 1½ percent inflation goal has the target federal funds rate just
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 41
Table 1: Alternative Language for the September 2008 FOMC Announcement
August FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for 
the federal funds rate at 2 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for 
the federal funds rate at 2 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for 
the federal funds rate 25 basis points 
to 2¼ percent.
Incoming information suggests that 
growth in economic activity has 
slowed in recent months, partly 
reflecting a softening of household 
spending.  In addition, labor markets 
have weakened further and financial 
markets remain under considerable 
stress.  Tight credit conditions, the 
ongoing housing contraction, some 
slowing in export growth, and past 
increases in energy prices are likely to 
weigh on economic growth over the 
next few quarters.  Over time, the 
substantial easing of monetary policy, 
combined with ongoing measures to 
foster market liquidity, should help to 
promote moderate economic growth.
Incoming information suggests that 
growth in economic activity has 
slowed in recent months, partly 
reflecting a softening of household 
spending.  In addition, labor markets 
have weakened further and financial 
markets remain under considerable 
stress.  Tight credit conditions, the 
ongoing housing contraction, some 
slowing in export growth, and past 
increases in energy prices are likely to 
weigh on economic growth over the 
next few quarters.  Over time, the 
substantial easing of monetary policy, 
combined with ongoing measures to 
foster market liquidity, should help to 
promote moderate economic growth.
Incoming information suggests that 
growth in economic activity has 
slowed in recent months, partly 
reflecting a softening of household 
spending.  In addition, labor markets 
have weakened further and financial 
markets remain under considerable 
stress.  Tight credit conditions, the 
ongoing housing contraction, some 
slowing in export growth, and past 
increases in energy prices are likely to 
weigh on economic growth over the 
next few quarters.  Nonetheless, the 
accommodative stance of monetary 
policy, combined with ongoing 
measures to foster market liquidity, 
should help to promote moderate 
economic growth.
Inflation has been high, but the 
Committee expects that the recent 
decline in energy and other 
commodity prices and increased slack 
in resource utilization will foster a 
moderation of inflation later this year 
and next year.  Nevertheless, the 
inflation outlook remains highly 
uncertain.
Inflation has been high, spurred by 
the earlier increases in the prices of 
energy and some other commodities, 
and some indicators of inflation 
expectations have been elevated.  The 
Committee expects inflation to 
moderate later this year and next year, 
but the inflation outlook remains 
highly uncertain.
Inflation has remained high, and 
some indicators of inflation 
expectations have been elevated.  
Although the Committee expects 
inflation to moderate later this year 
and next year, the possibility that 
inflation may fail to decline as 
anticipated is of significant concern.
Assessment of 
Risk
The downside risks to growth and the 
upside risks to inflation are both of 
significant concern to the Committee.  
The Committee will continue to 
monitor economic and financial 
developments and will act as needed 
to promote sustainable economic 
growth and price stability.
Although downside risks to growth 
remain, the upside risks to inflation 
are also of significant concern to the 
Committee.  The Committee will 
continue to monitor economic and 
financial developments and will act as 
needed to promote sustainable 
economic growth and price stability.
The Committee took this action to 
provide additional assurance that 
inflation will abate as desired.  The 
Committee will continue to monitor 
economic and financial developments 
and will act as needed to promote 
sustainable economic growth and 
price stability.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 41
a bit above its current level until the second half of 2010 (Chart 7).  Moreover, the
risks to the outlook remain considerable on both sides.  Financial strains have
continued over the intermeeting period, and, while business spending has held up, the
recent indications of exceptionally low consumer confidence, sharply declining auto
sales, and deteriorating labor market conditions may suggest continued significant
downside risks to growth.  At the same time, inflation has persisted at levels well
above those consistent with price stability, and the Committee may remain very
concerned that inflation will not moderate as forecast.  In these circumstances, the
Committee may consider it prudent to leave policy unchanged while waiting for more
information bearing on the outlook for economic activity and inflation.
(24) In the statement under Alternative B, the rationale begins by noting that
“Incoming information suggests that growth in economic activity has slowed in recent
months,” which is changed from “Economic activity expanded in the second quarter”
to shift the discussion to the current quarter and reflect the significant, albeit
expected, deceleration that appears to be under way.  In light of the continued
deterioration in labor market conditions, the statement then indicates that labor
markets have “weakened” further, rather than “softened” as in August.  The
statement again notes that “financial markets remain under considerable stress” and
then states that “Tight credit conditions, the ongoing housing contraction, some
slowing in export growth, and past increases in energy prices are likely to weigh on
economic growth.”  “Some slowing in export growth” is included to recognize that,
after surging about 11 percent over the four quarters ending in Q2, exports are
projected to decelerate to a rate more in line with historical norms, and “past increases
in” energy prices are referenced rather than “elevated” energy prices because the net
rise in energy prices over the past year or so continues to restrain growth despite the
recent marked decline in prices.  The remainder of the statement under Alternative B
is unchanged from that released by the Committee in August, indicating that the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 41
substantial easing of monetary policy will promote economic growth; that the
Committee expects inflation to moderate, but the outlook is uncertain; and that,
although downside risks to growth remain, upside risks to inflation are also of
significant concern.
(25) Futures and options quotes as well as the Desk’s survey of primary dealers
suggest that market participants do not expect any change in policy until the third
quarter of next year.  Investors read the statement released in August as consistent
with an outlook for unchanged policy, so Alternative B, which is very similar, would
probably not lead them to revise their views.  Market participants will note the shift in
focus of the discussion to the weaker economic activity in the current quarter, but
they will probably take more direction from the forward-looking parts of the
statement, which are unchanged.  In sum, short- and longer-term interest rates, equity
prices, and the exchange value of the dollar would probably be little changed in
response to an announcement along the lines of Alternative B.
(26) If the Committee both thinks that it is important that it be seen to be
responding to the continued high levels of inflation and has fairly high confidence in
the resilience of financial markets and economic activity, it may prefer to tighten
policy by 25 basis points at this meeting as in Alternative C.  PCE inflation in the
third quarter is projected to be its highest since the first quarter of 1990 – and above
inflation expectations remain above their levels of recent years.  Against this
backdrop, the Committee may feel that failing to tighten policy could lead market
participants and households to question its commitment to price stability, as in the
“Unanchored inflation expectations” alternative scenario in the Greenbook.
Moreover, most simple policy rules call for a federal funds rate that is considerably
above its current level (Chart 8).  Although financial market conditions remain
strained, members may judge that the financial situation is being adequately addressed
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 41
by the various measures that the Federal Reserve has put in place to support market
liquidity and by the Treasury’s actions to stabilize Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.  As a
result, the Committee may see the slowdown in growth as transitory, along the lines
of the “Financial rebound” Greenbook alternative scenario, and be concerned that
holding the federal funds rate at its current level would impart excessive momentum
to the economy going forward, undercutting efforts to bring inflation down.
(27) The discussion of economic activity in the statement proposed in
Alternative C is similar to that in Alternative B.  However, Alternative C cites the
“accommodative stance of monetary policy” rather than past policy easings as a factor
that should support growth in the future because policy would be tightened under this
alternative.  The inflation paragraph in Alternative C indicates that “inflation has
remained high.”  The statement goes on to emphasize that “the possibility that
inflation may fail to decline as anticipated is of significant concern” to the Committee,
and then notes that the policy firming at this meeting was intended to “provide
additional assurance that inflation will abate as desired.”  This indication that the
move was taken as a type of anti-inflation insurance, along with the earlier discussion
of the current period of economic weakness, may suggest that the tightening would
not necessarily be followed by a series of upward adjustments to the funds rate.
(28) Market participants are very confident in their outlook for no change in
policy at this meeting and would be quite surprised by the adoption of Alternative C.
The expected trajectory of the federal funds rate for the next several months would
likely be marked up at least 25 basis points, and might move up further if investors
thought the Committee was more likely to raise rates going forward.  Other short-
term interest rates would rise accordingly.  Longer-term rates would probably increase
as well.  Inflation compensation would likely decline a bit, as investors concluded that
the Committee was taking a more aggressive stance toward inflation.  Equity prices
would fall, perhaps sharply, while the exchange value of the dollar would probably
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 41
appreciate.  The policy surprise, along with the potentially large and unexpected
movements in asset prices, would likely intensify strains in financial markets, perhaps
(29) If the Committee sees recent developments as pointing to a weaker
economic outlook and less pronounced inflation pressures, members may instead be
attracted to the statement language of Alternative A.  The substantial decline in
energy prices in recent months, if not reversed, will pull down top-line inflation,
which may prevent elevated inflation rates from becoming embedded in expectations.
Indeed, near-term inflation expectations have come down appreciably over the
intermeeting period, as has five-by-five inflation compensation.  Moreover, the
passthrough of the lower energy prices, coupled with a higher level of unemployment,
should add to downward pressure on core inflation.  Members may also see the recent
marked rise in the exchange value of the dollar as likely to contribute to a reduction in
inflation while restraining overall economic growth.  In addition, financial strains
appear to have extended to a wider range of financial institutions over the
intermeeting period, in some cases creating severe pressures on their balance sheets
and even uncertainty about their solvency.  The ongoing pullback in credit availability
has the potential to weigh on economic growth for a considerable period, as in the
“More-persistent headwinds” scenario discussed in the Greenbook.  The real federal
funds rate (based on lagged four-quarter core PCE inflation) is roughly in line with its
Greenbook-consistent equilibrium value, which the Committee may see as an
appropriate policy stance in the present circumstances (Chart 6).  Still, the Committee
may now see risks to both inflation and output as considerable and roughly equal and
may wish to adjust the language in the statement to treat them symmetrically.
(30) The statement under Alternative A differs from that under Alternative B
only in its discussion of the inflation outlook and the assessment of risks.  In
particular, while still noting that inflation has been high, the alternative indicates the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 41
Committee’s expectation “that the recent decline in energy and other commodity
prices and increased slack in resource utilization will foster a moderation of inflation.”
The statement again notes that the outlook for inflation is uncertain, but adopts
language that suggests the Committee sees the risks to growth and inflation as roughly
equal – “The downside risks to growth and the upside risks to inflation are both of
significant concern to the Committee.”  Taken together, the adjustments suggest a
greater degree of confidence that inflation will moderate as well as a more balanced
outlook with regard to any future policy moves.
(31) Despite the changes in the statement language in Alternative A, the market
reaction may not be very large.  The observation that the substantial decline in oil
prices is likely to contribute to a moderation in inflation will come as no surprise to
market participants.  Furthermore, investors already expect policy to be unchanged
for several quarters and reportedly read the August statement as essentially signaling a
shift to a balanced assessment of risks, so a more explicit indication in that regard may
not spark much reaction.  Indeed, the Desk’s survey found that primary dealers expect
the statement to be changed slightly to indicate a somewhat weaker outlook for
growth and reduced inflationary pressures.  Still, the greater confidence expressed in
the statement that inflation will moderate may be seen as freeing up the Committee to
ease policy if necessary should the outlook for the economy worsen.  In consequence,
short-term interest rates may decline somewhat following such an announcement.
Long-term rates would likely edge down only a bit if at all, while inflation
compensation could tick higher if investors see the FOMC as having become less
vigilant with respect to inflation risks.  Equity prices may increase moderately, and the
exchange value of the dollar might decline a little.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 41
Money and Debt Forecasts
(32) Because M2 growth has continued to be surprisingly sluggish in recent
months, the forecast for M2 growth for 2008 has been revised down 1¼ percentage
points, to 5 percent, despite an upward revision to the staff’s outlook for nominal
GDP growth and a downward revision to the opportunity cost of holding money.
M2 growth is projected to fall to 3½ percent in 2009 and 3 percent in 2010 in
response to a projected increase in M2 opportunity cost as monetary policy firms.
(33) Growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to remain quite
moderate:  After slowing from 8½ percent growth in 2007 to 4¼ percent in 2008, it
stays at around 4½ percent in 2009 and 5 percent in 2010.  In the projection,
borrowing by households continues to be held down by falling home prices and
tighter bank lending standards.  Tightening by banks also contributes to a slowdown
in business borrowing, which is restrained in addition by elevated corporate bond
spreads.  In contrast, federal government debt is expected to accelerate this year and
next as a variety of factors, including this year’s fiscal stimulus payments, slower
growth in tax receipts, and expected federal outlays for deposit insurance and
assistance for the GSEs contribute to wider federal deficits.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 41
Table 2
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
No Change 25 bp Tightening Greenbook Forecast*
Monthly Growth Rates
Growth From To
*This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 41
(34) Draft language for the directive is provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/INCREASING/reducing the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around ________ 2 percent.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 37 of 41
