Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Content last modified 03/07/2014.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
MARCH 13, 2008
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 13, 2008
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Strains in many financial markets intensified over the intermeeting period as
deleveraging increased in scope and depth.  Pressures resurfaced in short-term funding
markets, with investors growing even more concerned about balance sheet capacity at large
financial institutions.  In response, the Federal Reserve announced on March 7 and March
11 a set of initiatives to help address term funding pressures.  In longer-term corporate
markets, both investment- and speculative-grade credit spreads widened markedly over the
intermeeting period, and secondary market bid prices for leveraged loans tumbled.  Issuance
of high-yield debt securities continued to be weak, but investment-grade bond issuance was
robust.  Equity prices declined, on net, with financial stocks especially hard hit.  Spreads of
rates on conforming mortgage products over those on comparable-maturity Treasury
securities widened significantly, but issuance of agency residential mortgage-backed
securities (RMBS) continued to be strong.  In contrast, issuance of RMBS backed by
nonconforming loans remained near nil.  Against the backdrop of tightening financial
conditions and a deteriorating economic outlook, market participants lowered their expected
path for the federal funds rate and are now virtually certain of at least 50 basis points of
easing at the March FOMC meeting.
Money Markets
(2) Pressures reemerged in short-term funding markets over the intermeeting period.
After having narrowed following the introduction of the TAF and the uneventful turn of the
year, spreads of Libor and term federal funds rates over rates on comparable-maturity
overnight index swaps (OIS) began widening again, perhaps in anticipation of further
possible writedowns at financial institutions, of potential funding pressures stemming from
continued dislocations in markets for structured municipal products, and possibly of the
approach of the quarter-end (Chart 1).  Consistent with continuing funding pressures, the
fifth, sixth, and seventh TAF auctions attracted more demand than the January auctions; the
lack of dollar operations by the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank in
February may have contributed some to the increase in auction participation.  In the
commercial paper market, spreads of rates on lower-rated nonfinancial unsecured paper
over those on AA nonfinancial paper climbed over the intermeeting period.  Spreads of
rates on AA-rated asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) over those on AA financial paper
have increased by a smaller amount, on net.  After having expanded in January, ABCP
outstanding decreased some, on balance, over the intermeeting period, while unsecured CP
outstanding changed little.
(3) Strains reappeared in the Treasury bill market in recent weeks.  Three-month
Treasury bill yields declined 93 basis points over the intermeeting period, reflecting the
downward revision to the expected path of monetary policy and safe haven flows that were
reportedly heavy at times.  Signs of dislocation were also prominent in the repo market.
Amid robust demand for Treasury collateral, the overnight general collateral repo rate was
volatile, often dropping well below the target federal funds rate.  In addition, dealers
increased haircuts on many securities—particularly for alt-A and subprime MBS but also for
agency MBS and even for Treasuries, which had traditionally been perceived as a very safe
asset class.  Credit limits were also being reportedly reduced as dealers became concerned
that some counterparties—especially highly leveraged funds—may not have sufficient
capital to weather the current environment of asset price declines, exceptional price
volatility, and market illiquidity.  Finally, financing rates were increased as dealers passed on
elevated funding costs to customers.  Tighter lending terms in the repo market resulted in
widespread margin calls.  Most investors were able to meet them, but some, including a
high-profile traded mortgage fund and a medium-sized mortgage lender, were not.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 2 of 39
Chart 1
Asset Market Developments
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov. Jan. Mar.
2007 2008
140
Basis points
1-month
3-month
Spreads of Libor over OIS
Daily Jan.
FOMC
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov. Jan. Mar.
2007 2008
200
Basis points
ABCP
A2/P2
Spreads on thirty-day commercial paper
Jan.
FOMC
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov. Jan. Mar.
2007 2008
8
Percent
Target federal funds rate
Treasury
MBS
Overnight repo rates
Source. Bloomberg
Jan.
FOMC
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov. Jan. Mar.
2007 2008
300
Basis points
Banks*
Broker/dealers**
*Median spread of 26 banking organizations.
**Median spread of 10 broker-dealers.
Note. Last observation is for March 12, 2008.
CDS spreads at selected financial institutions
Daily Jan.
FOMC
170
Index(12/31/00=100)
Wilshire
Dow Jones Financial
Equity prices
Daily Jan.
FOMC
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Ten-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate bond spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Note. Last observation is for March 12, 2008.
Jan.
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 3 of 39
Meanwhile, lending from the SOMA securities portfolio remained elevated.  Likely reflecting
in part developments in short-term funding markets, as well as investors’ increasing
concerns about balance sheet capacity, credit default swap (CDS) spreads for banks and
especially for broker-dealers have widened sharply in recent weeks.
(4) In response to strains in the interbank and repo markets, the Federal Reserve
announced on March 7 that it would increase the size of the two upcoming TAF auctions,
that it would hold such auctions for at least the next six months unless evolving market
conditions clearly indicated that such auctions were no longer necessary, and that it would
initiate a series of 28-day term repurchase transactions against a single tranche consisting of
Treasury, agency, and agency MBS collateral.  On March 11, the Federal Reserve announced
an expansion of its securities lending program under which primary dealers could borrow
Treasury securities for a 28-day period using agency, agency MBS, or AAA-rated private-
label MBS as collateral.  In addition, the FOMC authorized an increase in its existing
temporary reciprocal currency arrangements with the European Central Bank and the Swiss
National Bank, and those central banks announced a resumption of dollar auctions for
institutions in their jurisdictions.  Overall, short-term funding markets showed some early
signs of improvement as a result of the Federal Reserve’s initiatives.  For example, spreads
of Libor and term federal funds rates over rates on comparable-maturity OIS reversed some
of their earlier increases.  (See box “Recent Federal Reserve Initiatives to Address Short-
term Liquidity.”)
Longer-term Corporate Markets
(5) Broad equity indexes continued to be volatile and ended the period down about
3½ percent on concerns about credit market developments and the implications of negative
economic news for corporate earnings.  Financial sector stocks were particularly hard hit,
declining about 13 percent.  The spread between the twelve-month forward trend earnings-
price ratio for S&P 500 firms and a real long-run Treasury yield—a rough gauge of the
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 4 of 39
Recent Federal Reserve Initiatives to Address Short-term Liquidity
Recently, conditions in short-term funding markets, particularly interbank and repurchase 
agreement (repo) markets, have deteriorated.  Increased demand for dollar liquidity led term Libor-OIS 
spreads, which had narrowed considerably since mid-December, to widen again in mid-February.  At the 
same time, an accelerating pullback from mortgage-related assets and heightened demand for Treasury 
securities created dislocations and volatility in collateralized lending markets.  In response to these 
developments and general strains in market functioning in a number of financial markets, on March 7, the 
Federal Reserve announced that it would increase its lending volume through the Term Auction Facility 
(TAF) and that the Desk would begin a series of 28-day, single-tranche repo transactions.  On March 11, 
the Federal Reserve announced that it would create a new Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), and 
that the FOMC had extended and increased currency swap lines with the European Central Bank (ECB) 
and the Swiss National Bank (SNB). 
 
 To ease pressures in dollar funding markets, the Federal Reserve announced that the total dollar 
value offered at each March TAF auction would be increased to $50 billion, and stated that, unless market 
conditions clearly indicated that the auctions were to become unnecessary, it would continue the TAF for 
at least six months.  The first such auction, held on March 10, was well subscribed.  The FOMC also 
authorized an increase to $30 billion in the currency swap arrangement with the ECB and an increase to 
$6 billion in the arrangement with the SNB.  These central banks announced that they would resume 
auctions on March 25 and that they would continue to provide dollar liquidity for as long as they deemed 
necessary.
The Federal Reserve also initiated a series of 28-day repos in which dealers are able to deliver as 
collateral any of the types of securities that are eligible as collateral in conventional operations, and the 
highest rates bid, regardless of collateral, win the auction.  Cumulating to $100 billion, these operations 
should allow dealers to finance mortgage-backed securities (MBS) more easily, and the first operation, 
conducted on Friday, March 7, received propositions exclusively for MBS collateral.  In addition, the 
Federal Reserve’s new $200 billion TSLF will lend Treasury securities from the SOMA portfolio to 
primary dealers for a term of up to 28 days against agency debt, agency-backed MBS, and AAA/Aaa-rated 
private-label MBS.  This new facility allows dealers to substitute less-liquid securities for Treasury 
securities.
To maintain the overnight federal funds rate near the target rate, the Desk must drain an amount
of balances that is roughly equal to the reserves provided by the TAF and the single-tranche term repos.  
The Desk has a variety of tools, including reducing the quantity of other repos outstanding, redeeming 
Treasury securities, and selling Treasury securities on an outright basis from the SOMA portfolio.  Indeed, 
on March 7, for the first time since 1990, the Desk sold Treasury bills in the open market, and it sold 
additional bills on March 12.  These operations will leave an even greater supply of sought-after Treasury 
securities at dealers’ disposal.
Market participants’ response to these initiatives has generally been positive.  Dollar Libor-OIS
spreads narrowed noticeably in response to the first auction of the expanded TAF.  In the cash MBS 
market, spreads to Treasuries also came in notably, suggesting that the recent and prospective shifts in 
relative market supply of Treasury securities to other, less liquid assets has promoted market functioning.  
And on the day of the announcement of the TSLF and the extended currency swap lines, equity markets 
rallied and interest rates rose reflecting improved sentiment.  Apparently, some market participants view 
these initiatives as a partial substitute to easing of the federal funds rate for the Federal Reserve to address 
liquidity and market functioning difficulties.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 5 of 39
equity risk premium—remained at the upper end of its range over the past two decades.
Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index continued to be high by historical standards.
(6) In the corporate bond market, yields on both investment- and speculative-grade
issues rose markedly over the intermeeting period, even as longer-term Treasury yields
declined.  As a result, spreads over comparable-maturity Treasury securities widened about
45 and 60 basis points, respectively, and they are now at their highest levels since 2002.  The
widening in spreads primarily reflected a rise in near-term forward spreads, suggesting
increased concerns among investors about prospects for credit quality.  CDS spreads rose
for nonfinancial firms, but by noticeably less than for financial firms.  Issuance of
investment-grade bonds was robust in February, but very few high-yield bonds were issued.
In the secondary market, liquidity conditions reportedly deteriorated, although trading
volumes have increased since late last year.  Strains were also apparent in the CDS market,
where unusually wide ranges of dealer quotes for the same reference entities suggested that
liquidity and price discovery were impaired.  While in the second half of last year this
problem affected mainly financial institutions, so far this year dealer quotes have been sparse
for nonfinancial institutions as well.
(7) In the leveraged loan market, banks reportedly continued to face severe difficulties
syndicating to investors previously underwritten loans used to finance large LBO deals, and
the pipeline of leveraged loans stayed elevated.  Meanwhile, secondary market bid prices for
leveraged loans tumbled over the intermeeting period (Chart 2).  This sharp price
deterioration apparently reflected a combination of factors, including concerns about credit
quality, reduced investor interest following the decline in Libor rates, and reported unwinds
of positions by leveraged investors and market value collateralized loan obligations (CLOs).
Liquidity also apparently deteriorated:  The average bid-asked spread on leveraged
syndicated loans widened about 40 basis points, to 206 basis points, and it is now well above
the peak reached last August.  An index of CDS on leveraged syndicated loans (the LCDX
index) increased more than 60 basis points, on net.  In the CLO market, spreads have
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 6 of 39
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov. Jan. Mar.
2007 2008
104
Basis points Percent of par
Bid-asked spread (left scale)
Bid price (right scale)
Average bid-asked spread and average bid price
on leveraged loans
Source. LSTA/LPC Mark-to-Market Pricing.
Jan.
FOMC
1.7
Ratio
Twenty-year
One-year
Municipal bond yield ratios
Jan.
FOMC
Total Tax
Exempt
Prime Gov
Taxable
Weekly rate
Source. Investment Company Institute.
Money market fund flows ($ billions)
400
Basis points
FRM
One-Year ARM
Jumbo-Conforming
Mortgage rate spreads
Jan.
FOMC
2006 2007
  0
220
Basis points
Fannie Mae
Ginnie Mae
Agency option-adjusted spreads
Jan.
FOMC
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov. Jan. Mar.
2007 2008
2000
Basis points
AAA    
BBB
Ten-year investment grade CMBS spreads
Jan.
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 7 of 39
widened sharply across the capital structure since the January FOMC meeting and new
issuance has remained extremely weak.  Likely reflecting the sharp price deterioration in the
loan market, prime rate loan funds reportedly continued to experience outflows.
The Municipal Bond Market and Money Market Mutual Funds
(8) Ratios of municipal bond yields to comparable-maturity Treasury yields climbed
over the intermeeting period, apparently reflecting investors’ concerns about the conditions
of financial guarantors and some softening in the fiscal outlook for local and state
governments.  Issuance of municipal bonds slowed in February.  CDS spreads of financial
guarantors remained elevated, on balance, even though rating agencies have recently
reaffirmed the AAA ratings of the largest two firms.
(9) Concerns about the conditions of financial guarantors had important implications
for the functioning of the markets for structured municipal products.  In the auction rate
securities (ARS) market, many auctions failed as broker-dealers did not step in to support
them when investor demand largely vanished in response to concerns about the guarantors,
and interest rates reset, often to very high penalty rates.  The market for variable-rate
demand notes (VRDNs) also experienced unprecedented volatility, apparently prompted in
part by the possible effect of financial guarantors’ downgrades on liquidity arrangements
incorporated in these securities.  Reflecting similar concerns, dislocations were significant
also in the tender option bond (TOB) market, where unwinds have accelerated in recent
(10) Tax-exempt money market mutual funds (MMMFs) have reportedly been
reducing their holdings of some structured municipal products on perceived weakness in the
liquidity provisions supporting these products. Nevertheless, MMMFs overall have
continued to experience very large inflows—comparable to those they attracted last August
at the beginning of the ongoing turmoil in financial markets—likely reflecting a flight toward
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 8 of 39
relatively safe assets and perhaps recent policy rate cuts, which reduce the rates available to
new fund investors only gradually.
Mortgage Markets
(11) Interest rates on thirty-year fixed-rate conforming mortgages increased 65 basis
points over the intermeeting period, while rates on one-year adjustable-rate conforming
loans rose 15 basis points.  As a result, spreads over comparable-maturity Treasury securities
widened markedly.  Posted offer rates on thirty-year jumbo mortgages have also increased
since the January FOMC meeting, and such credit continued to be difficult to obtain.
Issuance of residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) backed by nonconforming loans
dried up.  By contrast, issuance of agency MBS securities stayed strong.
(12) Liquidity conditions for private-label RMBS—especially alt-A securities—
worsened significantly starting in mid-February; prices dropped sharply as dealers began
imposing much higher haircuts when funding such positions, and some investors were
reportedly forced to scale back their holdings.  Significant signs of stress were also evident in
the agency MBS market.  Bid-asked spreads widened, and option-adjusted spreads (OAS)
over Treasuries surged to the highest levels in many years, reportedly reflecting in part
investor deleveraging amid tighter financing terms and the large supply of securities coming
to market.  Market participants also pointed to anxiety about the size of GSE losses as a
reason for the decline in liquidity in the agency MBS market.  However, OAS spreads
continued to increase even after Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac released their earnings reports
in late February and their regulator announced that it would lift limits on their portfolio
growth that it had previously put in place.  The increase in the agencies’ CDS spreads was
also steep over the period.  Spreads widened sharply even on Ginnie Mae’s MBS, which
carry a U.S. government guarantee, pointing to investors’ heightened aversion to mortgage
products.  In recent days, however, agency spreads retraced some of their earlier increases,
as investors apparently judged that the Federal Reserve’s initiatives could help return some
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 9 of 39
liquidity to agency mortgage markets.  In the market for commercial mortgage-backed
securities, issuance continued to be negligible, while spreads over swap rates widened even
further over the intermeeting period.
Monetary Policy Expectations and Treasury Yields
(13) With the exception of the announcement of the Term Securities Lending Facility,
Federal Reserve actions and communications over the intermeeting period generally elicited
only modest market reactions.  The FOMC’s decision at its January meeting to reduce the
target federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 3 percent was widely anticipated.1
Subsequently, the downward revision to the growth outlook and the upward revision to the
inflation outlook contained in the summary of economic projections released with the
FOMC minutes apparently did not surprise market participants, and investors reportedly
viewed the Chairman’s monetary policy testimony at the end of February as in line with
recent FOMC communications.  However, in response to the Federal Reserve’s
announcement on March 11, the expected path for policy firmed temporarily, as market
participants apparently saw the favorable effects of the expansion of the securities lending
program as likely to reduce the need for policy easing.  Inflation data releases were
disappointing over the intermeeting period, but the softness in real-side economic data,
deteriorating financial market conditions, and concerns about some large financial
institutions evidently were interpreted by market participants as suggesting that more policy
easing than previously foreseen would be forthcoming.  On net, market participants now
expect the funds rate to decline to about 1.75 percent late this year, about 50 basis points
1 The effective federal funds rate averaged 2.99 percent over the intermeeting period with elevated 
volatility, comparable to that seen in recent months.  Over the period, the volume of long-term RPs 
increased $36 billion, primarily reflecting the introduction of the new 28-day, single-tranche RP 
program.  The Desk redeemed $10 billion in Treasury bills and sold $25 billion on an outright basis.  
The reduction in holdings of Treasury securities offset the provision of balances through the Term 
Auction Facility and the twenty-eight-day RP program.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 10 of 39
more than at the time of the January meeting (Chart 3).  Judging from quotes on federal
funds target binary options, investors are now virtually certain of a rate cut of 50 basis
points or more at the upcoming FOMC meeting and attach about a 40 percent probability
to a half-point of easing.  Respondents to the Desk’s recent survey of primary dealers—
which was conducted before the March 11 announcement—were about evenly split between
a 50 and a 75 basis point cut.  A majority of the primary dealer economists anticipated the
language of the statement released after the upcoming FOMC meeting to be similar to the
January 30 statement.  On balance, uncertainty about the path for policy remains elevated.
The option-implied distributions of the federal funds rate between six and twelve months
ahead are now skewed to the downside and show non-negligible odds of very low interest
(14) Yields on two-year nominal Treasury securities dropped 59 basis points, on net,
over the intermeeting period; ten-year Treasury yields declined 9 basis points.  Liquidity
continued to be somewhat impaired in the Treasury coupon market, with bid-asked spreads
staying elevated.  The spread between yields on on-the-run and off-the-run five- and ten-
year Treasury notes remained very wide, at levels not seen since 2002.  Trading volumes
were exceptionally high in January, but receded in February.  The forward term structure of
TIPS yields steepened sharply; the decline in real forward rates at short horizons is
consistent with the downward revision in the economic outlook.
(15) Forward TIPS-based inflation compensation increased across the term structure
over the intermeeting period.  Five-year inflation compensation adjusted for carry effects
rose 9 basis points amid higher-than-expected inflation data releases and sharp increases in
commodity prices including oil, while five-year inflation compensation five years forward
moved up 19 basis points.  The increase in inflation compensation may reflect in part an
increase in inflation expectations and inflation risk premiums.  (See box “Long-Run
Inflation Expectations and Uncertainty.”)
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 11 of 39
Chart 3
Interest Rate Developments
2008 2009
1.5
3.5
Percent
March 13, 2008
January 29, 2008
Expected federal funds rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
70
Percent
<2.25 2.50 >2.75
Binary options*
Desk’s survey
_ _
Probability density for target funds rate
after the March meeting*
*Derived from binary options on target funds rate after the meeting.
Implied distribution of federal funds rate six 
months ahead*
Recent: 3/13/2008
Last FOMC: 1/29/2008
*Derived from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, with term premium 
 and other adjustments to estimate expectations for the federal funds rate.
7
Percent
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Jan.
FOMC
Real Inflation
Compensation
Changes in components of implied one-year forward
rates since last FOMC
Years Ahead
Basis Points
130
Percent $/barrel
Next Five Years (left scale)
Five-to-Ten Year Forward (left scale)
Spot WTI (right scale)
Inflation compensation and oil prices*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
 Treasury yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Jan.
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 12 of 39
Long-Run Inflation Expectations and Uncertainty
Several financial market and survey-based indicators of long-run inflation expectations and uncertainty have moved 
up since the start of this year.  Most notably, inflation compensation derived from comparing the nominal and TIPS 
yield curves has risen across the term structure:  The four-to-five-year forward rate of inflation compensation has 
climbed about 15 basis points since the start of the year, and the five-to-ten-year forward rate has increased by almost 
50 basis points.  About half of the rise in the five-to-ten-year forward rate occurred in narrow windows around the 
two January FOMC policy announcements, the releases of higher-than-expected consumer and producer price data, 
and speeches by FOMC participants which emphasized the Committee’s concerns about downside risks to growth.  
The increase in inflation compensation likely primarily reflects some combination of increases in inflation 
expectations and uncertainty, with the latter leading to higher inflation risk premiums.  (To the extent that strains in 
financial markets have caused investors to prefer the relative liquidity of nominal Treasury securities, this would tend 
to put downward pressure on their yields and so lower measured inflation compensation.  However, if the liquidity 
effects were especially pronounced at the front end of the nominal yield curve they could act to boost the five-to-ten-
year forward rate measure of inflation compensation.)
A number of other indicators also suggest greater nervousness about longer-term inflation prospects.  Nine-to-ten-
year nominal forward rates have risen to their highest levels since the middle of 2004, perhaps in part reflecting 
concerns about the inflation outlook.  Moreover, dealers report increased investor interest in inflation cap contracts, 
which offer insurance against inflation rising above a specified high rate, typically between 3½ percent and 4½ 
percent.  Although this market remains very thin, the prices of these caps have reportedly risen in recent months, 
consistent with higher expected inflation and greater inflation uncertainty.  In a similar vein, inflows into inflation-
protected bond funds increased sharply in January.  By contrast, recent survey measures of expected inflation have 
been mixed.  The February Survey of Professional Forecasters reported increases in both long-run inflation 
expectations and inflation uncertainty; likewise, the Desk survey of primary dealers in recent months has pointed to an 
edging up in long-run expected inflation.   However, the March Blue Chip Economic Indicators and the February 
Reuters/University of Michigan Survey showed little change in longer-run inflation expectations since the start of the 
year, although the Michigan survey does suggest that long-run inflation expectations have moved up since the autumn.
All measures of inflation expectations and inflation uncertainty are imperfect and noisy.  As a result, a more reliable 
guide to developments in underlying inflation concerns may be gained by considering the common movement in a 
range of measures.  An index of inflation expectations and uncertainty, constructed as the first principal component 
of fourteen different inflation indicators, declined sharply during the period of disinflation in the 1990s and has since 
remained in a relatively narrow range.  The indicators employed include TIPS-based inflation compensation, survey 
measures of expectations, and survey measures of inflation uncertainty and the dispersion of expectations.  Although 
the index remains within the range seen over the past ten years or so, it has moved up since the start of the year.  This 
development is consistent with the staff’s assessment that although longer-term inflation expectations still appear 
reasonably well anchored, concerns about future inflation have increased somewhat in recent months.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 13 of 39
Foreign Developments
(16)  European interbank term money markets showed less evidence of stress during
most of the intermeeting period than did U.S. markets.  Although Libor-OIS spreads for
both euro and sterling moved up, on balance, the net increases were less than those in dollar
term markets.  Earlier discontinuation of dollar auctions by the European Central Bank
(ECB) and Swiss National Bank (SNB) may have driven some European borrowers into
U.S. markets and contributed to higher dollar spreads.  On March 11, in actions coordinated
among G10 central banks, the ECB and SNB announced that they would resume their
dollar auctions and increase their size, consistent with the expansion of their currency swap
lines with the Federal Reserve.  Also as part of the coordinated actions, the Bank of England
and the Bank of Canada announced measures designed to address strains in term money
markets in their own currencies.  Following the announcements, Libor-OIS dollar spreads
declined, but European spreads showed little reaction.  Trading conditions in the FX swap
market continued to be somewhat strained during the intermeeting period.  The outstanding
amount of European asset backed commercial paper (ABCP) continued to decline over the
intermeeting period and is now roughly half what it was as the beginning of the current
financial turmoil.
(17)  The trade-weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar against major currencies
moved down about 3½ percent, on balance, over the intermeeting period amid growing
concerns about distress in U.S. financial markets, cumulating signs of weakness in the U.S.
economy, and increasing expectations of further aggressive action by the Federal Reserve
(Chart 4).  News on foreign economic developments—as well as assessments of the health
of foreign financial markets and institutions—tended to be less negative.  Yields on two-year
euro-area government securities declined noticeably less than did comparable yields on two-
year U.S. Treasuries (only about 20 basis points versus roughly 60 basis points for U.S.
yields).  Yields on long-term government securities in advanced foreign economies declined
10 to 40 basis points.  The dollar dropped more than 5 percent against the euro and yen, but
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 14 of 39
Chart 4
International Financial Indicators
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal trade-weighted dollar indexes
Jan. FOMC
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-year government bond yields (nominal)
Jan. FOMC
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock price indexes
industrial countries
Jan. FOMC
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock price indexes
emerging market economies
Jan. FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 15 of 39
only about 2 percent versus sterling and 1 percent against the Canadian dollar.  Both the
Bank of Canada and the Bank of England lowered policy rates (by 50 and 25 basis points,
respectively) during the period.  The Bank of Japan and the European Central Bank left
policy rates unchanged, and ECB officials highlighted their concerns about intensifying
inflationary pressures.2   Headline share price indexes registered widespread declines of 1 to
5 percent in Europe and Japan, and financial stocks experienced steeper falls, including a 15
percent price decline for Japanese bank stocks.   Most major emerging markets continue to
be relatively unscathed by the financial turmoil and the growing worries about global
economic growth.  Though risk spreads on emerging market sovereign debt widened
somewhat and stock prices in some emerging market economies experienced modest
declines, share prices moved up in Mexico, Brazil, Korea, and Thailand.  The dollar fell on
balance about 1¼ percent against an index of currencies of our other important trading
Debt and Money
(18) Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is estimated to be expanding at an annual rate
of about 5¼ percent in the current quarter, a marked slowdown from the pace recorded in
the fourth quarter of last year (Chart 5).  Growth of nonfinancial business debt is projected
to moderate to a rate of 5½ percent this quarter, as the previously torrid growth of C&I
loans has slowed substantially—damped in part by significantly weaker M&A activity—and
as funding in both the high-yield bond market and the leveraged loan market has come
nearly to a halt—especially for large LBO deals.  In the household sector, mortgage debt
growth is expected to decelerate further to about 3½ percent in the first quarter, held down
by falling house prices, declining home sales, and tighter credit conditions for most types of
loans.  Consumer credit growth is projected to expand roughly 3 percent this quarter.
2   There were no foreign official purchases or sales of dollars by reporting central banks in industrial 
countries during the intermeeting period.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 16 of 39
Chart 5
Debt and Money
Growth of debt of nonfinancial sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
p Projected.
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in selected components of debt of
nonfinancial business*
2005 2006 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Jan Feb
2007 2008
Monthly rate
*Commercial paper and C&I loans are seasonally adjusted, bonds are not.
Growth of debt of household sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Q1p
Q1p
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of house prices
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
OFHEO Purchase-Only Index
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
2005 H1 H2 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Jan Feb
2006 2007 2008
M2 velocity and opportunity cost
VelocityPercentage points
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 17 of 39
(19) M2 advanced at a rapid 12½ percent annual rate, on average, in January and
February.  Likely reflecting continued demand for safety and liquidity, retail money funds
grew at a 61 percent pace in February.  Liquid deposits also accelerated noticeably in
February, as the opportunity cost of holding these assets has fallen in recent months.  With
several thrift institutions offering aggressive deposit rates to attract funding, growth in small
time deposits picked up in January, although it moderated in February.  After three months
of contraction reflecting weak demand from overseas investors, currency expanded
moderately in February.  In recent quarters, the opportunity cost of holding M2 has fallen
steeply while the velocity of M2 has declined only slightly, bringing these variables closer to
their historical relationship.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 18 of 39
Economic Outlook
(20) The staff has marked down appreciably its outlook for growth in 2008 in
response to steeper-than-anticipated declines in home prices, a sharp deterioration in
business and consumer sentiment, a marked softening of labor markets, higher oil prices,
and a further tightening of credit conditions.  As a consequence, the forecast now assumes
that the Committee will ease policy 50 basis points at this meeting, another 50 basis points
in April, and 25 basis points at the June meeting, and then maintain the funds rate at 1¾
percent through the end of 2009.  With that path for policy, longer-term Treasury yields
have been revised down about 10 basis points over the rest of this year and 25 basis points
in 2009.  The overall contour for long-term interest rates, however, is similar to that
projected in January, with the yield on the ten-year Treasury note edging up as the ten-year
window moves past the especially low short-term interest rates this year and next.  Stock
prices rise at an annual rate of about 6¼ percent over the remainder of this year from a
starting point that is a bit lower than anticipated in the previous forecast and are expected
to climb at an annual rate of 11¼ percent next year as the equity premium starts to decline
toward more normal levels in response to dissipating macroeconomic risks; because the
staff pushed back the assumed beginning of the decline in the equity premium by a few
quarters, equity prices at the end of 2009 are about 6 percent lower than in the previous
Greenbook.  The trade-weighted dollar is assumed to depreciate at a 4¼ percent average
annual rate over the remainder of 2008 and about 3 percent in 2009.  In line with futures
quotes, the price of West Texas intermediate crude oil is expected to average about $102
per barrel over the forecast period, about $15 per barrel higher than in the previous
(21) Against this background, real GDP is projected to contract at about a
½ percent rate during the first half of this year; subsequently, fiscal stimulus and the lagged
effects of monetary policy easing engender a gradual recovery, with real GDP projected to
expand at a ¾ percent rate in the second half of 2008.  For 2008 as a whole, real GDP is
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 19 of 39
projected to be essentially flat, a downward revision in the rate of growth of almost 1½
percentage points relative to the January forecast.  With the contractionary effects of
higher oil prices and financial turmoil waning, economic growth picks up to about 3
percent in 2009, about ¾ percentage point above the staff’s estimate of the rate of
expansion of potential GDP.  As a consequence of economic weakness over the next
several quarters, the unemployment rate rises to almost 5¾ percent by the end of 2008—a
full percentage point above the staff’s estimate of the NAIRU—and then declines to 5½
percent by the end of 2009.  The forecast for total PCE inflation during the first half of
this year has been revised up substantially, from around 2½ percent to about 4 percent,
largely reflecting higher oil prices.  However, the assumed flattening out of energy and
other commodity prices, combined with the expected deceleration in import prices and
persistent slack in product and labor markets, pushes headline inflation down to about 1¾
percent by the third quarter of this year.  The path for core PCE inflation is a bit above the
January projection, mainly owing to elevated recent monthly readings on inflation and
some assumed deterioration in the public’s expectations of future inflation.  All told, the
staff expects core PCE inflation to average 2¼ percent this year and a bit below 2 percent
in 2009.
Update on Monetary Policy Strategies
(22) Since the January Bluebook, the Greenbook-consistent and FRB/US model-
based estimates of short-run r* have declined sharply and now stand at -0.5 and -0.1
percent, respectively (Chart 6).  These measures are now about 1¼ percent below our
measure of the current real federal funds rate.  These substantially lower estimates reflect
the downward revision to the staff’s outlook for aggregate demand.  In the small structural
model, the recent declines in stock and house prices, coupled with higher spreads on
corporate debt, also prompted a sharp decline in short-run r*; that estimate now stands at -
1.1 percent.  In contrast, the estimate obtained from the single equation model remains
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 20 of 39
Chart 6
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
8
Percent
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 Percent confidence interval
90 Percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
Single-equation model (2.0 (2.3
Small structural model -1.1 (0.7
Large model (FRB/US) -0.1 (0.9
Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval -1.7 - 2.3
90 percent confidence interval -2.7 - 3.6
Greenbook-consistent measure -0.5 (0.8
Medium-Run Measures
Single-equation model (2.2 (2.3
Small structural model (1.7 (1.9
Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval (1.0 - 2.9
90 percent confidence interval (0.5 - 3.7
TIPS-based factor model (2.0 2.0
Actual real federal funds rate (0.8 (1.4
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 21 of 39
positive and has shifted down only 30 basis points; this measure depends only on current
and lagged values of the output gap and not on financial conditions or other leading
indicators of aggregate demand.
(23) Chart 7 depicts optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model using
the staff’s extension of the Greenbook forecast beyond 2009.  In these simulations,
policymakers place equal weights on keeping core PCE inflation close to a specified goal,
on keeping unemployment close to the long-run NAIRU, and on avoiding changes in the
nominal federal funds rate.3  For an inflation goal of 1½ percent (the left-hand set of
charts), the simulation prescribes a nominal federal funds rate that declines to around 2¼
percent by late next year and then rises toward 3¾ percent by the end of 2012.  With an
inflation goal of 2 percent (the right-hand set of charts), the optimal funds rate falls more
sharply, dipping to near 1¼ percent by the end of 2009 before rising to about 4 percent by
2012.  Under either inflation goal, for the next two years these prescriptions are around
100 basis points lower than those shown in the previous Bluebook, mainly reflecting the
much weaker outlook for aggregate demand in the current forecast, as manifested in
upward revisions to the unemployment rate paths from 2008 through 2010.  Despite this
additional slack, the paths for core inflation are also above those shown in the January
Bluebook, reflecting unexpectedly high readings on inflation, recent increases in the prices
of oil and imported goods, and signs that inflation expectations may have moved up a bit
relative to the time of the last meeting.
(24) The outcome-based monetary policy rule prescribes a funds rate path that
declines to around 2 percent by the fourth quarter of this year, then fluctuates between 2
and 3 percent over the next several years (Chart 8).  Through the end of 2009, this
projection is, on average, around 100 basis points lower than the trajectory in the January
3  In conducting these simulations, policymakers and participants in financial markets are assumed to 
understand fully the forces shaping the economic outlook (as summarized by the extended 
Greenbook projection), whereas households and firms form their expectations using more limited 
information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 22 of 39
Bluebook.  According to financial market quotes, investors anticipate that the funds rate
will decline to around 1¾ percent by the end of this year and then progressively rise to
slightly below 4 percent by the end of 2012.  The confidence intervals on interest rate caps
indicate some odds of a funds rate as low as 1 percent by the end of 2008.  The near-term
prescriptions from the simple policy rules proposed by Taylor (1993, 1999) are lower than
those shown in January Bluebook, but remain well above the current target rate and the
prescriptions of the estimated outcome-based rule.  These higher prescriptions presumably
reflect that these rules do not include a lagged interest rate, and also that they do not take
into account current financial market pressures and other forward-looking information
captured by market expectations and the staff forecast.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(25) This Bluebook presents four policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized by the draft statements in Table 1.  The underlined text shown
in red highlights the changes from the January 30 statement, which appears on the page
following the table.  Alternative A cuts the federal funds rate target 75 basis points to 2¼
percent; Alternative B cuts the target 50 basis points to 2½ percent; Alternative C lowers
the target 25 basis points to 2¾ percent; and Alternative D leaves the target federal funds
rate at 3 percent.  As usual, the Committee could consider combining an action from any
one policy alternative with portions of the statement from more than one alternative.
(26) Should the Committee share the staff’s assessment of the underlying forces
shaping the economy and judge that the monetary stimulus already in the pipeline is
inadequate to foster a sufficiently timely resumption of moderate economic growth, it may
want reduce the target federal funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting as in Alternative
B.  Even with the 50 basis point reduction in the target federal funds rate on January 30,
some FOMC participants noted at that meeting that they anticipated that further easing
would be necessary to support aggregate demand.  Moreover, economic and financial news
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 25 of 39
Table 1: Alternative Language for the March 18, 2008 FOMC Announcement
Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Alternative D
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for  
the federal funds rate 50 basis points  
to 2-1/2 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for the 
federal funds rate 25 basis points to 
2-3/4 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 3 percent.
Recent information indicates that the 
outlook for economic activity has 
weakened further and that downside 
risks persist.  Growth in consumer 
spending has slowed and labor markets 
have softened.  Financial markets remain 
under considerable stress, and the 
tightening of credit conditions and the 
deepening of the housing contraction 
are likely to continue to weigh on 
economic growth.
Growth in consumer spending has 
slowed and labor markets have 
softened.  Financial markets remain 
under considerable stress, and the 
tightening of credit conditions and the 
deepening of the housing contraction 
are likely to continue to weigh on 
economic growth.  Recent policy 
actions should help to promote 
moderate growth over time, but 
downside risks to growth remain.
Growth in consumer spending has 
slowed, labor markets have softened, 
and financial markets remain under 
considerable stress.  Although 
downside risks to growth remain, 
recent policy actions should help to 
promote moderate growth over time.
Rationale 
3.  Inflation has been elevated, and some 
measures of inflation expectations have 
risen.  The Committee expects inflation 
to moderate in coming quarters, 
reflecting a projected leveling-out of 
energy and other commodity prices and 
an easing of pressures on resource 
utilization.  Still, uncertainty about the 
inflation outlook has increased.  It will 
be necessary to continue to monitor 
inflation developments carefully.
Inflation has been elevated, and some 
measures of inflation expectations have 
risen.  The Committee expects inflation 
to moderate in coming quarters, 
reflecting a projected leveling-out of 
energy and other commodity prices and 
an easing of pressures on resource 
utilization.  Still, uncertainty about the 
inflation outlook has increased.  It will 
be necessary to continue to monitor 
inflation developments carefully.
Inflation has been elevated, and upward 
pressure on inflation could result from 
several factors, including further 
increases in energy, commodity, and 
other import prices.  Although the 
Committee expects inflation to 
moderate in coming quarters, the 
upside risks to the outlook for inflation 
have increased.  The Committee will 
continue to monitor inflation 
developments carefully.
Inflation has been elevated, and upward 
pressure on inflation could result from 
several factors, including further 
increases in energy, commodity, and 
other import prices.  Although the 
Committee expects inflation to 
moderate in coming quarters, the 
upside risks to the outlook for inflation 
have increased.  The Committee will 
continue to monitor inflation 
developments carefully.
Assessment 
of Risk
Today’s policy action, combined with 
those taken earlier, should help to 
promote moderate growth over time and 
to mitigate the risks to economic 
activity.  However, downside risks to 
growth remain.  The Committee will 
continue to assess the effects of financial 
and other developments on economic 
prospects and will act in a timely manner 
as needed to address those risks.
The Committee judges that the risks to 
growth outweigh the risks to inflation, 
particularly in light of stresses in 
financial markets.  The Committee will 
continue to assess the effects of 
financial and other developments on 
economic prospects and will act in a 
timely manner as needed to address the 
evolving risks.
The Committee will continue to assess 
the effects of financial and other 
developments on economic prospects 
and will act in a timely manner as 
needed to promote price stability and 
sustainable economic growth.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 26 of 39
January 30, 2008 Statement
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 27 of 39
during the intermeeting period strongly suggests that the outlook for economic growth is
weakening:  Strains in financial markets have intensified, and incoming data indicate that
growth in consumer spending is flagging and labor markets are slackening, and the
tightening of credit conditions now appears to be interacting with the deteriorating
macroeconomic outlook in a mutually reinforcing cycle.  The Greenbook-consistent
measure of the equilibrium real funds rate is about 1¼ percentage points below the level
of the current real rate, suggesting that considerable further easing is necessary to bring
output back to its potential over the medium term.  Moreover, the Committee might see
the risks around the staff’s outlook as skewed to the downside, given the absence of
convincing signs of a bottoming in the housing market and the possibility of a sharp
further worsening of financial market conditions.  At the same time, however, the short-
run tradeoff between economic activity and inflation apparently has deteriorated, and
policymakers’ confidence that inflation will decline might have been eroded by the recent
run-up in energy and other commodity prices, the fall in the exchange value of the dollar,
and the rise in measures of inflation compensation.  In these circumstances, the
Committee might be concerned that additional aggressive policy easing may trigger
increases in inflation expectations that could be costly to reverse.  In view of such
concerns, the Committee might believe that more than 50 basis points of easing before
long may be warranted but might be reluctant to make that full adjustment at this meeting.
(27)  The rationale section of the statement accompanying Alternative B would
begin by noting the deterioration in the outlook for economic activity, pointing specifically
to the softening in consumer expenditures and labor markets.  The statement would also
point out that financial markets remain under considerable stress and that the tightening of
credit conditions, coupled with the deepening of the housing contraction, is likely to weigh
on economic growth in the near term.  The paragraph on inflation would note that the
Committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters assuming “a projected
leveling-out of energy and other commodity prices and an easing of pressures on resource
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 28 of 39
utilization.”  This alternative would highlight the risks that attend the Committee’s
expectation regarding the trajectory for inflation by indicating that “uncertainty about the
outlook for inflation has increased” and would note that the Committee “will continue to
monitor inflation developments carefully.”  The final paragraph would repeat the
assessment of risks from the January statement.
(28)  Investors place roughly even odds on both 50 basis point and 75 basis
point reductions in the target federal funds rate at this meeting.  As a result, adoption of
Alternative B would likely cause near-term policy expectations to move somewhat higher.
Equity prices might decline, and yield spreads on private-debt instruments over those on
Treasuries could widen, should market participants conclude that monetary policy was not
being eased sufficiently promptly to cushion adequately the weakness in economic activity.
Any such adverse effects, however, would likely be tempered by the Committee’s
acknowledgment that the downside risks to growth remain and that the Committee is
prepared to act in a timely manner to address those risks, a communication that would
likely be interpreted as indicating that members are still predisposed to ease policy further.
Given the smaller-than-expected policy move and the indication in the statement of
greater concern about inflation risks, market participants could mark down their inflation
expectations slightly.  Any move in the foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely be
relatively small.  However, in light of impaired trading conditions in many markets and
investors’ increasingly skittish attitudes, even small policy surprises have the potential to
generate an outsized reaction in financial markets.
(29) If the Committee judges that the news on economic activity and financial
markets since the January meeting has appreciably undermined the outlook for the
economy and is reasonably confident that inflation will moderate, it might prefer to move
more aggressively to promote growth and mitigate downside risks by cutting the funds rate
75 basis points at this meeting, as in Alternative A.  Despite the five policy moves over
the past six months, the substantial downward revision to the Greenbook forecast suggests
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 29 of 39
that significantly more easing than previously foreseen may be required to stave off a
severe deterioration in macroeconomic conditions.  Indeed, in light of the rapidly eroding
financial situation in recent weeks, policymakers might see an even weaker outlook than in
the Greenbook that would ultimately require even more policy easing than assumed in the
staff forecast.  Alternatively, policymakers might see the cumulative 125 basis points of
easing assumed in the staff forecast as likely to prove necessary to restore output to its
potential, but might prefer to deliver the easing in a more rapid manner than in the staff
forecast, in order to arrest the deterioration in investor sentiment currently afflicting
financial markets.  The downside risks around the growth outlook might be particularly
worrisome, given the steeper-than-expected declines in house prices and the intensification
of strains in financial markets.  In such circumstances, the Committee might view the odds
of an intensifying adverse feedback cycle—that is, a worsening of the macroeconomic
situation generating further distress in financial markets and among financial institutions,
thereby prompting a further tightening in the supply of credit and so putting further
downward pressure on real activity—as having risen appreciably over the intermeeting
period (a possibility suggested by the Greenbook scenario, “Greater Housing Correction
with More Financial Fallout”).  Members might also find the case for a 75 basis point cut
to be persuasive if they would be willing to tolerate a somewhat higher path for inflation
than in the staff forecast in order to respond more aggressively to the prospect of
significant weakness in output.  Instead, members might be more optimistic about the
outlook for inflation than the staff.  For example, with the unemployment rate seen as
likely to rise markedly, policymakers might anticipate that workers will become particularly
concerned about job security, a situation that could restrain wage demands and reduce cost
pressures by more than assumed in the baseline forecast (a possibility suggested by the
“Worker Insecurity” scenario in the Greenbook).
(30) The two paragraphs in the rationale portion of the statement associated with
Alternative A are identical to those in Alternative B.  However, the assessment of risks
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 30 of 39
differs from that in Alternative B by noting explicitly the risks to both growth and
inflation.  Alternative A also indicates that the Committee “judges that the downside risks
to growth outweigh the upside risks to inflation” and that the FOMC is prepared to act in
a timely manner as needed to “promote sustainable economic growth and price stability.”
(31) With market participants putting significant odds on both 50 basis point and 75
basis point cuts at this meeting, selection of Alternative A would likely leave short- and
intermediate-term interest rates a little lower.  Market participants would probably interpret
such an aggressive interest rate cut, together with the indication that downside risks to
growth predominate, as suggesting that the Committee is inclined to further policy easing.
This combination might bolster market confidence, causing equity prices to rise and credit
spreads on corporate debt to narrow some.  However, longer-term yields might move
higher if market participants became concerned that the Committee was underestimating
inflation risks or was more willing to tolerate higher rates of inflation going forward than
earlier anticipated.
(32) If the Committee believes that the economic outlook has weakened but is
concerned that aggressive further policy easing amid unfavorable inflation readings could
increase the likelihood of a rise in longer-term inflation expectations, it may wish to lower
the funds rate target by just 25 basis points at this meeting, as in Alternative C.  In
particular, this alternative might be favored if the factors underlying the recent increase in
inflation were viewed as likely to be more persistent than envisaged in the staff’s
projection.  In light of recent data, the Committee might see the short-run tradeoff
between economic activity and inflation as having worsened to a greater extent than
judged by the staff and believe that the scope for monetary policy to provide stimulus to
growth while applying adequate restraint to inflation has decreased noticeably.  Such a
deterioration in the short-run tradeoff between economic activity and inflation could
reflect in part an increase in inflation expectations, as illustrated in the Greenbook’s “More
Inflationary Pressures” scenario.  The difficulty of reliably detecting shifts in inflation
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 31 of 39
expectations may bolster the case for this alternative, especially if the Committee perceives
an upward drift of such expectations as being very costly to unwind.
(33) The statement accompanying Alternative C would explicitly acknowledge that
the upside risks to inflation have increased by pointing to recent unfavorable readings on
inflation and by emphasizing the factors that could potentially exert upward pressure on
inflation going forward.  As under Alternative B, the statement would point out that
members expect “inflation to moderate in coming quarters,” but would conclude that “the
upside risks to the outlook for inflation have increased.”  The rationale paragraph for this
alternative would also state that “recent policy actions should help to promote moderate
growth over time, but downside risks to growth remain.”  The risk assessment would
reflect the Committee’s judgment that “the risks to growth outweigh the risks to inflation,
particularly in light of stresses in financial markets,”  and the statement would end by
noting that the Committee “will act in a timely manner as needed to address the evolving
(34) A decision to adopt Alternative C would come as a significant surprise to the
financial markets.  Investors would presumably revise up sharply their expectations for the
path of policy over the next few quarters, leading to an increase in short- and intermediate-
term interest rates.  At the same time, long-term nominal Treasury yields would likely rise
by less or could even fall if investors concluded that the FOMC had a lower tolerance for
inflation than they had previously thought.  With real rates higher, equities would fall,
credit spreads on corporate debt would widen, strains in financial markets would intensify,
and the foreign exchange value of the dollar could rise.
(35) If the Committee believes that economic growth is likely to resume an
acceptable pace before long and that inflation is on a higher trajectory than in the
Greenbook, it might prefer to leave the stance of policy unchanged, as in
Alternative D.  Although measures of consumer and business sentiment have declined,
the Committee might view the data on final demand as only a bit weaker than expected
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 32 of 39
and judge that financial turmoil, while posing significant risks, is likely to have less of an
effect on aggregate demand than anticipated by the staff.  Moreover, monetary policy has
been eased considerably and substantial fiscal stimulus has been enacted, factors that are
likely to provide a significant boost to aggregate demand in coming quarters.  Accordingly,
policymakers might prefer to wait for additional information about the extent of that
boost before making any further policy adjustments.  In addition, given the recent run-up
in energy and other commodity prices, the drop in the foreign exchange value of the
dollar, and the apparent slight increase in long-term inflation expectations, the Committee
might now see it as increasingly unlikely that inflation will decline at an acceptable pace
and might believe that the upside risks to inflation have risen unacceptably.  A pause at
this juncture might be particularly appealing to policymakers who prefer a more distinct
downward tilt to the trajectory for inflation over the next few years than that shown in the
Greenbook, such as that illustrated by the optimal-control simulation with an inflation goal
of 1½ percent.
(36) The first paragraph of the rationale portion of the statement associated with
Alternative D would acknowledge that economic activity has been weak and that financial
markets remain under considerable stress.  It would also state that although “downside
risks to growth remain, recent policy actions should help to promote moderate growth
over time.”  The rationale portion pertaining to the outlook for inflation would be
identical to that in Alternative C.  The risk assessment section in Alternative D would
stress that the Committee “will act in a timely manner as needed to promote price stability
and sustainable economic growth.”
(37) Given the expectations embedded in financial market prices of further
substantial policy easing at this meeting, a decision to adopt Alternative D would stun
market participants, leading to a sharp upward revision of their short-term outlook for the
path of policy and a significant increase in short-term interest rates.  Despite the indication
in the announcement that recent policy actions should help to promote moderate growth
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 33 of 39
over time, investors would likely become gravely concerned about the economic outlook, a
development that would cause credit spreads on corporate debt to widen substantially,
market functioning to deteriorate further, equity prices to tumble, and longer-term
nominal yields to decline.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(38) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 is projected to grow 9 percent this year, a
pace of expansion that significantly exceeds that of the nominal GDP.  The sharp decline
in velocity reflects the projection of a continued shift in the composition of households’
portfolios toward safe and liquid monetary assets at the expense of capital market
instruments in response to ongoing financial turmoil and the substantial fall in the
opportunity cost of M2 assets resulting from monetary policy easing.  In 2009, M2 growth
is projected to drop to 5½ percent—roughly in line with growth in nominal GDP—
reflecting the leveling off in the opportunity cost and the assumed return of more normal
conditions in financial markets.
(39) Growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is expected to slow to an annual
rate of around 4¾ percent on average over the forecast horizon, down notably from the
growth of 8 percent in 2007.  In the household sector, falling house prices and weak
residential investment continue to dampen mortgage borrowing over the forecast horizon.
Consumer credit is also projected to slow notably, reflecting weak household spending on
durable goods and tighter standards and terms on consumer loans.  With M&A and share
repurchase activity diminishing significantly, business borrowing is expected to slow
sharply.  State and local borrowing throttles back, reflecting the anticipated drop in
issuance for both long-term capital projects and advance refundings; in addition, the
ongoing difficulties of major bond insurers are expected to restrain municipal bond
issuance somewhat this year.  The projected widening of the unified budget deficit—
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 34 of 39
75 bp Easing 50 bp Easing 25 bp Easing No change Greenbook Forecast*
Monthly Growth Rates
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Table 2
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 35 of 39
reflecting in part borrowing to fund the economic stimulus package—boosts federal debt
growth to an average of about 8 percent over this year and next.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 36 of 39
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
(40) Draft language for the directive is provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To
further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks
conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/INCREASING/reducing the federal funds rate AT/to an
average of around ________ 3 percent.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 37 of 39
