Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Content last modified 04/01/2015.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
APRIL 23, 2009
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 1 of 64
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Conditions in financial markets showed some limited signs of improvement over
the intermeeting period.  Investor concerns about financial institutions appeared to
ease somewhat, with a number of major banking organizations posting better-than-
expected first-quarter earnings results.  An index of bank equity prices rose notably,
outperforming broad equity indexes, although credit default swap (CDS) spreads for
large banking organizations were little changed, on net, at elevated levels.  Rates on
short-term funding instruments generally edged lower, and functioning in markets for
these instruments improved.  Nevertheless, market participants appear to remain
concerned about the methodology and results of the stress tests for banks and
potential policy responses to the results.
Yields on nominal Treasury securities decreased modestly, on net, over the
intermeeting period.  Yields dropped appreciably following the FOMC announcement
on March 18 that the Federal Reserve would purchase up to $300 billion of longer-
term Treasury securities and increase its purchases of agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities, but yields subsequently retraced a significant portion of
that drop amid a perceived improvement in the economic outlook and perhaps some
reversal of flight-to-quality flows.  Yields on corporate bonds fell a bit more than
those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities, leaving risk spreads a little
narrower, though still very elevated.  Other risk spreads also narrowed somewhat,
although they remained high relative to their historical ranges.  Rates on mortgages in
the primary and secondary markets declined over the intermeeting period, benefiting
from the announced expansion of Federal Reserve large scale asset purchases.
Despite the lower interest rates, net private sector debt appears to have contracted
in the first quarter.  Bond issuance by nonfinancial corporations has been robust, but
much of the proceeds have been used to pay down short-term borrowing.  Residential
mortgage applications have picked up.  This increase appears to largely reflect
refinancing activity, and mortgage debt is projected to contract in the first quarter.
Results from the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey indicated a further
tightening of banks’ lending policies and a further weakening of demand for loans
from both businesses and households.
A number of central banks in both developed and emerging economies eased
monetary policy over the intermeeting period.  Prices in foreign stock markets surged,
especially those for bank stocks, amid a general improvement in investor sentiment
and some reports of better-than-expected performance from financial firms in the
United States and Europe.  Sovereign bond yields in advanced economies generally
rose, and the dollar declined against most major currencies.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Concern about the health of U.S. financial institutions appeared to abate
somewhat, on net, over the intermeeting period.  An index of bank equity prices
increased about 20 percent, reflecting in part better-than-expected first-quarter
earnings results at some large banking organizations (Chart 1).  The prices of
preferred equity of large bank holding companies also rose significantly.  Nonetheless,
concerns about the condition of banks persisted.  Earnings statements generally noted
heavy provisioning for loan losses, causing some smaller banking organizations to
post losses in the first quarter.  CDS spreads for large bank holding companies and
for other banks remained elevated.  Rating agencies lowered credit ratings for Wells
Fargo and Bank of America on March 25.  Investors continue to be uncertain about
the methodology being used in the stress tests of large banking organizations; the
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 64
results of those tests, which will be released in early May; and the likely policy
responses.1  On April 2, FASB voted to modify the rules related to fair value
accounting for illiquid assets and “other than temporary impairments.”2  These
changes were reportedly seen as benefiting financial institutions, but some market
participants have raised concerns that the changes could reduce transparency in the
financial sector.  Market participants were also concerned about the potential
influence of the accounting rule changes on banks’ reported earnings.  A few small
banks began repaying the capital injections received through the TARP program, and
Goldman Sachs announced its intention to use the funds from its $5 billion April 14
equity offering to do the same.  Concerns regarding the capital position of insurance
companies appeared to diminish following market reports that some insurance
companies would be eligible to receive TARP funds.  Insurance company equity
prices rose about 25 percent, but CDS spreads for these institutions were little
changed on net.
During the intermeeting period, the Treasury announced details regarding the
public-private investment partnership (PPIP) program to purchase legacy assets from
financial institutions.  This announcement was initially well received by market
used to implement the tests will be released April 24.  
2 The new fair value guidance for illiquid assets reduces the emphasis that should be placed
on the “last transaction price” in valuing assets when markets are not active and 
transactions are likely to be forced or distressed.  The new guidance for other-than-
temporary-impairments will require that only the credit-related portion of a debt security’s 
fair value impairment—the difference between the present value of the expected cash flows 
and the amortized cost basis—be written-down through earnings when two criteria are 
met: the institution does not have the intent to sell the debt security and it is unlikely that 
the institution will be required to sell the debt security before a forecasted recovery of its 
value.  In the event the two criteria are not met, the full impairment—the difference 
between the security’s amortized cost basis and its fair value—must be written-down 
through earnings.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 64
participants.  Of late, however, market uncertainty about the efficacy of government
support to the financial sector has increased, as investors have reportedly become
more hesitant to participate in some government programs as a result of concerns
about risk coming from political pressures such as possible disclosure of program use
or restrictions on their hiring and compensation practices.  Some market participants
are also said to be concerned that the Legacy Loans Program portion of the PPIP will
attract few sellers, as they believe the difference between current market values of
eligible assets and those reflected on banks’ books to be quite large.
Issuance of banking organization senior obligations guaranteed by the FDIC
under the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program (TLGP) totaled about $25 billion
over the intermeeting period.  Spreads of yields on securities issued under this
program to those on comparable-maturity Treasuries generally moved down over the
intermeeting period.  On April 1, TLGP fees were increased and both the issuance
and guarantee periods were extended.3  On April 6, Standard and Poor's announced
that it will no longer automatically assign an A-1+ rating to all short-term FDIC-
guaranteed debt owing to the rating agency's concerns about the timeliness of
repayment in the event of default.  This rating action does not appear to have had any
notable effect to date.
MARKET FUNCTIONING
Functioning in many financial markets improved over the period.  Conditions in
short-term bank funding markets improved somewhat, with reports that the volume
of lending had generally risen.  Libor fixings (and spreads over OIS) inched down, 
                                           
3 Changes to the FDIC program included an increase in guarantee fees for debt with a one-
year maturity or longer, with insured depository institutions having smaller fee increases 
than holding companies; an extension of the period for which FDIC-guaranteed debt can 
be issued to the end of October 2009; and an extension of the end date for the guarantees 
under the program from June 30, 2012, to year-end 2012.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 64
perhaps reflecting in part reduced concerns about counterparty credit risk (Chart 2).
Even so, Libor-to-OIS spreads remain elevated, especially at maturities beyond one
month.  Consistent with some easing of conditions in bank funding markets, amounts
bid in the TAF auctions conducted over the period were below the levels seen earlier
this year, and primary credit outstanding fell about $25 billion, to $45 billion.
Overnight general collateral repo rates have also edged down recently, converging
toward the federal funds rate, and the volume of longer-maturity repo transactions
reportedly increased.  Median bid-asked spreads for repo transactions involving most
types of collateral were little changed, although bid-asked spreads for transactions
involving agency MBS declined a bit.  Delivery fails on Treasury securities remained
low despite the low level of interest rates.  Consistent with steady or improving
conditions in the term repo market, the amount of loans outstanding under the TSLF
program continued to decline, and the last two TSLF auctions involving Schedule 1
collateral received no bids.4  During the intermeeting period, the New York Fed
increased the regular SOMA securities lending program minimum rate from 1 basis
point to 5 basis points in view of improved market functioning.
Spreads on both AA-rated asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) and A2/P2-
rated commercial paper (CP) moved down a bit further.  The amount of nonfinancial
CP and ABCP outstanding declined over the intermeeting period, in part because
firms substituted longer-term funding and also because overall demand for financing
diminished.  Financial CP outstanding edged up, on net, over the past several weeks.
Credit extended under the CPFF held steady over the intermeeting period at about
$240 billion, while credit extended under the AMLF continued to decline, reaching a
level of just $1 billion.5  Nonetheless, market participants reportedly continue to view
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 64
the Federal Reserve programs related to the CP market as providing important
Functioning in the Treasury market also improved over the intermeeting period,
reportedly owing in part to the Federal Reserve’s open market purchases.  Spreads
between the yields on on-the-run and off-the-run notes have narrowed significantly,
although they remain wide.  Similarly, fitting errors from staff yield-curve models have
diminished, although they remain large.  Average bid-asked spreads for on-the-run
Treasury notes were relatively stable at pre-Lehman levels.  Nevertheless, trading
volumes remained low by historical standards, despite considerable issuance.
Indicators of functioning in the corporate bond market—such as bid-asked
spreads estimated by the staff—suggest that conditions in the speculative-grade
segment of the market continued to be strained, although they improved relative to
the fall of last year.  Similarly, the leveraged loan market showed some improvement
over the last few months, with the average bid-asked spread narrowing and the
average bid price moving up some from very depressed levels.  In the CDS market,
changes were introduced on April 8 to reduce counterparty risk and improve
operational efficiency by making trades more standardized and fungible, with the
intent of facilitating the movement towards central clearing.  Prior to the
implementation of these changes, liquidity in the CDS market reportedly had declined.
However, no significant disruption was reported following the changes and liquidity is
said to have returned to recent norms.  The basis between the CDX Investment
Grade index of CDS spreads and measures of investment-grade corporate spreads—a
rough proxy for unexploited arbitrage opportunities in the corporate market—
remained at high levels, due to an ongoing lack of financing capacity at major financial
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 64
MONETARY POLICY EXPECTATIONS AND TREASURY YIELDS
The Committee’s decision at the March meeting to leave the target range for the
federal funds rate unchanged was widely anticipated.6  However, investors were
apparently surprised by the FOMC’s announcement that it would increase
significantly further the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet by purchasing up
to $300 billion in Treasury securities and expanding purchases of agency MBS and
agency debt by up to $750 and $100 billion, respectively.  (See box entitled “Balance
Sheet Developments During the Intermeeting Period.”)  In addition, market
participants reportedly interpreted the statement that the federal funds rates was likely
to remain exceptionally low for “an extended period” as stronger than the phrase “for
some time” in the previous statement.  Following the release of the FOMC statement,
rates on Eurodollar futures contracts and yields on Treasury, agency, and mortgage-
backed securities all fell considerably.7  The initial decline in the path for the federal
funds rate implied by futures rates was subsequently reversed, perhaps in response to
the modest improvement in the economic outlook (Chart 3).  Based on our standard
term premium assumption of 1 basis point per month, market quotes currently
suggest that market participants anticipate that the FOMC will start to raise the
federal funds rate around the end of 2009.  However, staff models suggest that term
premiums could well be higher than usual, implying a flatter path for the expected
federal funds rate.  Only four respondents to the Desk’s survey of primary dealers
expect the target federal funds rate to be raised before the third quarter of 2010, with 
                                           
6 Two other notable announcements regarding Federal Reserve monetary policy were made
during the intermeeting period.  On March 23, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury 
announced an accord regarding the appropriate roles of the Federal Reserve and the 
Treasury to preserve financial and monetary stability.  On April 6, the Federal Reserve 
announced that it had entered into currency swap arrangements with several foreign central 
banks that would enable the Federal Reserve to provide liquidity in foreign currencies.  
Neither announcement appeared to prompt any market reaction.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 64
Balance Sheet Developments During the Intermeeting Period
Since the March FOMC meeting, the Federal Reserve’s total assets have 
expanded by about $130 billion to around $2,200 billion.1  The expansion primarily 
reflected an increase of $215 billion in securities held outright; the Open Market 
Desk purchased $139 billion in agency mortgage-backed securities, $60 billion in 
U.S. Treasury securities, and $17 billion in agency securities.2  The purchases of 
agency mortgage-backed securities have been concentrated in newly issued 30-year 
MBS, while the purchases of U.S. Treasury and agency securities have been 
concentrated in maturities of less than seven years and less than five years, 
respectively.  In addition, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 
conducted its first two operations: The TALF lent roughly $6 billion to finance the 
issuance of asset-backed securities collateralized by auto and credit card loans; prior 
to these operations, there had been no significant issuance of these classes of ABS 
since last summer.
The effect of the System’s securities purchases on total assets was damped by a 
decline in lending through liquidity programs for financial firms.  Foreign central 
bank liquidity swaps declined $47 billion; the sum of primary, secondary, and 
seasonal credit declined $25 billion; term auction credit declined $13 billion; and 
primary dealer and other broker-dealer credit declined $12 billion.3  The runoff in 
credit provided under these facilities reflected in part improvement in short-term 
funding markets, with market participants noting that rates have declined and 
lending volumes have increased in term bank funding and repurchase agreement 
markets.  Securities lent through the Term Securities Lending Facility, which do not 
affect assets because the Federal Reserve retains ownership, declined by $62 billion.  
Dealers reduced or stopped their use of this facility for a number of reasons, 
including the improved market conditions, continued deleveraging, and concerns 
about government restrictions on program participants.
On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, the expansion was 
reflected primarily in a sharp increase of $145 billion in the reserve balances of 
depository institutions.  The U.S. Treasury’s General Account remained elevated 
and quite volatile during the intermeeting period due to inflows of corporate and 
personal tax receipts, but it declined $15 billion, on net.  The Supplementary 
Financing Account remained unchanged at $200 billion over the period.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 64
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet 
Billions of dollars
Change 
since last 
FOMC
Current 
(4/22/2009)
Maximum 
level
Date of 
maximum
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 64
half of the respondents anticipating the first rate increase to occur during or after the
first quarter of 2011, roughly the same as in the last survey.  The primary dealers also
placed small but non-negligible odds on the Committee modestly increasing the scale
of asset purchases over the next few meetings.
Immediately following the FOMC announcement, yields on two- and ten-year
nominal Treasury securities dropped about 20 and 40 basis points, respectively.  A
portion of these initial declines was retraced over the intermeeting period amid a
perceived improvement in the economic outlook, the abatement of concern about
financial institutions, continued strong Treasury issuance, and perhaps some reversal
of flight-to-quality flows.  Yields on both two- and ten-year nominal Treasury
securities ended the period down about 15 basis points.  Implied volatility on long-
term Treasury yields decreased substantially following the FOMC meeting, and staff
estimates of term premiums also moved down.  Spreads between the yields on agency
debt securities and those on comparable maturity Treasuries narrowed at shorter
maturities but were little changed at longer horizons.
Yields on inflation-indexed Treasury securities fell a bit more than those on their
nominal counterparts, especially at the five-year horizon.  As a result, five-year
inflation compensation rose about 0.3 percent to 0.4 percent, possibly owing in part
to an increase in energy prices.  Five-year inflation compensation five years ahead was
little changed over the intermeeting period at around 2.5 percent.  Although it has
improved of late, poor liquidity in the TIPS market continued to make these readings
difficult to interpret.  Near-term inflation expectations from the Michigan survey also
jumped, but long-term expectations edged down.  The primary dealers’ median
forecast for core PCE inflation was marked up slightly in 2009 to 1 percent, but
revised down somewhat to 0.5 percent in 2010.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 64
CAPITAL MARKETS
Broad stock price indexes rose notably, on balance, over the intermeeting period,
with the Dow Jones U.S. Total Stock Market Index (formerly the Wilshire 5000) up
about 10 percent (Chart 4).  However, even after this increase, this index is down
about 5 percent for the year.  Implied volatility in the S&P 500 continued to decline
from the exceptionally high levels of last fall, but it remains quite elevated.  Early
earnings reports from S&P 500 firms combined with analyst estimates suggest that
earnings declined about 40 percent in the first quarter relative to the year-earlier
period.  With the rise in equity prices and downward revisions to the outlook for
corporate earnings, the difference between the forward trend earning-price ratio and
an estimate of the real long-run Treasury yield—a rough proxy for the equity risk
premium—has declined but remains extremely high.
In the corporate bond market, yields and spreads to comparable-maturity
Treasury securities moved down over the intermeeting period, with the decline
particularly pronounced for below-investment grade firms.  Nevertheless, risk spreads
for both investment-grade and speculative-grade bonds stayed very high as investors
reportedly continue to be concerned about credit quality deterioration and perhaps
also cautious about taking on additional risk.  Both investment- and speculative-grade
CDX indexes declined over the intermeeting period.  Bond issuance by nonfinancial
corporations remained extremely strong in March.  Most of the recent issuance,
however, has been by investment-grade firms, as these firms apparently acted to lock
in longer-term financing.  Some of the proceeds from the bond issuance have
reportedly been used to pay down bank loans and commercial paper.  In contrast,
bond issuance by speculative-grade firms has been modest.  Issuance of leveraged
loans in the first quarter of 2009 was extremely weak, down nearly 60 percent from
the same period of last year; issuance of institutional loans totaled only $2 billion.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 64
Indexes of CDS spreads on senior AAA-rated CMBS narrowed after the
announcement of the PPIP and the expansion of the TALF to include legacy assets.
By contrast, indexes of CDS spreads on junior-AAA and lower-rated tranches of
CMBS widened as the credit ratings of some of these tranches were lowered owing to
increased expected losses.
The interest rate on 30-year fixed-rate conforming mortgages has continued its
downward trend and is currently a bit below 5 percent, likely reflecting in part the
support provided to the mortgage market by the Federal Reserve through its
purchases of agency debt and agency MBS.  The low mortgages rates have spurred an
increase in refinancing activity.  Issuance of mortgage-backed securities by the GSEs
picked up notably in February, but issuance of non-agency mortgage-backed securities
has continued to be non-existent.  The consumer asset-backed securities (ABS)
market also saw a pickup in issuance and decline in spreads.  These developments may
owe in part to the implementation of the TALF program, where the first two
subscriptions resulted in about $6.5 billion in loans being extended; however,
investors reportedly remain hesitant about participating in this program for some of
the same reasons they are wary of the PPIP.  A few ABS deals were issued without
Federal Reserve support, including one that was eligible for the TALF.  Perhaps
reflecting in part the improvement in the secondary market, interest rates on
consumer loans also generally moved down some.
State and local governments continued to issue a moderate volume of long-term
bonds, with higher-rated issuers accounting for the bulk of these offerings.  The ratio
of yields on long-term municipal bonds to those on comparable-maturity Treasuries
continues to be above historic norms.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 64
FOREIGN DEVELOPMENTS
Major foreign stock market indexes rose during the intermeeting period,
apparently supported by improved market sentiment and boosted by some reports of
better-than-expected performance from financial firms in the United States and
Europe (Chart 5).  Banking sector share prices outperformed broad stock price
indexes in Europe.  In the United Kingdom, Barclays and Standard Chartered Bank
reported a strong start of the year.  Barclays also announced that it had passed the
FSA’s stress test, decreasing the odds that the bank would participate in the U.K.
government’s Asset Protection Scheme.  In contrast, the equity prices of Japanese
banks changed little on balance amid worries about the financial condition of some
institutions.  Credit availability in interbank and other wholesale markets continued to
increase modestly in the wake of the optimism that boosted equity markets, with
Libor-to-OIS spreads in euros and sterling declining over the period.
Long-term bond yields in the United Kingdom, Canada, and the euro area fell
sharply after the FOMC announcement on March 18 but have retraced their declines.
On net, German and Canadian ten-year yields changed little, while Japanese and U.K.
ten-year yields increased 12 to 45 basis points.  These moves in yields, which occurred
despite the many central bank actions over the period to loosen monetary policy,
reportedly were in response to reduced risk aversion, signs of incipient stabilization in
the pace of economic contraction, and concerns about heavy future supply.  In
particular, U.K. gilt yields increased over the period despite the Bank of England
having purchased about £30 billion in gilts since the start of its quantitative easing
program on March 11.  On April 8, the European Central Bank cut its main
refinancing rate 25 basis points to 1.25 percent, less than the expected 50 basis point
cut, and deferred a decision regarding any use of unconventional policy tools to its
next Governing Council meeting in May.  The Bank of Canada halved its key
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 64
overnight interest rate to 25 basis points and indicated that, although it does not
anticipate it to be necessary, it would be ready to purchase debt if the outlook of the
economy worsened further.  Any specific moves would be announced in upcoming
policy meetings.  The Bank of Japan left its target for the call rate unchanged but
expanded some non-traditional policy measures:  It increased the size of its monthly
purchases of government bonds from ¥1.4 trillion to ¥1.8 trillion and it announced
that it will expand its eligible collateral to include municipal debt.  Many central banks
in emerging market economies have further eased monetary policy.  Market
participants expect that foreign central banks will continue to ease policy in 2009.
The dollar depreciated sharply in the days following the March FOMC meeting
and the smaller-than-expected rate cut by the European Central Bank.  The major
currencies index of the dollar decreased on net about 1.5 percent during the
intermeeting period, as depreciation versus the Canadian dollar, the yen, and sterling
more than offset a modest appreciation against the euro.  The dollar index for other
important trading partners decreased about 2 percent, as reduced risk aversion and the
announcements by several developing economies of agreements with the IMF on
financing packages improved sentiment towards those regions.  Mexico became the
first country to seek an arrangement with the IMF under the newly established
Flexible Credit Line, and it also drew on its liquidity arrangement with the Federal
Reserve.  At its April meeting, the G-20 agreed to support a general allocation of
SDRs equivalent to $250 billion to increase global liquidity.
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY
Private sector debt appears to have contracted again in the first quarter.  The staff
continues to estimate that household debt dropped at roughly the same pace in the
first quarter of 2009 as it did in the fourth quarter of 2008 (Chart 6).  Activity in the
mortgage market reflected mostly refinancing, and the staff estimates that household
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 64
mortgage debt contracted again in the first quarter, depressed by continued weak
housing demand, falling house prices, and writedowns of nonperforming loans.
Consumer credit was essentially flat, on net, in the first quarter despite the generally
lower interest rates on consumer loans.  Nonfinancial business debt growth has been
tepid as robust bond issuance was partly offset by declines in commercial paper and
bank loans.  Amid the ongoing heavy debt issuance by the Treasury, federal debt grew
at a more than 20 percent rate in the first quarter.
Commercial bank credit is estimated to have contracted again in March and April.
The weakness in bank credit owes importantly to a drop in loans to businesses, as
C&I loans fell almost 13 percent at an annual rate in March, reflecting in part
paydowns with the proceeds of bond issuance.  Commercial real estate loans declined
almost 2 percent.  The run-off in business loans appears to be continuing in April.
Bank lending to households was also weak in the spring.  Owing to considerable sales
of single-family mortgages to the GSEs, residential mortgage loans on banks’ books
declined, on balance, in March and the first part of April.  Consumer loans held by
banks also ran off amid heavy securitization.  In contrast, credit extended under
revolving home equity lines of credit continued to expand at a robust pace, partly
reflecting relatively attractive terms on existing lines.
The Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices conducted
in April indicated that banks continued to tighten their credit standards and terms on
all major loan categories over the past three months.  The net fraction of banks that
reported tightening their business lending policies, while still elevated, edged down for
the second consecutive survey.  In contrast, somewhat larger net percentages of banks
reported having tightened credit standards on residential mortgages than in the
January survey.  Banks also reported a further tightening of standards and terms on
credit cards and other consumer loans.  A large majority of respondents cited a less
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 64
favorable or more uncertain economic outlook, a worsening of industry-specific
problems, and a reduced tolerance for risk as important reasons for the move toward
a more stringent lending posture.  In a set of special questions, large majorities of
domestic and foreign respondents indicated that they expect credit quality for all types
of business and household loans to worsen in 2009.  Large net fractions of banks also
reported a further weakening of demand for most types of loans, with the notable
exception of residential mortgages to prime borrowers where demand was reported to
have increased.
M2 grew at a rapid clip in March despite the weakness in nominal income.
Growth was boosted a few percentage points by large deposits in late February and
early March at one commercial bank that were made by a corporate customer in
anticipation of executing a take-over bid.  Robust expansion in liquid deposits more
than accounted for the rise in M2 and was likely fueled by a continued reallocation by
households toward safer assets.  Retail money market funds and small time deposits
contracted in March, probably as a result of the continued decline in rates paid on
these assets.  Growth of currency was brisk in March, apparently reflecting strong
foreign and domestic demand.  Consistent with the expansion of the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet, total reserve balances also increased in March.  Growth in
both currency and total reserves contributed to rapid expansion of the monetary base
last month.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 64
ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
Information received since the March meeting indicates that the labor market has
continued to deteriorate sharply and that business fixed investment has retained
considerable downward momentum.  Nonetheless, equity prices have rebounded
strongly since mid-March, consumer spending appears to have leveled off, and some
tentative signs of stabilization have been evident in the housing sector.  Looking
ahead, the staff forecast is predicated on the assumption that the Federal Reserve will
not implement any further liquidity or credit programs beyond those that have already
been announced and that it will not further expand its large-scale asset purchase
programs.  As in March, the staff also assumes that the FOMC will hold the target
federal funds rate within its current range through the end of the forecast period.
Long-term Treasury yields edge higher over the period as the window over which
expected future short-term rates are averaged moves forward and thus encompasses
fewer years of near-zero funds rates, but they do so from a level about 15 basis points
lower than in the previous forecast.  Investment-grade corporate bond yields have
moved down about 45 basis points since the March Greenbook and are projected to
decline another 140 basis points over the forecast horizon as risk spreads narrow
further from their current high readings.  Mortgage rates are anticipated to remain at
about their current level—which is about 20 basis points lower than in March—over
the medium term, reflecting the offsetting influences of a slight continued downward
drift in their spread to Treasuries and the projected rise in Treasury yields.  Equity
prices are projected to increase at an annual rate of 15 percent from a level about 18
percent higher than at the time of the previous forecast, as the equity risk premium
moderates gradually.8  The foreign exchange value of the dollar has declined by close
and the March FOMC meeting.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 64
to 3½ percent over the intermeeting period and is assumed to edge lower over the
balance of this year and fall by about 2 percent in 2010.  Broadly consistent with
futures quotes, oil prices move up to $56 per barrel by the end of this year and to $63
per barrel at the end of 2010, levels that are about $8 per barrel higher than at the
time of the March Greenbook.
Against this backdrop, real GDP is expected to decline at an annual rate of 1½
percent in the second quarter, a bit more slowly than in the previous forecast.  Output
is projected to stabilize in the third quarter, and a moderate recovery is expected to
get under way late this year.  Nevertheless, with GDP growing more slowly than
potential output through the first quarter of next year, the unemployment rate is
projected to increase to 9¼ percent in the fourth quarter of this year and remain at
that level, on average, in 2010.  Core PCE prices are expected to rise at a slightly
higher rate than previously projected, reflecting higher energy prices and a stronger
economic outlook; still, low levels of resource utilization, the lagged effects of large
declines in the prices of oil and other commodities, and reductions in core import
prices are expected to hold core PCE inflation to 1.2 percent in 2009 and just 0.7
percent in 2010.  Headline PCE prices are projected to increase 0.7 percent in 2009
and 1 percent next year.
Looking further ahead, the staff forecasts real GDP to expand about 5 percent
per year, on average, from 2011 to 2013, as monetary policy remains stimulative,
financial turmoil subsides, and the recovery in residential construction gains
momentum.  With actual output outpacing its potential by a wide margin, the
unemployment rate declines steadily over this period, reaching 4¾ percent (the staff’s
estimate of the NAIRU) by late 2013.  Under the assumption that long-run inflation
expectations remain relatively well anchored, the gradual recovery in real activity
allows core PCE inflation first to stabilize and then begin to move up slowly to
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 64
modestly above-average resource utilization in order to bring inflation gradually back
to the desired rate of 2 percent.  Once this is achieved, the real economy settles into a
balanced growth path with trend expansion of about 2¾ percent per year, an
unemployment rate of 4¾ percent, and a nominal federal funds rate of about 4¼
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 64
MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES
As shown in Chart 7, all of the estimates of short-run r*—that is, the value of the
real federal funds rate that would close the output gap within 12 quarters—have
moved up since the March Bluebook.  The Greenbook-consistent measure of short-
run r* is currently about -3¼ percent.  This estimate has risen about 2 percentage
points since March, mainly as a result of the recent increase in equity prices and the
depreciation of the dollar.  These factors have also pushed up by a similar amount the
FRB/US model estimate of short-run r*, which now stands at about -6¾ percent; this
estimate does not incorporate the judgmental estimates of fiscal stimulus or the
effects of unconventional monetary policy that are embedded in the Greenbook-
consistent measure.  (In the estimation of the FRB/US model’s short-run r*, all the
exogenous variables are forecasted using simple rules that do not take account of the
staff’s projection.)  Higher equity prices have also boosted the short-run r* estimate
from the small structural model; it is now about -9 percent.9  Apart from the estimate
produced by the single-equation model, all of the estimates are substantially below the
actual real funds rate of -1¾ percent; the estimate from the single-equation model,
which does not explicitly control for the effects of financial stress or fiscal stimulus, is
in line with the actual real rate.
are assumed to place equal weight on keeping core PCE inflation close to an inflation
goal of 2 percent, on keeping unemployment close to the NAIRU, and on avoiding
changes in the funds rate.  As in recent Bluebooks, monetary policy is severely
constrained by the zero lower bound in these simulations, and the nominal funds rate
remains close to zero through 2013 (black solid lines).  As a result, the real funds rate
hovers around -1 percent through the entire simulation period.  Chart 8 also displays
counterfactual results that would be obtained if the zero bound did not constrain the
nominal federal funds rate (blue dashed lines).  This counterfactual scenario can
provide a useful benchmark for considering the stimulus that may be provided by
unconventional monetary policy (see box “Policy Paths for Large-scale Asset
Purchases”).  Under this unconstrained policy, the funds rate falls to -7½ percent late
next year, rising back above zero in 2012.  The real funds rate decreases to about -8½
percent by the end of 2010.  Relative to the constrained case, such a policy places the
civilian unemployment rate on a distinctly lower path over the next few years and core
PCE inflation on a higher path.10  These paths for unemployment and inflation are
essentially the same as those in March (red dotted lines).  The unconstrained
prescription for the nominal funds rate in the current Bluebook is above the March
path, reflecting the somewhat stronger outlook for aggregate demand now seen by the
As depicted in Chart 9, the outcome-based policy rule prescribes a funds rate at its
effective lower bound through the end of 2011.  (The midpoint of the Committee’s
ones shown in the previous Bluebook; these differences reflect methodological changes in 
the specification used to simulate the behavior of long-run inflation expectations.  For 
details, see the memo to the FOMC, “Large-scale Asset Purchases and Inflation 
Expectations in the FRB/US Model” by David Reifschneider and John Roberts (April 20, 
2009).  To facilitate the comparison to previous conditions, results under the unconstrained 
policy for March were regenerated using the new specification.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 64
Policy Paths for Large‐scale Asset Purchases
In recent work, the staff has conducted optimal control 
simulations of the FRB/US model in which large-scale asset 
purchases (LSAPs) serve as the instrument of monetary policy 
while the federal funds rate is constrained by the zero lower 
bound.1  This box presents an illustrative simulation of an 
optimal control LSAP policy and then highlights some challenges 
and sources of uncertainty in specifying the appropriate 
magnitude and timing of asset purchases.2
In this simulation, LSAPs provide stimulus to the real 
economy by lowering longer-term yields; policymakers aim at 
keeping unemployment near the NAIRU and inflation near a 2 
percent objective, and they prefer not to hold more of these 
assets on the Federal Reserve balance sheet than usual and not to 
make large adjustments in asset holdings.  The top panel on the 
right shows simulated paths of longer-term asset holdings 
acquired by the Federal Reserve through LSAPs, which would 
normally be zero.  Conditional on the staff’s economic outlook, 
the optimal control path of LSAP holdings (black solid line) 
peaks at almost $4 trillion by early 2011; in subsequent years this 
path gradually approaches the Greenbook baseline (green dotted 
line), which goes to zero after 2013.
As shown in the lower panels, this more aggressive LSAP 
path fosters a somewhat faster pace of recovery than in the 
Greenbook baseline.  By the end of 2010, the unemployment 
rate is about ½ percentage point lower than the baseline while 
core inflation is somewhat above the staff projection.  These 
LSAP paths are between the baseline outcome and the 
unconstrained optimal control simulation paths reproduced from 
Chart 8 (blue dashed line), in which the federal funds rate is 
allowed to fall below zero and the path of LSAPs is held at the 
Greenbook baseline.
The scale of purchases in this optimal control simulation of 
LSAPs is about twice as large as simulations shown in a box in 
the March Bluebook,3 while the outcomes for unemployment 
and inflation are broadly similar.  The main reason is a
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 64
downward revision in the staff’s assessment of the likely effects of asset purchases on longer-
term yields.4  In the LSAP simulation shown here, an announcement of purchases over the next 
two quarters decreases yields by reducing the expected net supply of longer-term debt relative to 
the total stock of government debt.  In light of recent data on interest rate movements, the effect 
of purchasing a given share of the market for longer-term assets is now estimated to be 
somewhat lower than assumed in earlier staff work.  This estimate is subject to a wide margin of 
error and could change considerably as additional information is incorporated.  Furthermore, 
actual and projected levels of government debt have surged since late 2008, reducing the 
expected responses of yields to asset purchases of a given dollar size.
There is also considerable uncertainty concerning how yields are affected by purchases of 
different categories of assets.  In the simulations reported in the March Bluebook, the staff 
assumed that purchases of MBS and agency debt have larger effects on their own yields than 
purchases of Treasury securities have on Treasury yields.  The data tend to confirm that recent 
purchases had indeed larger effects on MBS and agency yields, but since their spreads have 
declined, the staff assumes that the responses of such yields to any future LSAPs would be 
roughly similar to the effects on longer-term Treasury yields.
Additional considerations add to uncertainty regarding the effect of LSAPs on the economy.  
One particularly uncertain factor is whether yields are affected primarily by the stock of 
purchased assets or by the flow of purchases.  Another source of uncertainty is the extent to 
which yields are affected by the announcement of future LSAPs as opposed to their execution.  
These issues are hard to assess empirically given the very limited data available.
Finally, LSAPs may raise some significant risks that are not incorporated in the staff model 
or sufficiently captured by assumptions about policymakers’ preferences for avoiding large 
holdings of longer-term securities as well as rapid adjustments in such holdings.  For example, 
financial markets might be disrupted by outsized LSAP purchases or by the heavy sales that 
might be required if the economy were to recover more rapidly than anticipated.  The LSAP 
simulation shown here requires the Federal Reserve to buy almost half the stock of outstanding 
longer-term Treasury debt, agency debt, and agency MBS.  At this scale, the scope of purchases 
would have to be extended to the secondary market and off-the run securities and would crowd 
investors out of the primary market, as net borrowing of the U.S. Treasury is projected to reach 
only $2.8 trillion over the next two years.  Moreover, purchases of the scale shown on the 
previous page would boost the reserves of depository institutions by up to $4 trillion, putting 
massive upward pressure on the size of their balance sheets—which currently total only about 
$15 trillion—at a time when many institutions are seen as having weak capital positions.  As a 
result, depository institutions could pull back from lending even further, potentially offsetting at 
least a portion of the expansionary effect of the LSAP.  Finally, the very large purchases 
contemplated here expose the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve to considerable interest rate 
risk, pointing to the possibility of significant capital losses, in particular if large and rapid sales of 
securities proved necessary to regain control over the federal funds rate.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 64
somewhat less sluggish outlook, the federal funds rate begins to increase a couple of
quarters earlier than in the March Bluebook.11  Financial market participants appear to
anticipate that the funds rate will rise to 1½ percent by the end of 2010 and
subsequently reach a plateau at just under 3 percent.  Compared with those shown in
the March Bluebook, the confidence intervals around these forecasts, derived from
market prices of interest-rate caps, are tighter through 2013.12
The lower panel of Chart 9 provides near-term prescriptions of simple policy
rules.  As shown in the left hand columns, these funds rate prescriptions are generally
constrained by the zero lower bound.  The right hand columns show the prescriptions
implied by these rules if the zero lower bound is not imposed.  In this case, the Taylor
(1993) rule prescribes a funds rate of about ¼ percent this quarter and -½ percent
next quarter.  The Taylor (1999) rule prescribes a funds rate close to -3 percent this
quarter and -3¾ percent next quarter, reflecting the rule’s higher sensitivity to the
output gap.  The estimated outcome-based and forecast-based rules also prescribe
negative nominal federal funds rates for the next two quarters.
substantially modified since the last Bluebook, and are now based on a longer and more 
volatile sample period.  By itself, this change generates appreciably wider intervals for 
forecasts of the federal funds rate.  However, this effect is offset for near-term interest rate 
forecasts by another methodological change to the way the zero lower bound is imposed 
on the outcome-based policy rule.  For further details, see the memo to the FOMC, 
“Changes in Macroeconomic Uncertainty” by Robert Tetlow and Peter Tulip (April 20, 
2009).
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 64
POLICY ALTERNATIVES
This Bluebook presents two policy alternatives and a variation on the language of
one of the alternatives for the Committee’s consideration, summarized by the draft
statements on the following pages.  Under Alternative A, the Committee would
expand its purchases of longer-term Treasury securities to as much as $750 billion and
would lengthen the time period over which these purchases would take place to the
end of the year.  Under Alternative B, the Committee would instead maintain the
course of policy announced in March and not make any changes to the planned
purchases of long-term assets.  Under Alternative B´, the Committee would also stay
the course, but in the Committee’s statement the purchases would be translated into
both an approximate dollar amount per month and an average monthly percentage
growth rate of the System’s holdings of these assets through the end of the year.  All
three alternatives introduce language stating explicitly that the Committee’s future
decisions as to the timing and overall amounts of purchases of long-term assets will
depend on the evolution of the economic outlook and on changes in financial
conditions.  Under all alternatives, the Committee would seek to maintain the federal
funds rate within the current range of 0 to ¼ percent and would again communicate
its expectation that the federal funds rate is likely to remain at exceptionally low levels
for an extended period.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 64
March FOMC Statement
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January indicates 
that the economy continues to contract.  Job losses, declining equity and housing wealth, and 
tight credit conditions have weighed on consumer sentiment and spending.  Weaker sales 
prospects and difficulties in obtaining credit have led businesses to cut back on inventories 
and fixed investment.  U.S. exports have slumped as a number of major trading partners 
have also fallen into recession.  Although the near-term economic outlook is weak, the 
Committee anticipates that policy actions to stabilize financial markets and institutions, 
together with fiscal and monetary stimulus, will contribute to a gradual resumption of 
sustainable economic growth.
In light of increasing economic slack here and abroad, the Committee expects that inflation 
will remain subdued.  Moreover, the Committee sees some risk that inflation could persist 
for a time below rates that best foster economic growth and price stability in the longer 
term.
In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote 
economic recovery and to preserve price stability.  The Committee will maintain the target 
range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and anticipates that economic conditions 
are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.  
To provide greater support to mortgage lending and housing markets, the Committee 
decided today to increase the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet further by 
purchasing up to an additional $750 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities, bringing 
its total purchases of these securities to up to $1.25 trillion this year, and to increase its 
purchases of agency debt this year by up to $100 billion to a total of up to $200 billion.  
Moreover, to help improve conditions in private credit markets, the Committee decided to 
purchase up to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the next six months.  
The Federal Reserve has launched the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility to 
facilitate the extension of credit to households and small businesses and anticipates that the 
range of eligible collateral for this facility is likely to be expanded to include other financial 
assets.  The Committee will continue to carefully monitor the size and composition of the 
Federal Reserve's balance sheet in light of evolving financial and economic developments.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 64
April FOMC Statement — Alternative A
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 64
April FOMC Statement — Alternative B
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 37 of 64
April FOMC Statement — Alternative B′
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 38 of 64
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
If policymakers believe that the Committee has already put in train a substantial
amount of monetary stimulus and think that the Federal Reserve’s policies, coupled
with the effects of the fiscal stimulus approved by the Congress and the
implementation of the financial stability plan, will likely suffice to return the economy
reasonably promptly to a path of sustainable growth, they could decide to reaffirm the
course of policy announced in March, as in Alternative B.  Mortgage rates have
declined substantially since the Committee first announced its intention of purchasing
large quantities of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities.  Similarly, long-term
private yields have declined somewhat, on net, since the March announcement that
the Committee would increase its purchases of agency securities and would begin
purchasing Treasury securities.  The Committee may be of the view that these lower
rates are providing stimulus to the economy that is likely to increase in coming
months as households and businesses respond with a lag to the lower rates.  Indeed,
the data received over the intermeeting period suggested some stabilization in
consumer spending and housing activity, and the staff has revised up its outlook for
growth during the remainder of this year and next year.  Against this backdrop, the
Committee may see no compelling reason to further expand the size of the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet and may prefer instead to observe how the economic situation
unfolds before considering an additional expansion of the planned accumulation of
longer-term assets.  The option of waiting before deciding to acquire even more of
those assets may be especially attractive if the Committee is concerned that holdings
of long-term assets could prove difficult or costly to unwind when that becomes
Some of the credit and liquidity facilities that the Federal Reserve put in place to
facilitate the extension of credit to businesses and households have seen diminished
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 39 of 64
usage of late.  Even though some of the decline in usage may be attributable to
government-imposed conditions that are viewed as onerous by borrowers, members
may judge that the decline has been largely a reflection of the improvement in
financial conditions observed over the intermeeting period.  If so, the Committee may
see no need to compensate for that reduction with an increase in asset purchases,
particularly given that the Federal Reserve balance sheet has expanded since the
March meeting.  In addition, incoming data have pointed to somewhat higher-than-
expected inflation.  Members might interpret the latter development as tentative
evidence that the downside risk to price stability has diminished slightly amid higher
energy prices and less bleak prospects for economic activity, reinforcing the judgment
that there is no need for immediate further expansion of asset purchases.
The statement suggested for Alternative B begins by noting that recent
information indicates that the economy has continued to contract and that, although
the outlook has improved modestly, economic activity is likely to remain weak for a
time.  Nonetheless, the statement points out that the policy actions taken recently,
together with fiscal and monetary stimulus, will contribute to a gradual resumption of
sustainable growth.  The paragraph characterizing the outlook for inflation is identical
to that in March.  In the third paragraph, the statement reiterates that the Committee
will use all available tools to promote economic recovery and preserve price stability.
It also repeats the Committee’s expectation that the federal funds target rate is likely
to remain at very low levels for an extended period, and it reminds the markets and
the public that the FOMC has already decided to purchase large quantities of Treasury
and agency securities over the course of the year.  The draft statement introduces new
language to emphasize that the Committee stands ready to adjust the timing and
overall amounts of these purchases as appropriate; this new sentence aims to
communicate to the public that monetary policy will be a function of the evolving
economic outlook and conditions in financial markets.  The statement then mentions
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 40 of 64
that the Federal Reserve is employing a range of other programs to facilitate the
extension of credit to households and businesses and to support the functioning of
financial markets.  As in March, the statement concludes by noting that the
Committee will monitor the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance
sheet in light of economic and financial developments.
The Committee may prefer a description of its large-scale asset purchases that
characterizes the path of those purchases in addition to their overall amount.
Members might believe, for example, that emphasizing the path of purchases would
better communicate the sense that policymakers have a forward-looking plan for the
conduct of policy.  If so, Committee members may want to adopt a slightly different
statement, such as the one suggested under Alternative B´.  This statement is
identical to the one for Alternative B, except that it adds two sentences in the middle
of the third paragraph to specify that the Committee expects that the Federal
Reserve’s holdings of Treasury and agency securities will increase at an average pace
of about $160 billion per month over the reminder of 2009, which would be
equivalent to an average monthly growth rate of around 20 percent from the end of
March through the end of the year.13  This sentence adds information about the
Committee's expectation for the growth of the securities portfolio over time to a
statement that maintains the basic structure of those previously released by the
mortgage-backed securities on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  Of those, $307.2 
billion were securities acquired recently under the announced purchase programs.  
Subtracting that amount from the announced $1.75 trillion of total planned purchases gives 
$1.443 trillion of those securities that still have to be acquired by year-end.  Dividing that 
amount by nine months (April to December) results in a constant monthly purchase rate of 
$160.3 billion, or 20.5 percent of the $782.5 billion of initial holdings.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 41 of 64
Judging from the Desk’s survey of primary dealers, very few market participants
appear to expect an expansion in long-term asset purchases or other significant policy
actions at this meeting.  Accordingly, the market reaction to the release of a statement
such as that suggested for Alternatives B or B´ should be muted.  Short- and long-
term yields, stock prices, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar all should
change little.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
If the Committee is concerned that the near-term outlook for economic activity
might be worse than that presented in the staff forecast and that the subsequent
recovery might be unduly sluggish, it may prefer to apply additional monetary
stimulus by expanding its purchases of long-term assets at this meeting, along the lines
of Alternative A.  The Committee may judge that the signs of economic and financial
stabilization that were seen over the intermeeting period were quite tentative and that
significant uncertainties remain as to the timing and extent of the economic recovery,
perhaps along the lines of the “False Dawn” alternative scenario in the Greenbook.
Alternatively, the Committee might think that the economic outlook presented by the
staff is quite plausible but unacceptably weak.  While members may be satisfied that
the purchases of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities already in train are
having a significant beneficial effect on mortgage rates, they may also view the
amount of Treasury purchases announced in March as insufficient to have a
substantial effect on private yields, especially in light of the relatively modest net
decline in those yields since the March meeting.  Indeed, the relatively small decline
may have induced members to revise down their estimates of the elasticity of private
yields to those purchases and to increase their views of the volume of purchases
necessary to produce a given amount of monetary stimulus.  In addition, the
Committee may be concerned that the effects on interest rates of the purchases of
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 42 of 64
Treasury securities already planned may be largely offset by the effects of greater
issuance of such securities to fund a large projected budget deficit.  And members
may take comfort from the thought that the potential cost of expanding the balance
sheet through additional acquisitions of Treasury securities may not be high since
holdings of those securities may be relatively easy to unwind when appropriate, albeit
perhaps at a capital loss.
In view of the shallow trajectory of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan
Facility (TALF) to date and the contraction in some other liquidity facilities, some
members might see the need to take additional action at this meeting to maintain a
brisk expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  Members may believe that the
recent decline in the usage of some Federal Reserve facilities might not be solely the
result of improved financial conditions but rather to a significant degree is a
byproduct of increased stigma associated with those programs that reflects the recent
conditions imposed on participants in certain government programs.  Similarly,
members may feel that fears of government actions may undermine the TALF.
Members may thus view an increase in the purchases of Treasury securities as
appropriate to offset, at least in part, the reduced policy stimulus generated by existing
credit facilities.  If members are concerned that the economy will continue to contract
in the near term and that the recovery will be sluggish, they might also judge that the
risks that inflation will persist below rates consistent with price stability remain largely
intact even though recent data have pointed to somewhat higher inflation than had
been anticipated.
The first paragraph of the statement that accompanies Alternative A is similar to
the one for Alternative B, but its description of the economic outlook is more
downbeat.  It says explicitly that the Committee expects that economic activity will
continue to contract in the near term and that the subsequent recovery could be
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 43 of 64
sluggish.  Also, it does not refer to the anticipated beneficial effects of previous policy
actions and monetary and fiscal stimulus.  The paragraph on inflation is virtually
identical to the one in the March statement.  In the third paragraph, the statement
announces that the Committee has decided to provide additional monetary stimulus
by stepping up its purchases of Treasury securities to as much as $750 billion by year
end—an increase of $450 billion relative to the March decision and an extension of
the time period over which these purchases will take place.  The rest of the statement
is identical to that for Alternative B, including language to communicate the
possibility of future adjustments to the timing and overall amounts of purchases of
long-term assets in light of the evolving economic outlook and financial market
conditions, the maintenance of the current range for the federal funds target rate, the
expectation that short-term rates will remain exceptionally low for an extended
period, and the references to other liquidity programs and the Committee’s intention
to monitor the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet carefully.
Since market participants reportedly see only small odds that the Committee will
announce a further expansion of its securities purchases at this meeting, it is likely that
asset prices would move substantially following the release of a statement like that
accompanying Alternative A.  Treasury and private yields dropped significantly on
March 18 after the announcement that the Federal Reserve would purchase $300
billion of Treasury securities and an additional $850 billion in agency debt and
mortgage-backed securities.  Still, the response of yields to an announcement of
additional Treasury purchases might be smaller than previously thought (see box
entitled “Policy Paths for Large Scale Asset Purchases”).  Even though Alternative A
more than doubles the quantity of Treasury purchases announced in March, the
immediate response of Treasury and corporate yields may be substantially smaller
than the one observed after the release of the March statement because that statement
also announced large increases in the purchases of agency securities.  Keeping in mind
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 44 of 64
that the uncertainty surrounding any judgments regarding the effects of increased
securities purchases on asset prices is very large, the staff estimates that the
announcement that the Federal Reserve will purchase an additional $450 billion worth
of Treasury securities will push down long-term yields between 20 and 45 basis points
immediately after the announcement.  Equity prices would likely climb, and the
foreign exchange value of the dollar would decrease.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 45 of 64
LONG‐RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE
Under the Federal Reserve’s current policy approach, the size of the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet over the next several years will be driven by the evolution of
its assets, specifically, the scale of asset purchases and demand for Federal Reserve
liquidity programs and credit facilities.  The total amount of liabilities will be
determined by the total quantity of assets, and their composition will be determined
by the evolution of currency demand and other factors on the liability side with
reserve balances determined largely as a residual. Two balance-sheet scenarios are
presented here; they differ in their assumptions regarding asset purchases.  The baseline
scenario includes only asset purchases that have already been announced by the
FOMC: the Desk purchases a total of $300 billion of Treasury securities, $200 billion
of agency securities, and $1,250 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)
this year.  The baseline scenario corresponds to Alternative B in the Policy
Alternatives section.  In the expanded purchases scenario, which corresponds to
Alternative A in the Policy Alternatives section, purchases of U.S. Treasuries are
increased by $450 billion to $750 billion by the end of the year.
To construct the projections, we had to make assumptions about all
components of the balance sheet other than reserve balances, which are the residual
item.  The foreign central bank liquidity swap lines and the Term Auction Facility
(TAF) are assumed to wind down by year-end 2010 and year-end 2011, respectively,
as financial markets continue to improve.  The Section 13(3) facilities are assumed to
be extended beyond October 30, 2009, but they are assumed to run off by the end of
II, and Maiden Lane III are assumed to be sold over time; they reach zero by 2015.
In light of the slow initial uptake of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility
(TALF), the facility is assumed to peak at $500 billion—half of the announced
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 46 of 64
$1 trillion limit—at the end of 2010:  The first phase of TALF makes $100 billion of
purchases matches the assumed path in the Greenbook whereas the expanded
purchases scenario boosts Treasury purchases; both scenarios assume that the assets
purchased are held to maturity.  We assume a slower-than-average path for the
prepayment of MBS that implies that approximately half of the MBS purchases are
still on the balance sheet in 2016.  On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s
balance sheet, both scenarios assume that currency (Federal Reserve notes) grows at
the same rate as the staff forecast for money stock currency through 2010 and
thereafter expands at the rate of nominal GDP growth in the extended Greenbook
forecast.  The Treasury’s Supplementary Financing Account is projected to wind
down by the end of 2009, and the U.S. Treasury’s general account returns to its
historical target level of $5 billion over the same period.  All other liabilities except
reserve balances are assumed to be constant.14  These projections for liabilities,
combined with the assumed path for assets, imply a path for reserve balances under
each scenario.  In both scenarios, the implied level of reserve balances rises rapidly
until late in 2009, then declines until 2015, at which point we assume that the Desk
begins conducting open market operations to maintain a level of $25 billion of reserve
balances for the rest of the projection period.
Under both scenarios, the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet expands rapidly over
the course of 2009.  For the baseline scenario, the size of the balance sheet reaches
$3.4 trillion at the end of 2009 and then declines to a level just below $1.4 trillion in
from historical patterns.  U.S. Treasury securities account for less than one-quarter of
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 47 of 64
total assets at the end of 2009, and less than half at the end of the projection period,
whereas prior to August 2007, Treasuries accounted for about 90 percent of assets.
By the end of the projection period, the alternative path yields the same composition
and size of the balance sheet as the baseline scenario.
Projections for the monetary base are derived from these balance-sheet
projections as the sum of currency in circulation and reserve balances.  Under both
scenarios, the monetary base expands rapidly in 2009 and into 2010.  In the second
quarter of 2010, however, as the liquidity facilities are winding down and asset
purchases have ceased, the monetary base begins to contract; the base continues to
decline until mid-2016, at which point the stabilized level of reserve balances and the
continued growth of currency lead to resumed growth in the base.
The extended Greenbook projection shows the target federal funds rate rising
from the current 0 to ¼ percent range to 2 percent over the course of 2013.  Under
the operating procedures employed before the financial crisis, the projected
end-of-year level of approximately $426 billion of reserve balances would not have
been consistent with a federal funds rate significantly above zero.  If the interest rate
paid on excess reserve balances becomes an effective floor on the federal funds rate, a
higher target rate could be achieved even with quite elevated reserve balances.  The
experience last autumn, however, suggests that the Desk would likely need to drain
reserves through open market operations to get the funds rate significantly above
zero.  This projection for the balance sheet implicitly assumes that alternative
operating procedures can be put in place to achieve the path for the federal funds rate
assumed in the Greenbook projection.  If no such operating procedures are available,
the baseline projection of the balance sheet includes over $600 billion in Treasury
securities that in principle could be sold by the end of 2013.  In practice, some
combination of tools, including reverse repurchase agreements, outright sales of
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 48 of 64
securities, or other strategies, would need to be balanced against potential costs,
including possible capital losses experienced by the Federal Reserve or disruption to
markets.  These projections do not assume the statutory authority to issue Fed bills or
a renewal of the Supplementary Financing Program.
Growth of Monetary Base
Date Baseline Alternative
percent, annual rate
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 49 of 64
Baseline Scenario
Source:  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
Source:  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
Bi
lli
on
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasury Securities Agency debt MBS Repurchase agreements
Swaps  TALF  Other liquidity facilities Other assets
$ 
Bi
lli
on
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse  repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 50 of 64
Expanded Purchases Scenario
Source:  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
Source:  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
B
ill
io
ns
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasuries Agency debt MBS Repurchase agreements
Swaps  TALF  Other liquidity facilities Other assets
$ 
B
ill
io
ns
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse  repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 51 of 64
BANK CREDIT, DEBT, AND MONEY FORECASTS
Bank credit is forecast to decline at about a ¼ percent pace in 2009, largely
reflecting weakness in core loans so far this year, and to expand at a 4½ percent rate
in 2010 as economic activity is anticipated to pick up.  C&I loans are projected to
grow only modestly over the remainder of this year and in 2010, reflecting a
significant contraction in business fixed investment and weak inventory investment.
Real estate loans are likely to run off slightly in 2009 but to grow about 3 percent in
expected to be about flat in 2009 and to expand at about a 2¼ percent rate in 2010, as
growth of personal consumption expenditures and nominal GDP picks up.
Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is expected to expand 4¼ percent in the
current quarter, about the same pace as in the first quarter.  The level of private-sector
debt is forecast to decrease in the second quarter as households pay down debt (on
net) and as borrowing by nonfinancial businesses remains soft.  Amid weak household
spending, falling home prices, and tight terms and standards for bank loans,
borrowing by households is expected to remain extremely light through 2010.
Similarly, borrowing by nonfinancial businesses is projected to remain sluggish
throughout the forecast period, reflecting weak investment spending, borrowing costs
that remain relatively high, and tight terms and standards for bank loans.  Federal debt
will likely continue to expand at a rapid pace through the end of 2010.
M2 is forecast to expand at an annual rate of 3½ percent in 2009, well above the
growth rate of nominal GDP, boosted by the lagged effects of declines in opportunity
cost and ongoing financial market volatility.  In 2010, M2 is expected to decelerate to
a 2½ percent annual rate, below nominal GDP growth, as some of the unusually rapid
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 52 of 64
accumulation of M2 deposits that resulted from the financial turmoil unwind to some
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 53 of 64
Greenbook Forecast*
Monthly Growth Rates
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Actual data through March 2009; projections after.
Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 54 of 64
Draft language for the directive is provided below.
ALTERNATIVE A
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to 1/4 percent.  The Committee directs
the Desk to purchase agency debt, agency MBS, and longer-term Treasury securities
during the intermeeting period with the aim of providing support to private credit
markets and economic activity.  The timing and pace of these purchases should
depend on conditions in the markets for such securities and on a broader assessment
of private credit market conditions.  The Committee anticipates that the combination
of outright purchases and various liquidity facilities outstanding will cause the size of
the Federal Reserve's balance sheet to expand significantly in coming months.  The
Desk is expected to purchase up to $200 billion in housing-related agency debt by the
end of this year.  The Desk is expected to purchase at least $500 billion in agency
MBS by the end of the second quarter of this year and is expected to purchase up to
$1.25 trillion of these securities by the end of this year.  The Committee also directs
the Desk to expand the System’s purchases of longer-term Treasury securities to up to
$750 billion of longer-term Treasury securities.  The System Open Market Account
Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing
developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could affect the attainment
over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 55 of 64
ALTERNATIVE B
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to purchase agency debt, agency MBS, and longer-term Treasury securities
during the intermeeting period with the aim of providing support to private credit
markets and economic activity.  The timing and pace of these purchases should
depend on conditions in the markets for such securities and on a broader assessment
of private credit market conditions.  The Committee anticipates that the combination
of outright purchases and various liquidity facilities outstanding will cause the size of
the Federal Reserve's balance sheet to expand significantly in coming months.  The
Desk is expected to purchase up to $200 billion in housing-related agency debt by the
end of this year.  The Desk is expected to purchase at least $500 billion in agency
MBS by the end of the second quarter of this year and is expected to purchase up to
$1.25 trillion of these securities by the end of this year.  The Desk is expected to
purchase up to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the third
quarter.  The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the
Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet
that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
ALTERNATIVE B’
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 56 of 64
Desk to purchase agency debt, agency MBS, and longer-term Treasury securities
during the intermeeting period with the aim of providing support to private credit
markets and economic activity.  The timing and pace of these purchases should
depend on conditions in the markets for such securities and on a broader assessment
of private credit market conditions.  The Committee anticipates that the combination
of outright purchases and various liquidity facilities outstanding will cause the size of
the Federal Reserve's balance sheet to expand significantly in coming months.  The
Desk is expected to purchase up to $200 billion in housing-related agency debt by the
end of this year.  The Desk is expected to purchase at least $500 billion in agency
MBS by the end of the second quarter of this year and is expected to purchase up to
$1.25 trillion of these securities by the end of this year.  The Desk is expected to
purchase up to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the third
quarter.  The Desk is expected to increase the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury
and agency securities at an average pace of about $160 billion per month over the
remainder of 2009.  With the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury and agency
securities of about $780 billion at the end of March taken as the base, this pace of
purchases is equivalent to an average monthly growth rate of securities holdings for
the rest of 2009 of around 20 percent.  The System Open Market Account Manager
and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments
regarding the System's balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the
Committee's objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
April 23, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 57 of 64
