Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Content last modified 04/01/2015.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
AUGUST 6, 2009
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Financial market conditions generally became more supportive of economic
activity over the intermeeting period, as investor sentiment improved and strains in
several markets eased further.  Equity markets rallied in response to second-quarter
earnings reports that were substantially stronger than analysts had expected and other
indications that the economy may be stabilizing.  Meanwhile, despite the near failure
of a major middle-market lender in July, the yields and spreads on corporate debt
declined, credit default swap (CDS) spreads narrowed, and conditions in short-term
funding markets continued to improve.  Rates on conforming fixed-rate mortgages
decreased somewhat, and the market for commercial mortgage-backed securities
(CMBS) showed some limited signs of recovery following the inclusion of legacy
CMBS in the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) and the release of
additional details regarding the Treasury’s Public-Private Investment Program (PPIP).
In spite of these improvements, however, bank credit is still very tight, and the
functioning of some financial markets remains strained.
In reaction to earnings reports, generally mixed economic data, and various
Federal Reserve communications, policy expectations and yields on Treasury coupon
securities were somewhat volatile over the intermeeting period; on net, however, both
the expected path of the federal funds rate and the nominal yield curve were little
In the second quarter, as in the first, household debt shrank a bit, while debt of
nonfinancial businesses was essentially unchanged.  Nonetheless, owing to a very large
expansion of government borrowing, the growth of total domestic nonfinancial sector
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 1 of 71
debt increased in the second quarter.  Commercial bank credit contracted across all
major loan categories, and banks further tightened standards and terms on loans to
businesses and households over the past three months.  M2 fell in July, as investors
unwound further the shift toward safe monetary assets that occurred during the
height of the crisis.
International financial markets continued to exhibit signs of improved sentiment
and decreased risk aversion over the intermeeting period.  Global stock markets rose,
and the dollar depreciated somewhat as investors’ demand for foreign assets
MONETARY POLICY EXPECTATIONS AND TREASURY YIELDS
The Committee’s decisions at its June FOMC meeting to leave the target range
for the federal funds rate unchanged and to maintain the size of the large-scale asset
purchase (LSAP) programs were largely anticipated.  However, investors had
reportedly placed some odds on the Committee increasing the size of the Treasury or
mortgage-backed security (MBS) purchase programs.  In addition, a number of
analysts interpreted the statement as suggesting that the Committee believed
economic activity to be in the process of bottoming out.  Accordingly, nominal
Treasury yields and rates on longer-dated Eurodollar futures contracts rose
moderately following the statement.  The release of the minutes on July 15 occasioned
little additional market reaction, but monetary policy expectations declined during the
Chairman’s testimony on July 21, as investors reportedly took note of his remark that
“the FOMC believes that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will be
appropriate for an extended period.”  FOMC communication over the period also
seemed to contribute to greater market confidence that the Committee had the tools
necessary to withdraw policy accommodation in a smooth and timely manner when
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 71
Other incoming economic information had little net effect on policy expectations,
and the market-implied path of the federal funds rate ended the period about the
same as at the time of the June FOMC meeting (Chart 1).  Futures quotes, along with
the staff’s usual assumptions regarding term premiums, still suggest that market
participants expect the target rate to remain within its current range until the first
quarter of 2010.  However, term premiums may well be larger than assumed by the
staff, implying a lower expected path of policy than that depicted in Chart 1.  Indeed,
most respondents to the Desk’s dealer survey in August anticipated that the federal
funds rate would remain in its current range until at least the fourth quarter of next
year, as they did in the June survey.1, 2
Yields on Treasury coupon securities were somewhat volatile, responding to
Federal Reserve communications, better-than-expected corporate earnings reports,
and economic data that were mixed relative to expectations.  Still, on balance over the
intermeeting period, the nominal yield curve was largely unchanged, with only a small
upward shift in long-term yields.  Implied volatility of long-term interest rates
moderated, although it remains relatively high.
Near-term inflation compensation fell early in the intermeeting period, partly due
to a weak employment report and declines in energy prices.  Although it subsequently
retraced a portion of this drop, inflation compensation for the next five years was
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 71
down 9 basis points on balance over the intermeeting period.  Meanwhile, ten-year
inflation compensation increased 13 basis points.  Those changes resulted in an
increase of 38 basis points in the five-year forward measure of inflation
compensation.3   Liquidity in the TIPS market reportedly continues to be poor.
Survey measures of long-term inflation expectations held steady over the period.
Short-run measures of inflation expectations were also little changed; the median
forecast of core PCE inflation through 2011 from the primary dealer survey registered
a small uptick while near-term inflation expectations measured by the
Reuters/Michigan survey fell slightly over the period.
The Treasury auctioned $252 billion in coupon securities across the term structure
during the intermeeting period, and its net marketable debt (including bills and
coupon securities) increased by $216 billion.  Several of the auctions were for record
amounts, and—apart from two tepid receptions in late July—demand was reportedly
stronger than market participants had anticipated.  Measures of foreign participation
mostly continued to suggest solid demand from abroad.4
CAPITAL MARKETS
Amid signs of improvement in the economic outlook, broad equity indexes rose
significantly, ending the intermeeting period about 11 to 12 percent higher (Chart 2).  
                                           
3 There is some dispersion in readings from various market-based measures of inflation 
compensation this period.  The figures reported in the text are based on Board staff’s usual 
calculations from fitted off-the-run TIPS and nominal yield curves, and information from 
the inflation-swaps market is generally consistent with these readings.  Barclay’s measures 
of break-even inflation (which are based on on-the-run yields) show the same general 
pattern but suggest a smaller increase in the five-year forward rate.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 71
Earnings in the second quarter were substantially better than analysts had anticipated,
with about three-quarters of reports exceeding expectations, often by large margins.
Reported revenues were close to analysts’ estimates on average, suggesting that the
earnings surprises reflected larger-than-expected cost reductions.  Implied volatility of
equity prices, as measured by the VIX index, declined 5 percentage points to about
the levels that prevailed in early 2008, and the equity premium—measured by the
staff’s estimate of the expected real equity return over the next ten years relative to the
real 10-year Treasury yield—continued to narrow, although it remained high by
historical standards.
In the financial sector, second-quarter earnings results were mixed.  Several large
banking organizations reported higher-than-expected profits, mainly due to revenues
from investment banking, trading activities, and fees from the wave of mortgage
refinancing during the spring.  Although regional banks generally have higher
exposure to commercial real estate than larger banks, the regional-bank sector
generally met earnings expectations.  Within this sector however, earnings varied
widely.  Overall, bank profits in the second quarter were weighed down by high
provisions for loan and lease losses as well as a number of one-time charges.5
Meanwhile, earnings reports for insurance companies generally met expectations.
Stocks of banks and insurance companies outperformed the broader market, and, in
general, the CDS spreads for such institutions narrowed considerably.
Inflows into bond mutual funds increased in recent months, and yields on
investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds continued their steep decline,
producing a further narrowing of spreads over comparable-maturity Treasury issues
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 71
over the intermeeting period.  Indexes of corporate CDS spreads, which had widened
somewhat in early June, retreated to near their pre-Lehman bankruptcy levels.
Despite prominent budget problems at some state and local governments, yields on
municipal bonds were down modestly, and gross issuance of municipal debt was solid.
Nonfinancial corporate bond issuance remained solid in June and July.  However,
commercial paper issuance continued to decline, and commercial and industrial (C&I)
lending registered another significant drop, leading to a slight decrease in the overall
pace of net debt financing by nonfinancial corporations in July.  Meanwhile, debt
issuance by financial firms remained sluggish, and issuance through the Temporary
Liquidity Guarantee Program declined further.  Equity issuance in both the financial
and nonfinancial sectors was weak in July.
Auctions of agency debt securities were generally well received during the
intermeeting period.  Spreads on senior agency debt narrowed slightly, reportedly due
in part to continuing Federal Reserve purchases.  On July 10, Freddie Mac announced
that it would tender offers for all of its $4.4 billion of outstanding subordinated debt,
and it subsequently reported purchasing about 86 percent of these issues.  The firm
reportedly viewed the offer as a means of retiring a portion of its liabilities at relatively
low cost.  Some market participants expected that a similar announcement from
Fannie Mae could be forthcoming, and the prices of agency subordinated debt
Spreads on highly rated tranches of CDS indexes on CMBS narrowed over the
intermeeting period, as market participants focused on the expansion of the TALF to
cover legacy CMBS, as well as on additional details released by the Treasury regarding
the PPIP.  Nevertheless, the market for new-issue CMBS was still moribund.
Commercial real estate markets remained under considerable stress, as sales of
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 71
commercial properties continued to drop in the second quarter, the delinquency rate
on securitized commercial mortgages rose further, and price indexes fell to about two-
thirds of their peak level from late 2007.
Interest rates on 30-year conforming fixed-rate residential mortgages declined to
about 5¼ percent over the period but remained higher than they were from January
through April.  Spreads between primary mortgage rates and yields on agency MBS
narrowed somewhat to about 50 basis points, while spreads between MBS and (on-
the-run) ten-year Treasury yields were little changed at about 100 basis points.
Following the release of the minutes, which noted that the FOMC had discussed
possible purchases of agency MBS backed by adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) under
the MBS LSAP program, secondary-market spreads on ARM products reportedly
narrowed.  However, spreads for adjustable-rate mortgages remained elevated, and
applications for such loans, though slightly higher than in June, stayed at a very low
level.  Agency MBS issuance rose slightly in May, but the private-label RMBS market
remains closed.
Conditions in the consumer asset-backed securities (ABS) market were roughly
stable over the period.  Spreads of AAA-rated consumer ABS to swaps were
unchanged at levels comparable to those in the first half of 2008, and the recent
volume of ABS issuance—most of which has been facilitated by the TALF—has been
nearing levels observed prior to the second half 2008.  Nevertheless, interest rates on
consumer loans have yet to retreat, and consumer debt growth is estimated to have
remained negative through the second quarter.
MARKET FUNCTIONING
Measures of functioning and liquidity in most financial markets improved further
over the intermeeting period.  Conditions in short-term funding markets continued to
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 71
recover, as spreads between three- and six-month Libor rates and overnight index
swaps (OIS) edged down, and participation in Federal Reserve liquidity programs
declined further (Chart 3).  Bid-asked spreads and haircuts for most types of
transactions in the repo market also ticked down.  Spreads on A2/P2-rated
commercial paper and AA-rated asset-backed commercial paper were little changed
since late June, remaining at the low end of their ranges over the past two years.  In
Treasury markets, a decline in the fitting errors of staff nominal yield-curve models
suggested that investors were increasingly willing and able to engage in arbitrage.6
Still, trading volumes reportedly remained low, although they picked up somewhat
since June, and the elevated spread between on- and off-the-run ten-year yields
pointed to continued strains.  Quarter-end pressures facing financial institutions in
late June appeared to be quite modest.
In mid-July, investors became increasingly concerned about the financial
condition of CIT Group, one of the largest lenders to middle-market firms, as it
appeared potentially unable to roll over maturing debt and failed to receive public
support.  Subsequent negotiations with bondholders succeeded in procuring $3 billion
in private rescue financing, which may have averted a near-term default.7  Broader
financial markets appear to have been largely unaffected by these developments.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 71
The corporate bond market continued to function reasonably well.  The basis
between the CDX investment-grade index of CDS spreads and investment-grade
corporate bond spreads—a rough gauge of possible arbitrage opportunities in
corporate debt markets—narrowed further, and the range of quotes reported by CDS
dealers tightened.  Some further improvements occurred in the leveraged loan market,
with average bid prices rising about 4 percent and bid-ask spreads falling by about 35
basis points over the intermeeting period.  Although conditions in this market have
improved substantially in recent months, they remain quite impaired relative to pre-
crisis experience.
Over the intermeeting period, total Federal Reserve assets were little changed at
about $2 trillion, with an increase in securities purchased under the LSAP program
about offsetting declines in credit supplied under liquidity facilities.  (See box entitled
“Balance Sheet Developments During the Intermeeting Period.”)  In the most recent
primary dealer survey, respondents placed very low odds on increases in the size of
the LSAP program at the upcoming FOMC meeting.  Usage of most of the System’s
liquidity facilities shrank further, although TALF credit continued to expand, with the
first extensions of CMBS-backed loans occurring in July.  On June 25, the Federal
Reserve announced extensions of and modifications to a number of its liquidity
programs.  Market participants reportedly viewed these actions as appropriate given
the recent improvement in financial conditions, and the response in financial markets
was minimal.
FOREIGN DEVELOPMENTS
On net, foreign stock markets rose and the dollar depreciated mildly against most
currencies over the intermeeting period (Chart 4).  European and Japanese stock
indexes increased 8 to 10 percent, as positive U.S. earnings reports and news of strong
growth in emerging Asia lifted investor sentiment since the June FOMC meeting.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 71
Balance Sheet Developments During the Intermeeting Period
Since the June FOMC meeting, the Federal Reserve’s total assets have edged 
just below $2 trillion and their composition has continued to shift.1  As a result of 
the ongoing asset purchases, securities held outright increased $149 billion, but this 
increase was more than offset by a $177 billion decrease in lending through 
liquidity and credit facilities.
The Open Market Desk purchased $60 billion in U.S. Treasury securities, 
$14 billion in agency debt securities, and $76 billion in agency mortgage-backed 
securities during the intermeeting period.2  In contrast, most of the System’s 
liquidity and credit programs contracted further, likely reflecting continued 
improvements in global bank funding markets.  Term auction credit declined 
$49 billion, foreign central bank liquidity swaps declined $46 billion, and primary 
credit declined $6 billion.  Lending under the Primary Dealer Credit Facility 
remained at zero, and securities lent through the Term Securities Lending Facility 
(TSLF)—which do not affect on-balance sheet assets because the Federal Reserve 
retains ownership of the securities lent—fell by $4 billion to $3 billion, the lowest 
level since the inception of the program.
The facilities aimed either directly or indirectly at the commercial paper market 
also declined.  Credit extended through the Commercial Paper Funding Facility 
(CPFF) declined $65 billion, as a large amount of maturing commercial paper was 
not rolled over in the facility.  This decline is likely a sign, at least in part, of some 
substitution of longer-term credit for commercial paper, as well as some 
deleveraging by commercial paper issuers.  Loans extended under the Asset-Backed 
Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (AMLF) 
decreased by $17 billion, leaving only $113 million outstanding.  In contrast to the 
other facilities, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF), which 
conducted two subscriptions during the intermeeting period, expanded in size.  The 
first loan subscription, totaling $5 billion, financed the issuance of asset-backed 
securities collateralized by auto, credit card, student, small business, and servicing 
advance loans.  The second loan subscription, totaling $636 million, was associated 
with the first legacy commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) operation.3
Market Desk committed to purchase an additional $126.6 billion of MBS, on net. 
3 The New York Fed has announced that $6.9 billion was requested in TALF loans at the August 6, 2009
facility.  The closing date of this operation is August 13, 2009.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 71
Regarding other assets, the second-quarter revaluation of the Maiden Lane 
portfolios led to an unrealized revaluation net gain of $1.35 billion on the three 
Maiden Lane portfolios, largely because of a substantial upward revision in 
valuation of Maiden Lane III assets that more than offset continued declines in 
valuations of the Maiden Lane and Maiden Lane III portfolios.  The reported value 
of the revolving AIG credit extension was reduced by a loan adjustment of about 
$1.3 billion to reflect the lower interest earnings from the loan related to the most 
recent modification of the terms of the facility in April 2009.
On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, the U.S. Treasury’s 
general account decreased $70 billion.  The Treasury’s supplementary financing 
account remained unchanged at $200 billion, while most other categories recorded 
small changes.  The net result of these changes to the balance sheet was an increase 
of $39 billion in reserve balances of depository institutions
Following the June FOMC meeting, the Federal Reserve announced extensions 
of and modifications to a number of its liquidity programs and credit facilities. 
Specifically, the Federal Reserve approved extension through February 1, 2010, of 
the AMLF, CPFF, PDCF, TSLF, and the foreign central bank liquidity swaps.4 
Furthermore, it was announced that Term Auction Facility (TAF) auction amounts 
would be reduced gradually if market conditions continued to improve.  Auction 
amounts were set at $125 billion for the July auctions, down from $150 billion 
previously, and have been set at $100 billion for the August auctions.
as the offered amount of Schedule 2 TSLF auctions was reduced.  The authorization for the Money Market 
Investor Funding Facility (MMIFF) was not extended, and an additional administrative criterion was 
established for use of the AMLF.  The expiration date for the TALF currently remains set at December 31, 
2009.  The TAF does not have a fixed expiration date.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 71
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet 
Billions of dollars
Change 
since last 
FOMC
Current 
(8/5/2009)
Maximum 
level
Date of 
maximum
Market Desk committed to purchase $126.6 billion of MBS, on net.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 71
European financial stocks, which were further boosted by early reports of better-than-
expected profits by some European banks, increased more than 20 percent.  The
improvement in global sentiment appeared to encourage investors to move further
into foreign assets, placing some downward pressure on the dollar.  The major
currencies index of the dollar declined 3¼ percent since the June FOMC meeting.
The June 24 auction by the European Central Bank (ECB) of unlimited one-year
funds at a fixed rate of 1 percent was met with very strong demand.  Banks bid for a
record €442 billion in loans at the auction, increasing the ECB’s total amount of
outstanding refinancing operations by 45 percent, and as a result the effective
overnight interest rate in the euro area has declined to about 35 basis points.  The
ECB also began its purchases of covered bonds, buying €5 billion of bonds so far;
yields on intermediate-term European covered bonds have declined by roughly 20
basis points since the purchases began in early July.  In contrast, yields on longer-
dated gilts rose as much as 19 basis points immediately after the Bank of England
(BOE) surprised markets by leaving the size of its Asset Purchase Facility (APF)
unchanged at £125 billion at its July Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meeting.
Gilt yields continued to edge higher over July as the bank’s purchases neared their
limit under the facility; however, the completion of purchases at the end of July,
which was expected, had little apparent impact on the gilt market.  Market participants
were divided as to whether the BOE would authorize any further purchases at its
August meeting, but the MPC did decide to renew its purchases.  Citing the depth of
the recession, the BOE raised the size of the APF to £175 billion and widened the set
of gilts it would purchase, stating that it expected to conduct its additional purchases
over the next three months.  Benchmark gilt yields fell about 20 basis points on the
announcement.   On net, benchmark yields in the United Kingdom are about
unchanged when compared to their levels at the time of the June FOMC, while they
have declined by 8 basis points in the euro area.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 71
Mutual fund flows to the emerging markets turned positive again after a brief
period of outflows in late June, and the dollar depreciated about 1¼ percent against
the currencies of our other important trading partners.  The larger emerging Asian
and Latin American stock markets increased 12 to 18 percent, and EMBI Global
spreads declined by about 100 basis points.  Several Latin American central banks
lowered their policy rates further over the intermeeting period, and but have signaled
that they intend to pause before considering any further reductions.
The Swiss National Bank (SNB) intervened
since announcing in March that it would purchase foreign assets as part of
its monetary policy operations; .
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY
The level of private domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to have
declined again in the second quarter.  Household debt is estimated to have dropped at
an annual rate of 1¼ percent, and nonfinancial business debt appears to have been
essentially unchanged (Chart 5).  In contrast, the federal government issued debt at a
rapid clip, and state and local government debt expanded moderately.  All told, the
growth rate of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is estimated to have increased from
an annual rate of about 4 percent in the first quarter of this year to 5½ percent in the
second quarter.
Commercial bank credit contracted at an annual rate of 3¼ percent in the second
quarter and 13¼ percent in July.  The declines in June and July were widespread
across all major loan categories but were particularly pronounced for C&I loans amid
subdued originations and broad-based paydowns that may reflect, in part, substitution
into bond issuance.  Commercial real estate loans also declined.  Residential real estate
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 71
loans on banks’ books dropped further, likely reflecting tighter standards, higher
mortgage rates in recent months, continued securitization activity, and additional
reductions in the home equity credit lines of some existing customers.  The stock of
consumer loans originated by banks decreased in June and July, amid reported weaker
loan demand and tighter credit standards and terms.  The decline in bank credit,
combined with further increases in core deposits, has allowed banks to pare their
managed liabilities substantially in recent months.  Banks’ allowance for loan and lease
losses continued to rise through late July, suggesting that banks see further
deterioration in loan performance as likely.
The Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey conducted in July indicated that banks
continued to tighten their lending standards and terms over the past three months on
all major categories of loans to businesses and households.  However, the net
percentages of banks that tightened declined further.  With respect to C&I loans,
respondents again cited a less favorable or more uncertain economic outlook, along
with a worsening of industry-specific problems and a reduced tolerance for risk, as the
leading reasons for the continued tightening.  Demand for loans reportedly continued
to weaken across all categories except for prime residential mortgages.  In response to
a special question, most banks said that they expected lending standards to remain
tighter than long-run norms until at least the second half of 2010; for below-
investment-grade firms and nonprime households, standards are expected to remain
tighter for longer, with many banks reporting that standards for such borrowers will
remain tighter than average for the foreseeable future.
After growing at an annual rate of 13 percent in the first quarter, M2 increased at
a rate of just 2½ percent in the second quarter and contracted at a 3½ percent rate in
July, likely reflecting in part a reversal of safe haven demands for M2 assets that had
boosted money growth in previous quarters.  The recent sluggishness has been
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 71
evident in all components of M2 but has been most prominent in small time deposits
and retail money market funds, both of which have declined at double-digit rates over
the last several months as yields on these instruments have dropped to very low levels.
The monetary base expanded at a 24 percent rate in the second quarter, a somewhat
less rapid pace than had been observed over previous months, and fell at a 6 percent
rate in July; these rates reflect the declining usage of several Federal Reserve liquidity
and credit facilities.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 71
ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
Information received since the June meeting suggests that the downturn in
economic activity is drawing to a close.  The staff estimates that real GDP declined
at an annual rate of 1½ percent in the second quarter, compared with a 6½ percent
contraction in the first quarter.8  As in June, the staff outlook assumes that the federal
funds rate will remain at its current level for the next few years and that the Federal
Reserve will not make any significant changes in the size or timing of its large-scale
asset purchase (LSAP) programs.  The staff continues to anticipate that the spending
and tax changes authorized by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
will contribute about 1 percentage point to the annualized growth rate of real GDP
growth during the second half of this year and about ¾ percentage point to real GDP
growth next year.
In the staff’s projection, longer-term Treasury yields edge up through 2010.
Mortgage rates are expected to increase about ¼ percentage point as spreads over
longer-term Treasury yields widen slightly from unusually low levels.  In contrast, risk
spreads on investment-grade corporate bonds are projected to narrow a bit more than
½ percentage point.  With the equity risk premium also continuing to decline over
coming quarters, stock prices are projected to rise at a brisk annual rate of about 15
percent.  The availability of bank credit to firms and households is expected to
improve over time but remain quite tight by historical standards.  The real foreign
exchange value of the dollar, which declined about 2 percent over the intermeeting
period, is assumed to fall about 2 percent annually during the remainder of this year
and in 2010.  The current and projected price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil is
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 71
little changed from the time of the June Greenbook; based on readings from futures
markets, the staff expects oil prices to rise gradually through the end of next year.
Against this backdrop, the staff now expects real GDP to grow at an annual rate of
notch during the intermeeting period, is projected to reach a peak of 10 percent late
this year.  Economic activity is expected to pick up modestly next year, with real GDP
rising a bit more than 3 percent and the unemployment rate declining to about
economic slack, the staff projects core PCE inflation to decline to an average annual
rate of 1¼ percent in the second half of this year and to 1 percent in 2010.10  The
corresponding rates for overall PCE inflation are projected to be 2¼ percent in the
second half of 2009 and 1¼ percent in 2010.
Looking further ahead, the staff assumes that the federal funds rate will remain
at its effective lower bound through 2011 and then move up to about 4 percent over
the next two years.  The staff forecasts that real GDP will expand at an average rate of
about 5 percent from 2011 through 2013, outpacing a rise in potential output that
averages 2½ percent per year.  As a result, the unemployment rate declines steadily,
falling to around 5 percent—the staff’s current estimate of the NAIRU—by late 2013.
As real activity recovers, total PCE inflation slowly rises to about 1.4 percent by
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 71
MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES
Measures of short-run r* for this round were influenced by two sets of
countervailing factors.  First, the comprehensive NIPA revision lowered recent
readings on the level of output, leading the staff to revise down substantially its
estimate of the output gap in the second quarter to about -7½ percent.  Other things
equal, the wider output gap tends to push short-run measures of r* lower.  Second,
incoming data, a lower value of the dollar, an improvement in other financial market
conditions, and a stronger forecast for foreign growth put upward pressure on short-
run measures of r*.11  The net effect of these factors depends on the model used to
generate the r* measures and on whether or not the estimates are conditioned on the
staff outlook.  Nonetheless, all of the r* measures are appreciably lower than the real
federal funds rate, which currently stands at -1½ percent.
As shown in Chart 6, the Greenbook-consistent estimate of short-run r*
computed using the FRB/US model remains at about -2¾ percent.  Of the r*
measures not conditioned on the staff outlook, those derived from the FRB/US and
EDO models increased about 1½ percentage points to -4 and -2¼ percent,
respectively.  Similarly, the measure of short-run r* from the small structural model
rose by ½ percentage point and now stands at -3 percent.  In contrast, the r* estimate
from the single-equation model and the Greenbook-consistent measure of r* from the
EDO model declined appreciably.  In both cases, the downward revisions (of about a
percentage point) were heavily influenced by the downward revision in the staff’s
estimate of the output gap.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 71
shifted down by about 15 basis points since the previous Bluebook.12  Still, futures
quotes appear to price in a significant probability that the eventual policy tightening
could be more rapid than is suggested by FRB/US simulations with the outcome-
based rule.  As in the previous Bluebook, the 70 percent confidence intervals include a
funds rate of 3 percent for the end of 2010.
The lower panel of Chart 8 provides near-term prescriptions from simple policy
rules.  As shown in the left-hand columns, all of the prescriptions are at the effective
lower bound.  The right-hand columns show the prescriptions that would be implied
by these rules if the lower bound was not imposed.  These unconstrained rules
uniformly imply negative funds rates.  With the exception of the first-difference rule,
the prescribed interest rates are markedly lower than in the June Bluebook, reflecting
the downward revision in estimates of the output gap.  The funds rates implied by the
Taylor (1993) and Taylor (1999) rules are affected most strongly by the output gap
revision: their average second-half 2009 values decreased by about ¾ percent and 1½
percent, respectively, compared to the June Bluebook.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 71
POLICY ALTERNATIVES
This Bluebook presents three main policy alternatives—labeled A, B, and C—for
the Committee’s consideration.  A variant of B, labeled B', also is presented.  Table 1
gives an overview of key policy elements of these alternatives, and draft statements
are provided on the following pages.
Each of the three main alternatives maintains an unchanged target range of 0 to ¼
percent for the federal funds rate, but the alternatives differ with respect to the size
and timing of the Federal Reserve’s large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs).  Under
Alternative A, the Committee would increase its purchases of Treasury securities and
potentially extend the period of time over which it expects to hold the funds rate at a
very low rate.  Alternative B would essentially maintain the current stance of monetary
policy while specifying a phase-out strategy for the purchases of Treasury securities.
Under Alternative C, the Committee would trim the size of the LSAPs and shorten
the anticipated period of time over which its target range for the funds rate would be
likely to remain extraordinarily low.
All of the alternatives refer to the recent improvements in financial market conditions
and provide generally similar descriptions of the incoming information on economic
activity and inflation, but each alternative provides a distinct characterization of the
economic outlook.  Alternative A states that “the pace of economic contraction has
abated significantly,” whereas Alternatives B and C adopt a somewhat more optimistic
tone and note that “economic activity is leveling out.”  Alternative C also indicates
that “downside risks are diminishing.”  As in June, all three alternatives reiterate the
Committee’s expectation that inflation “will remain subdued for some time.”
In characterizing the LSAP program, Alternatives B and C note that the Federal
Reserve is currently in the process of buying the previously announced maximum
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 71
amount of $300 billion in Treasury securities.  These two alternatives introduce new
language stating that the Committee has decided to “gradually slow the pace” of
purchases to promote “a smooth transition in markets” and that these transactions are
now expected to be completed by the end of October.  Alternative B' preserves the
same language regarding the phase-out strategy for the current program of purchases
of Treasury securities but indicates that the Committee is “prepared to consider
resuming” its purchases of Treasury securities.  In contrast, Alternative A raises the
amount of purchases of Treasury securities by $150 billion and indicates that the “full
amount” of $450 billion will be purchased by year-end; this alternative does not
mention a phase-out strategy for these transactions.
Under Alternatives A and B, the overall size of the Federal Reserve’s purchases of
agency MBS and agency debt would remain at the previously announced levels of
$1.25 trillion and $200 billion, respectively.  However, Alternative A would indicate
that the Committee anticipates completing the “full amount” of agency MBS
purchases, whereas Alternative B leaves open the possibility that total purchases will
not reach the maximum amount; moreover, by not specifying a phase-out strategy,
this alternative preserves more scope for the Committee to choose to expand these
purchases at a later date.  Alternative C states that the Committee has decided to
“gradually slow the pace” of its purchases of agency MBS and agency debt and now
anticipates that these purchases will only cumulate to about $1 trillion and $150
billion, respectively.  All alternatives state that these transactions would be completed
by the end of this year.13
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 71
Table 1:  Overview of Alternative Language  
for the August 11‐12, 2009 FOMC Announcement
August Alternatives
A B / B′ C
Forward Guidance on Funds Rate Path
“for an
extended   
period”
same as in June or 
“at least through
“for an  
extended  period”
“at least through  
the end
of this year”
Treasury Securities Purchases
Total  
Amount
up to  
$300 billion
“full amount”  
of $450 billion  $300 billion
“roughly  
$300 billion”
Pace ----- ----- 
pace  will
“gradually slow” 
pace  will
“gradually slow”
Completion by autumn  by year-end 
by the end  
of October
by the end  
of October
Agency MBS Purchases
Total  
Amount
up to  
$1.25 trillion
“full amount” 
of $1.25 trillion
up to  
$1.25 trillion
“will cumulate to 
about $1 trillion”
Pace ----- ----- ----- 
pace will
“gradually slow”
Completion by year-end by year-end by year-end by year-end
Agency Debt Purchases
Total 
Amount
up to  
$200 billion
up to  
$200 billion
up to  
$200 billion
“will cumulate to... 
about $150 billion”
Pace ----- ----- ----- 
pace will
“gradually slow”
Completion by year-end by year-end by year-end by year-end
Evaluation of LSAP Timing and Overall Amounts
adjustments  
to all LSAPs  
will continue
to be evaluated
adjustments  
to all LSAPs  
will continue
to be evaluated
adjustments to  
agency debt
and agency MBS  
will continue
to be evaluated
“prepared to 
consider resuming” 
Treasury purchases;
adjustments  
to agency debt and
agency MBS 
will continue
to be evaluated
adjustments to  
all LSAPs
will continue  
to be evaluated
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 71
June FOMC Statement
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April suggests that 
the pace of economic contraction is slowing. Conditions in financial markets have generally 
improved in recent months. Household spending has shown further signs of stabilizing but 
remains constrained by ongoing job losses, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. 
Businesses are cutting back on fixed investment and staffing but appear to be making 
progress in bringing inventory stocks into better alignment with sales. Although economic 
activity is likely to remain weak for a time, the Committee continues to anticipate that policy 
actions to stabilize financial markets and institutions, fiscal and monetary stimulus, and 
market forces will contribute to a gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth in a 
context of price stability.
The prices of energy and other commodities have risen of late. However, substantial 
resource slack is likely to dampen cost pressures, and the Committee expects that inflation 
will remain subdued for some time.
In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote 
economic recovery and to preserve price stability. The Committee will maintain the target 
range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and continues to anticipate that 
economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate 
for an extended period. As previously announced, to provide support to mortgage lending 
and housing markets and to improve overall conditions in private credit markets, the Federal 
Reserve will purchase a total of up to $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities and 
up to $200 billion of agency debt by the end of the year. In addition, the Federal Reserve will 
buy up to $300 billion of Treasury securities by autumn. The Committee will continue to 
evaluate the timing and overall amounts of its purchases of securities in light of the evolving 
economic outlook and conditions in financial markets. The Federal Reserve is monitoring 
the size and composition of its balance sheet and will make adjustments to its credit and 
liquidity programs as warranted.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 71
August FOMC Statement – Alternative A
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 71
August FOMC Statement – Alternative B
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 71
August FOMC Statement – Alternative B'
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 71
August FOMC Statement – Alternative C
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 37 of 71
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
If policymakers believe that the policy stimulus already in train will likely be
sufficient to foster a satisfactory economic recovery, the Committee could decide to
reaffirm its forward guidance regarding the funds rate, continue implementing its
previously announced LSAPs, and provide additional information about its plan for
winding down purchases of Treasury securities, as in Alternative B.  Maintaining the
current stance of monetary policy might be particularly appealing if the Committee
shares the staff’s assessment that economic growth will gradually pick up in coming
quarters as the financial system continues to heal and the housing sector shows
further signs of improvement.  Since the Federal Reserve’s purchases of Treasury
securities are scheduled to be completed by autumn, the Committee may view this
meeting as the appropriate time to clarify its strategy for phasing out these purchases,
while deferring consideration of the strategy for completing its other LSAP programs
to a subsequent meeting.  In particular, as recommended by the Desk, the Committee
might want to slow the pace of transactions so that these purchases taper off instead
of ending abruptly, thereby minimizing the risk of financial market dislocations.14
While economic and financial news since June has generally been positive, the
Committee—like the staff—may interpret this information as largely confirming its
modal outlook for economic activity and inflation and hence may see no compelling
reason to modify the current stance of monetary policy.  Indeed, the Greenbook-
consistent measure of short-run r* from the FRB-US model is the same as in June.
Moreover, reiterating that the federal funds rate is likely to remain exceptionally low
“for an extended period” remains consistent with the funds rate path implied by the
estimated outcome-based rule (Chart 8).  Even if meeting participants believe that
prospects for economic growth have improved somewhat further since June, the
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 38 of 71
Committee may still see considerable uncertainty about the outlook and may prefer to
wait for more definitive signs of recovery before modifying its forward policy
Policymakers may view the strength of the prospective recovery as not fully
satisfactory, but they may nonetheless believe that providing further monetary
stimulus through expanded LSAPs would entail costs that would likely outweigh the
potential benefits.  For example, Committee participants may be concerned that
additional purchases of longer-term assets could magnify the size of losses on the
Federal Reserve’s portfolio under scenarios involving a sharp increase in short-term
interest rates over the next few years.  Expanding the System’s purchases of Treasury
securities might be viewed as particularly problematic if policymakers judged that such
an announcement could trigger renewed concerns about possible future monetization
of federal budget deficits and hence push up inflation risk premiums.  Even a modest
increase in the size of the LSAPs might be viewed by investors as signaling a greater
likelihood of further expansions that could threaten the viability of the Committee’s
exit strategy.
Alternative B indicates that the Committee will continue to evaluate the timing and
overall amounts of the Federal Reserve’s purchases of agency debt and agency MBS
but does not mention further adjustments to the purchases of Treasury securities; the
absence of any such reference might well be seen by market analysts as suggesting that
the Committee would not be inclined to resume large-scale purchases of Treasury
securities even if financial or economic conditions deteriorated.  However, if
policymakers perceive an appreciable probability that additional purchases of Treasury
securities could become warranted in coming months, they might prefer language like
that of Alternative B', which states that the Committee is “prepared to consider
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 39 of 71
resuming its purchases of Treasury securities in light of the evolving economic
outlook and conditions in financial markets.”
The release of a statement such as that suggested for Alternative B should have muted
effects on financial markets.  The Desk’s survey of primary dealers indicates that
investors generally expect the Committee’s statement at this meeting will include
some reference to recent improvements in economic and financial conditions.
Moreover, investors expect the Committee to reiterate its forward policy guidance and
place very low odds on the announcement of any substantial change in the size of the
Federal Reserve’s LSAP programs.  Accordingly, there would likely be little change in
short- and long-term yields, equity prices, or the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
If policymakers are concerned that the economic outlook is unacceptably weak
and judge that additional monetary stimulus would be appropriate, the Committee
could decide to expand the total amount of purchases of Treasury securities and to
extend the timeframe for conducting those purchases, as in Alternative A.  Although
the staff has marked up slightly its forecast for economic growth, the output gap in
the Greenbook remains in excess of 7 percent over the next two years, the
unemployment rate declines only slowly from its projected 10 percent peak, and core
inflation hovers around 1 percent.  With protracted resource slack and inflation below
levels seen by most participants as consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate,
this outlook suggests that further monetary stimulus might be appropriate.  According
to the optimal control simulations depicted in Chart 7, the real federal funds rate
would be substantially lower and would foster significantly better outcomes for
employment and inflation were it not for the fact that the nominal funds rate is
constrained by the effective lower bound.  Furthermore, the Committee may judge
that signs of economic and financial stabilization are quite tentative and that
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 40 of 71
significant uncertainties remain as to the timing and extent of the economic recovery,
perhaps along the lines of the “Intensified Financial Fragility” scenario in the
Greenbook.  Given these considerations, the Committee might consider it
appropriate to apply more monetary stimulus by expanding the LSAP programs.
Even though the Committee did not modify the stance of monetary policy at the June
meeting, policymakers may judge that an expansion of LSAPs is appropriate at the
present juncture.  In particular, the Committee’s uncertainty about the effects of these
purchases on the economy may have diminished since March—the last time the
Committee adjusted the size of the LSAPs.  Also, since June investors have apparently
become more confident about the viability of the Federal Reserve’s exit strategy,
perhaps giving the Committee greater flexibility with regard to expanding the size of
its balance sheet.  In these circumstances, the Committee may see increased LSAPs as
a useful tool to strengthen aggregate demand and to promote a return of inflation to
rates that the Committee considers most consistent with the dual mandate.
The Committee may see expanded purchases of Treasury securities as the most
suitable means for providing additional monetary stimulus while minimizing adverse
effects on financial market functioning.  The current flow of the Federal Reserve’s
purchases of Treasury securities is relatively small compared with new issuance of
those securities, suggesting that purchases could be increased without a significant risk
of creating market distortions.  In contrast, the Desk has already encountered
challenges in maintaining a pace of agency MBS purchases consistent with reaching
the previously announced maximum amount; hence, expanded purchases of those
securities might not be feasible or desirable.  Expanded purchases of agency debt
could generate significant distortions in the markets for those securities, especially in
the absence of significant balance sheet growth of the housing GSEs.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 41 of 71
An announcement along the lines of Alternative A is not expected by market
participants and predicting the effects of such a statement is difficult.  Judging by
recent experience, the announcement of an additional $150 billion in Treasury
purchases is likely to reduce longer-term yields about 10 to 20 basis points.  Equity
prices would probably edge up, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar might
well decline.  Inflation compensation could increase if the Committee’s decision
prompted renewed investor concerns about possible monetization of the debt.  All of
these effects could be magnified if market participants saw the increase in asset
purchases as opening the door to yet further increases in such transactions.
In considering ways to provide additional monetary stimulus, policymakers could also
choose to indicate that maintaining the current target range for the federal funds rate
would likely be warranted “at least through mid-2010,” rather than reiterating that
“economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal
funds rate for an extended period.”  Futures quotes indicate that some financial
market participants anticipate a much earlier onset of funds rate tightening than
assumed in the Greenbook.  Thus, such an adjustment of the Committee’s forward
policy guidance would likely cause some investors to mark down their expectations
regarding the degree of tightening that is likely to occur over the next year or so.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
If policymakers are substantially more optimistic than the staff regarding the
economic outlook, the Committee might choose to trim the size of the LSAPs and to
adjust its language regarding the anticipated period over which the funds rate would
be likely to remain extraordinarily low, as in Alternative C.  Under this alternative, the
Committee would begin a gradual withdrawal of monetary stimulus by announcing a
tapering off of the LSAP program.  It would also revise its stated expectation for a
very low federal funds rate so that it extends “at least through the end of this year.”
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 42 of 71
This language would likely be seen by market participants as pointing to a somewhat
earlier end to the period of very low funds rates than implied by the Committee’s
recent statements.
With economic activity leveling off and conditions in financial markets improving
steadily, members may anticipate a more rapid unwinding of financial strains than
assumed by the staff, a possibility explored in the “Faster Pace of Financial Recovery”
scenario in the Greenbook.  Members may be especially concerned that, should
bankers’ attitudes toward lending improve rapidly, the large amount of reserves in the
banking system could bring about a strong expansion of bank credit, providing
considerable stimulus to aggregate demand.  Members may believe that such risks
would be moderated by reducing the Committee’s planned asset purchases and thus
lowering the accumulation of reserves in the banking system.
A less optimistic outlook for aggregate supply—especially in light of the
comprehensive NIPA revisions—and the attendant consequences for inflation might
also incline the Committee to begin withdrawing monetary stimulus sooner rather
than later.  For example, the Committee might see substantial benefits of moving
preemptively towards a firmer stance of monetary policy to help ensure that long-term
inflation expectations do not rise above levels consistent with price stability.  (The
“Higher Inflation Expectations” scenario in the Greenbook illustrates this possibility.)
Indeed, survey measures of long-term inflation expectations and the five-year forward
measure of inflation compensation have edged higher over recent months, despite
high levels of unemployment and resource slack.  Policymakers may see a reduction in
the Committee’s planned asset purchases as likely to reduce market concerns about
the Federal Reserve’s strategy and capacity for winding down the LSAP program,
reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, and eventually raising the
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 43 of 71
federal funds rate.  A reduction in such concerns could help ensure that inflation
expectations remain well anchored.
The publication of Alternative C would come as quite a surprise to market
participants.  The Desk’s survey indicates that primary dealers uniformly expect that
the Committee’s statement at this meeting will reiterate the same forward policy
guidance as in recent FOMC statements.  Only a quarter of survey participants
indicated that they expect the federal funds rate to be raised above its effective lower
bound by next June, while another half expect the initial rate increase to occur later
this year, and the remainder do not expect tightening before 2011.  Thus, the release
of a statement along the lines of Alternative C would likely cause short- and longer-
term interest rates to rise sharply, and equity prices to drop, while the exchange value
of the dollar would probably appreciate.  Forward inflation compensation might
decline if the Committee’s decision caused investors to mark down their inflation
expectations at longer horizons.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 44 of 71
LONG‐RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE
Under the Federal Reserve’s current policy approach, the size of the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet is driven by the evolution of its assets, specifically, the scale of
asset purchases and demand for Federal Reserve liquidity programs and credit
facilities.  Total liabilities are determined by total assets, and the composition of
liabilities depends on currency demand and other factors on the liability side, with
reserve balances determined as a residual.
Three balance sheet scenarios are presented here; they differ in their assumptions
regarding asset purchases.  The first scenario is a baseline scenario, which includes
large-scale asset purchases roughly in line with the quantities previously announced by
the FOMC:  $300 billion of Treasury securities by October; $150 billion of agency
debt by the end of this year; and $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities
(MBS) by the end of this year.  This baseline scenario corresponds to Alternative B in
the Policy Alternatives section of this Bluebook.  The second scenario corresponds to
Alternative A in the Policy Alternatives section, in which purchases of Treasury
securities are increased by $150 billion to $450 billion, and the purchases continue
through the end of this year.  The third scenario corresponds to Alternative C in the
Policy Alternatives section, in which the total quantity of agency MBS purchases is
reduced by $250 billion to $1 trillion.
To construct the projections, we made assumptions about all components of the
balance sheet other than reserve balances, which are the residual item.  Details on the
assumptions are available in Appendix C.  On the asset side of the balance sheet, the
baseline scenario path of large-scale asset purchases matches the assumed path in the
Greenbook.  In this scenario, Treasury securities purchases are expected to taper off
gradually through October and to cumulate to $300 billion.  All three scenarios
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 45 of 71
assume that the assets purchased are held to maturity and not replaced.  Reflecting
concerns that a higher level of purchases could distort pricing and compromise
market liquidity, agency debt purchases are projected to cumulate to $150 billion,
somewhat less than the $200 billion announced upper limit of the program.
Thereafter, agency debt holdings decline slowly for the remainder of the forecast
period as they mature.  Purchases of agency MBS are scheduled to be completed by
the end of this year; however, due to expected settlement lags and prepayments,
agency MBS holdings under Alternatives A and B peak at $1.24 trillion in March 2010,
a slightly lower level than the total amount purchased and a few months after
purchases have ceased.  For the Alternative C scenario, although total purchases are
less, the pattern for agency MBS holdings is similar, and holdings peak at $960 billion.
For all scenarios, a slower-than-historical-average path for the prepayment of agency
MBS implies that more than half of the agency MBS purchased are still on the balance
sheet in 2016.
The projections for liquidity and credit programs are the same in all three
scenarios.  The Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) is assumed to
reach a peak of $165 billion at the end of the second quarter of 2010, with
$120 billion in three-year loans and $45 billion in five-year loans at the peak.  TALF
loans outstanding reach zero in 2015.  The Commercial Paper Funding Facility
(CPFF), the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity
Facility (AMLF) and the foreign central bank liquidity swap lines are assumed to
expire on February 1, 2010; loans outstanding from these facilities wind down to zero
by mid-year 2010.  Credit extended to AIG and the Federal Reserve’s ownership of
preferred stock interests in AIG reach zero by 2013.  The assets held by Maiden Lane
LLC, Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC are assumed to be sold over
time; they reach a minimal level by 2016.  Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit sum
to about $1 billion from the end of 2010 forward.  Only the Term Auction Facility
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 46 of 71
(TAF) remains sizable at the end of the forecast period.  It is projected to swell at
year-end 2009 before dropping down to reach a steady-state level of $20 billion at the
end of 2010.  Finally, the Special Drawing Rights (SDR) certificate account is
projected to increase to $27.2 billion, as a result of an assumed monetization of $25
billion in SDRs that is expected to be implemented at the end of August.15
On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, all three scenarios
assume that currency (Federal Reserve notes in circulation) grows at the same rate as
the staff forecast for money stock currency through 2011 and after that point expands
at the projected growth rate of nominal GDP in the extended Greenbook forecast.
Consistent with the Treasury’s most recent quarterly financing estimates, the
Treasury’s Supplementary Financing Account is projected to remain at $200 billion
through December 2009, after which point it is assumed to wind down to zero by the
third quarter of 2010.  The U.S. Treasury’s general account is assumed to return to its
historical target level of $5 billion by the end of 2009.  All other liabilities other than
reverse repurchase agreements and reserve balances are assumed to be constant at
their level as of July 31, 2009.  Federal Reserve Bank capital is projected to grow in
line with its average pace of expansion over the past ten years.
These projections for liabilities and capital, combined with the assumed path for
assets, imply a path for reserve balances under each scenario.  In all three scenarios,
the implied level of reserve balances rises rapidly until the end of 2009 and then
increases at a more moderate rate during the first quarter of 2010.  In the baseline
scenario and Alternative A, reserve balances decline through the end of the forecast
period, while in Alternative C, a resumption of open market purchases is required in
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 47 of 71
Under all scenarios, the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet expands rapidly over the
course of 2009.  For the baseline scenario, the balance sheet reaches a peak of
$2.7 trillion in the first quarter of 2010 and then declines to a level of $1.5 trillion at
the end of the projection period.  For Alternative A, the peak occurs on the same
date, but at a higher level of $2.8 trillion.  Assets then decline to roughly the same
level as in the baseline scenario.  For Alternative C, the balance sheet peaks at $2.4
trillion at the end of 2009, and assets decline to $1.4 trillion at the end of the
projection period.16
Projections for the growth rates of the monetary base are derived from these
balance sheet projections as the growth rate of the sum of Federal Reserve notes in
circulation and reserve balances.17  Under all scenarios, the monetary base expands in
the second half of 2009 and into early 2010.  In the second half of 2010, however, as
increases in asset holdings cease and the liquidity facilities wind down, the monetary
base begins to contract; the base continues to decline through the remainder of the
projection period despite continued growth in currency.
Relative to the June Bluebook, there are a number of notable changes to the
projections.  The starting point is different because the size of the balance sheet in
July was lower than expected at the time of the last Bluebook, primarily because
agency MBS purchases and settlements were smaller than forecasted, and the CPFF
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 48 of 71
wound down faster than expected.  For asset purchases in the baseline scenario, three
changes affect the forecast: The rate of Treasury securities purchases was modified,
and the completion date of the program was extended from September to October;
agency debt purchases were reduced; and some agency MBS settlements were pushed
from 2009 into 2010 in order to reflect expected settlement lags.  For liquidity and
credit programs, the projection for TAF now includes an uptick in demand at the end
of the year.  Also, TAF is assumed to become a permanent policy tool, remaining at a
level of $20 billion through the end of the forecast period.  The TALF is assumed to
extend a somewhat lower volume of loans than previously.  Some of the other lending
facilities are now seen as running off slightly faster than was projected last round in
light of the improvement in financial markets.  In contrast, the SDR certificate
account was revised upward by $25 billion from about $2 billion reflecting the
monetization of the assumed allocation of SDRs.  On balance, total assets at year-end
the June Bluebook, mostly a result of the change in assumptions about agency MBS
settlement.  By the end of the projection period in 2016, however, total assets are a
little above that in the June Bluebook projection, reflecting the permanent addition of
the TAF and the monetization of the SDRs.
On the liabilities side, the staff has made only modest changes to the projections
relative to the June Bluebook.  The growth rate of currency was marked down
somewhat in 2011, reflecting a reassessment of currency growth for the last year of
our money projection period.  The Supplementary Financing Account is now
assumed to stay at its current level of $200 billion somewhat longer, based on
statements made by the Treasury in its last quarterly financing estimates.  The level of
reserve balances is somewhat lower at the end of this year, primarily reflecting the
shift in agency MBS settlement timing.  However, from mid-2010 forward, the
increases in TAF outstanding and in the SDR certificate account balance, as well as a
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 49 of 71
lower projected level for currency, lead to a somewhat higher level of reserve
The extended Greenbook projection shows the target federal funds rate rising
from the current 0 to ¼ percent range to 2.45 percent over the course of 2012.
Under the operating procedures employed before the financial crisis, the projected
level of reserve balances at the end of 2012 of approximately $850 billion would not
have been consistent with a federal funds rate significantly above zero.  If the interest
rate paid on excess reserve balances becomes an effective floor for the federal funds
rate, a higher target rate could be achieved even with quite elevated reserve balances
simply by raising the excess reserves rate.  The experience last autumn, however, may
suggest that other tools may be needed to augment the rate paid on excess reserves to
control the funds rate.  The projection for the balance sheet implicitly assumes that
alternative operating procedures can be put into place to achieve the path for the
federal funds rate assumed in the Greenbook projection; such procedures might
employ a range of tools such as reverse repurchase agreements, outright sales of
securities, a term deposit facility, or other strategies.  The balance sheet effects of
these tools, however, are not included in these projections.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 50 of 71
Growth Rates for Monetary Base
Date Baseline Alternative A 
Alternative
C 
Memo:
June Baseline
Percent, annual rate 
Monthly
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 51 of 71
Baseline Scenario
Source.  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
Bi
lli
on
s
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasury securities Agency debt Agency MBS
Repurchase agreements TAF Central bank swaps 
TALF  Other loans and facilities SDR and other assets
$ 
B
ill
io
ns
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 52 of 71
Alternative A
Source.  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
Bi
lli
on
s
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasury securities Agency debt Agency MBS
Repurchase agreements TAF Central bank swaps 
TALF  Other loans and facilities SDR and other assets
$ 
Bi
lli
on
s
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 53 of 71
Alternative C
Source.  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
Bi
lli
on
s
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasury securities Agency debt Agency MBS
Repurchase agreements TAF Central bank swaps 
TALF  Other loans and facilities SDR and other assets
$ 
Bi
lli
on
s
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 54 of 71
BANK CREDIT, DEBT, AND MONEY FORECAST
The outlook for nonfederal debt growth and bank credit expansion is relatively
weak, consistent with continued financial market strains and the staff’s forecast of a
quite anemic economic recovery.  M2 is also likely to be weak as a result of slow
income growth and a continued gradual reallocation of household wealth toward
riskier assets.
Bank credit is projected to decline at an average annual rate of about 2 percent
over the second half of this year, reflecting persistent weakness in all major loan
categories.  In 2010, as economic activity strengthens and lending standards gradually
ease, growth of bank credit is forecasted to step up to around 3¾ percent, slightly
lower than the rate of expansion in nominal income.  C&I loans are expected to
follow the same general trajectory, contracting at an average annual rate of almost
estate loans on banks’ books, a category that includes loans secured by both
commercial and residential real estate, are projected to run off through the end of
addition, the continued deterioration in the credit quality of banks’ commercial real
estate loan portfolios is projected to exert considerable drag on real estate lending,
which is expected to remain very weak until the second half of 2010.  With weak
demand and tight credit conditions, consumer loans are expected to contract about
year as consumer spending increases and unemployment levels off.  Growth in
securities holdings is expected to be fairly strong through 2010 as banks continue to
favor safe and liquid assets amid weak demand for loans and concerns about credit
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 55 of 71
Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to expand at an average annual
rate of about 5 percent in the second half of this year, reflecting rapid growth of
federal debt and a moderate rise in state and local government debt.  In contrast,
private-sector debt is expected to remain nearly flat.  Staff projects that federal debt
will continue to increase rapidly through the end of 2010 but that borrowing by
households will continue to contract and debt growth of nonfinancial businesses will
remain extremely light by historical standards.  Although the level of overall
household debt is forecasted to begin to edge up next year as the economy improves,
the rise will be limited by the elevated unemployment rate, continued deleveraging by
households, and lending standards that ease only gradually.  Despite the expected
further improvement in conditions in capital markets, borrowing by nonfinancial
businesses will also likely remain sluggish through the end of the forecast period, in
part because the low level of capital expenditures should limit the demand for external
M2 is projected to contract over the second half of this year as households
continue to reallocate some of their wealth toward riskier assets.  The runoff in M2 is
accounted for by declines in small time deposits and money market mutual funds
amid very low interest rates on those instruments, as well as a slowing in the rate of
growth of liquid deposits.  In 2010, M2 is forecast to increase less rapidly than
nominal GDP, as improvements in economic and financial market conditions
continue to reduce demand for M2 assets.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 56 of 71
Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
Greenbook Forecast*
Monthly Growth Rates
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
  Actual data through July 27, 2009; projections thereafter.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 57 of 71
The June directive and draft language for the August directive are provided below.
JUNE FOMC MEETING
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to purchase agency debt, agency MBS, and longer-term Treasury securities
during the intermeeting period with the aim of providing support to private credit
markets and economic activity.  The timing and pace of these purchases should
depend on conditions in the markets for such securities and on a broader assessment
of private credit market conditions.  The Committee anticipates that the combination
of outright purchases and various liquidity facilities outstanding will cause the size of
the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to expand significantly in coming months.  The
Desk is expected to purchase up to $200 billion in housing-related agency debt by the
end of this year.  The Desk is expected to purchase up to $1.25 trillion of agency MBS
by the end of the year.  The Desk is expected to purchase up to $300 billion of
longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the third quarter.  The System Open
Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of
ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the
attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 58 of 71
AUGUST FOMC MEETING — ALTERNATIVE A
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to purchase agency debt, agency MBS, and longer-term Treasury securities
during the intermeeting period with the aim of providing support to private credit
markets and economic activity.  The timing and pace of these purchases should
depend on conditions in the markets for such securities and on a broader assessment
of private credit market conditions.  The Desk is expected to purchase about $1.25
trillion of agency MBS, about $450 billion of longer-term Treasury securities, and up
to $200 billion in housing-related agency debt by the end of this year.  The Committee
anticipates that outright purchases of securities will cause the size of the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet to expand significantly in coming months.  The System Open
Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of
ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the
attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 59 of 71
AUGUST FOMC MEETING — ALTERNATIVE B/B'
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to purchase agency debt, agency MBS, and longer-term Treasury securities
during the intermeeting period with the aim of providing support to private credit
markets and economic activity.  The timing and pace of these purchases should
depend on conditions in the markets for such securities and on a broader assessment
of private credit market conditions.  The Desk is expected to purchase up to $200
billion in housing-related agency debt and up to $1.25 trillion of agency MBS by the
end of the year.  The Desk is expected to purchase about $300 billion of longer-term
Treasury securities by the end of October, gradually slowing the pace of these
purchases until they are completed.  The Committee anticipates that outright
purchases of securities will cause the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to
expand significantly in coming months.  The System Open Market Account Manager
and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments
regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the
Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 60 of 71
AUGUST FOMC MEETING — ALTERNATIVE C
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to purchase agency debt, agency MBS, and longer-term Treasury securities
during the intermeeting period with the aim of providing support to private credit
markets and economic activity.  The timing and pace of these purchases should
depend on conditions in the markets for such securities and on a broader assessment
of private credit market conditions.  The Desk is expected to purchase about $150
billion in housing-related agency debt and about $1 trillion of agency MBS by the end
of the year.  The Desk is expected to purchase roughly $300 billion of longer-term
Treasury securities by the end of October.  The Desk is expected to gradually slow the
pace of its purchases of agency debt, agency MBS, and Treasury securities until such
purchases are completed.  The Committee anticipates that outright purchases of
securities will cause the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to expand
significantly in coming months.  The System Open Market Account Manager and the
Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the
System’s balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s
objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
August 6, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 61 of 71
Measure  Description
Single-
equation
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and its 
lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.
Small 
Structural
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for six variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, the real 
bond yield, and the real federal funds rate.
EDO 
Model
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using EDO—an estimated dynamic-stochastic-
general-equilibrium (DSGE) model of the U.S. economy—depend on data for major 
spending categories, price and wages, and the federal funds rate as well as the model’s 
structure and estimate of the output gap.
FRB/US 
Model
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.
Greenbook-
consistent
Two measures are presented—based on the FRB/US and the EDO models.  Both models 
are matched to the extended Greenbook forecast.  Model simulations determine the value of 
the real federal funds rate that closes the output gap conditional on the extended baseline.
TIPS-based 
Factor 
Model
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’ expectations of 
the future path of real interest rates.  The TIPS-based measure of the equilibrium real rate is 
constructed using the seven-year-ahead instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS 
yields as of the Bluebook publication date.  This forward rate is adjusted to remove 
estimates of the term and liquidity premiums based on a three-factor arbitrage-free term-
structure model applied to TIPS yields, nominal yields, and inflation.
