Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Content last modified 04/01/2015.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
DECEMBER 10, 2009
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Financial market conditions became somewhat more supportive of economic
growth over the intermeeting period, but banks apparently continued to tighten the
terms of credit.  The expected path of monetary policy moved lower, on net, as did
yields on most fixed-income securities.  Broad equity indexes rose amid generally
positive economic data, and the dollar was mixed against the major currencies.
Consistent with a continued return toward normal functioning in funding markets,
borrowing from Federal Reserve facilities edged down further.
Corporate bond and equity issuance was solid in November, but the level of
commercial bank credit continued to decline, albeit at a slower pace than in recent
months.  Asset-backed security (ABS) issuance picked up in November, and, with the
support of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF), the first
commercial mortgage-backed security (CMBS) issuance in nearly 18 months came to
market.  Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to expand in the fourth
quarter at an annual rate of about 1½ percent, weighed down by a continued
contraction in the debt of both households and businesses.
MONETARY POLICY EXPECTATIONS AND TREASURY YIELDS
Implied rates on federal funds and Eurodollar futures have moved lower since the
November FOMC meeting.1  Although the decision to keep the target range for the
federal funds rate unchanged at that meeting and to retain the “extended period”
language in the accompanying statement was largely anticipated, market participants
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 1 of 72
took note of the Committee’s explicit enumeration of the factors that are expected to
continue to warrant this policy, and Eurodollar futures rates fell a bit on the release.
Market participants’ perception that the federal funds rate will likely remain near its
current level for an extended period appeared to be reinforced by subsequent Federal
Reserve communications, most notably Chairman Bernanke’s speech on November
their net impact on interest rate expectations appeared to be small.  Consistent with a
net reduction in realized and implied volatility in short-term rates, staff models
suggest that a decrease in term premiums may also have contributed to the decline in
futures rates since early November.
Under the staff’s usual term-premium assumption of 1 basis point per month, the
path of the federal funds rate implied by futures quotes now lifts off from the current
target range in the third quarter of 2010 and reaches about 2 percent by the end of
would entail substantial rate increases.  Quotes from the market for interest rate caps
suggest that the most likely path of the federal funds rate—that is, the mode of the
distribution, rather than the mean—does not move above 25 basis points until around
the beginning of 2011 and rises by about 70 basis points over the subsequent year
(Chart 1).
The readings from financial-market quotes are roughly consistent with results
from the December survey of primary dealers, according to which about two-thirds of
respondents expect the first rate increase to occur by the end of 2010, a slightly larger
fraction than in the October survey.  Dealers generally do not anticipate major
changes to the FOMC statement at the upcoming meeting, although several do expect
some revision to reflect an improvement in the economic outlook.  In a new question,
dealers were asked how many meetings in advance of the first increase in the target
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 2 of 72
rate they expected the phrase “extended period” to be removed from the statement.
Although responses varied considerably, most clustered around three.
Consistent with the decline in short-term interest rates, yields on two-year
nominal off-the-run Treasury securities fell 18 basis points over the intermeeting
period; ten-year yields were down only slightly.  Trading volumes in nominal issues
remained within their recent range, and measures of liquidity in the coupon market
were roughly stable.  TIPS yields fell slightly more than their nominal counterparts, on
net, leaving inflation compensation up a few basis points across the term structure.
Five-year inflation compensation five years ahead remained near the upper end of its
historical range.  Some of the decline in TIPS yields may owe to the Treasury
Borrowing Advisory Committee’s recommendation that total TIPS issuance for 2010
be increased to between $70 and $80 billion—a significantly smaller amount than
traders had expected.  Survey measures of short-term inflation expectations declined a
little, while changes in survey measures of longer-term expectations were mixed.
The Treasury auctioned approximately $270 billion in nominal coupon debt of
various maturities over the intermeeting period.  The auctions were generally well
received, with bid-to-cover ratios mostly at the upper end of their recent ranges.
Trends in indirect participation in these auctions, as well as anecdotal reports,
continued to suggest resilient foreign demand for Treasury securities.  In its quarterly
refunding statement on November 4, the Treasury announced the discontinuation of
line with market expectations.  As of December 9, debt subject to limit was only
about $80 billion below the statutory debt ceiling of $12.1 trillion.  Although the debt
limit is looming and may become binding in the near term, as in the past, the Treasury
will likely be able to employ accounting tools, if necessary, to continue to make
payments as scheduled for some time after the turn of the year.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 4 of 72
CAPITAL MARKETS
Broad equity price indexes rose about 5 percent over the intermeeting period,
partly in response to a somewhat improved economic outlook (Chart 2).  Also
contributing to the increase were third-quarter earnings for S&P 500 firms, which
logged another solid gain, and upward revisions to analysts’ expectations of year-
ahead earnings for S&P 500 firms.  In addition, the implied volatility of equity prices,
as gauged by the VIX index, declined.  Meanwhile, the equity premium—as measured
by the staff’s estimate of the expected real return on equity over the next ten years
relative to the real 10-year yield on Treasury securities—remained about unchanged at
a relatively high level.
Financial-sector shares, on the whole, underperformed the broader market
since the November FOMC meeting as investors continued to express concerns
about the future profitability of the banking industry.  Indeed, third-quarter Call
Reports show continued broad deterioration in measures of loan quality at
commercial banks, suggesting that loss provisioning will remain a drag on earnings for
some time.  Nonetheless, equity prices of both large and smaller banks moved higher
over the period, and spreads on credit default swaps (CDS) for large bank holding
companies fell a bit.  Although U.S. bank stock prices retreated somewhat on the
news of the standstill on Dubai World debt, these moves were partially reversed as it
became clear that domestic banks’ direct exposures were low.
In the corporate bond market, yields on investment-grade and speculative-grade
issues fell a little more than those on nominal Treasuries, leaving their spreads a touch
narrower.  In the secondary market for leveraged loans, bid prices changed little after
a run-up over the previous several months.  On balance, the credit quality of
nonfinancial firms appears to have remained steady over the period.  Based on data
through November, the pace of nonfinancial corporate ratings downgrades by
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 5 of 72
Moody’s is estimated to have been moderate in the fourth quarter.  The pace of
upgrades picked up notably in November, although bonds of a single domestic
automaker accounted for most of this change.  The year-ahead expected default
frequency for nonfinancial firms from Moody’s KMV was little changed in
November; this measure of default risk has declined sharply from the peak reached
early this year but is still elevated by historical standards.
Gross issuance of investment-grade bonds by nonfinancial corporations
rebounded in November following a lull in October, and speculative-grade bond
issuance maintained its solid third-quarter pace (Chart 3).  In the primary market for
syndicated leveraged loans, signs of a recovery emerged, with issuers trickling back to
the market and in some cases completing successful syndications.  By contrast, both
commercial paper outstanding and commercial and industrial (C&I) loans on banks’
books contracted again in November.  Gross public equity issuance by nonfinancial
firms remained solid in November, supported by the continued strength of initial
offerings.  The recent weakness in announcements of new share repurchase programs
persisted, while announcements of mergers and acquisitions continued to rebound.
For financial firms, gross bond issuance slowed somewhat further following the
October 31 expiration of the FDIC’s Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program.
Financial firms’ equity issuance was again sluggish in November, but Bank of America
issued nearly $20 billion of common-equivalent shares in early December in
conjunction with its repayment of $45 billion in funds received through the Troubled
Asset Relief Program.2
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 7 of 72
Municipal bond issuance remained robust in November, and the ratio of yields on
such instruments to comparable-maturity Treasury securities was about unchanged.
Newly acquired ratings data from Moody’s show that credit quality in the municipal
sector deteriorated over the first three quarters of 2009, a trend that, until recently,
had been obscured in the ratings data from Standard and Poor’s as a result of a
gradual shift in its rating methodology for this sector.
The average interest rate on 30-year conforming fixed-rate mortgages fell to 4¾
percent over the intermeeting period, and the spread between the mortgage rate and
the 10-year Treasury yield narrowed.  Yields on agency mortgage-backed securities
(MBS) decreased, on balance, and net issuance of MBS by Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac remained sluggish in October amid relatively strong demand for FHA loans.  Led
by auto-loan securitizations, consumer ABS issuance increased in November.  While
credit card ABS issuance was very low in October and November, it is set to pick up
substantially in December as a result of interim FDIC guidance that clarifies how the
FDIC would handle these securitizations for a bank in receivership.3  (See box entitled
“Effect of FAS 166 and FAS 197 on Commercial Banks.”)
The announcement in the FOMC statement that the Federal Reserve would
purchase only about $175 billion of agency debt securities had not been generally
anticipated, and spreads on those securities widened a few basis points following the
release.  Market participants noted further tapering of the MBS purchase program and
the apparent onset of tapering in the agency debt purchase program.  Investors have
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 9 of 72
The Effects of FAS 166 and FAS 167 on Commercial Banks
Last June, the Financial Accounting Standards Board published two new 
accounting standards—commonly referred to as FAS 166 and FAS 167—that will 
change the basis for determining whether firms are required to consolidate 
securitized assets (as well as the associated liabilities and equity) onto their balance 
sheets.1  The new standards focus on the degree of control that the firm exercises 
over the assets, whereas the previous standards were more focused on the firm’s 
credit exposure to the assets.
Board staff believes that most credit card securitizations and asset-backed 
commercial paper conduits will need to be consolidated, as will the portion of 
private label mortgage-backed securitizations and other term securitizations for 
which the originator retains both servicing rights and an economic interest in the 
securitization.2  Most banks will apply the new standards as of the March 31, 2010 
Call Report.  Industry analysts estimate that the amount of assets that will be 
brought onto banks’ balance sheets at that time is likely to exceed $1 trillion, with 
the amount highly concentrated at a handful of large banking institutions.
The consolidation of these assets is likely to significantly reduce the regulatory 
capital ratios of several large banks that are heavily involved in securitization, 
particularly monoline credit card banks.3  Rating agencies reportedly have already 
been evaluating capital adequacy on the basis of the firms’ combined on- and off-
balance sheet assets, so the accounting change is not expected to have adverse 
implications for banking institutions’ credit ratings.  Moreover, the Supervisory 
Capital Assessment Program incorporated estimates of the effect of the 
consolidation for most securitizations, and staff estimate that the regulatory capital 
ratios of each highly affected bank will remain above key regulatory thresholds even 
after implementing FAS 166 and 167.  Even so, it is possible that some banks may 
respond to the decline in their reported capital ratios by restricting lending in order 
to offset at least some of the effect of the consolidation.  Partly in response to
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 10 of 72
these concerns, the Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation is working 
with the other bank regulatory agencies on a final rule that would phase in the 
effect of the accounting changes on risk-based capital ratios over as much as one 
year.4
The changes in accounting treatment have also led the FDIC to reconsider its 
handling of securitized assets in receiverships; the specific details of the new rules 
the FDIC is developing in this area could have significant consequences for the 
recovery of securitization markets.  Prior to the accounting changes, the FDIC 
granted securitized assets that qualified for off-balance-sheet treatment a safe 
harbor under which the assets would not be subject to stays or seizure in 
receivership, thereby providing investors with assurance of timely payment of 
principal and interest on the debt.  The FDIC recently announced that 
securitizations completed before March 31, 2010 that comply with the old 
accounting rules for off-balance-sheet treatment will continue to be granted this 
safe harbor treatment.   FDIC staff is consulting with staff members at the Board 
and the other supervisory agencies in their effort to develop new safe harbor 
provisions for securitizations completed after March 2010.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 11 of 72
reportedly continued to express some uncertainty about several matters related to the
GSEs over the coming weeks, including the expiration of the Treasury’s GSE liquidity
facility at year-end, the extent of the Treasury’s authority to provide additional capital
going forward, the termination of the Federal Reserve’s and Treasury’s large-scale
asset purchase programs, and the portfolio reductions required of the agencies under
the terms of their conservatorship.  To date, these concerns do not appear to have put
substantial pressure on agency debt or MBS prices.
MARKET FUNCTIONING AND FEDERAL RESERVE PROGRAMS
Conditions in short-term funding markets were little changed over the
intermeeting period.  One- and three-month Libor-OIS spreads were flat, while six-
month spreads edged down somewhat further.  Spreads on A2/P2-rated commercial
paper and AA-rated ABCP were little changed, remaining at the low end of their
ranges over the past two years.  There were few signs of significant year-end pressures
in the commercial paper market or in bank funding markets.  In the Treasury bill
market, however, year-end pressures were more evident, with high demand for bills
maturing just past December 31 pushing yields on several such bills to zero.  The
relative scarcity of Treasury bills has been exacerbated by the recent reduction in
supplementary financing bills.  The combination of scarce collateral and abundant
liquidity is also reportedly putting downward pressure on term general collateral repo
rates.  Separately, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York announced that it would
conduct a series of small-scale triparty repurchase agreements to ensure the
operational readiness of this tool, and it carried out four such operations in early
December.  Neither the announcements nor the operations themselves elicited
material price action.
Indicators of how well other markets are functioning also showed no recent
deterioration.  Bid-asked spreads on corporate bonds, Treasury securities, and
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 12 of 72
leveraged loans moved sideways, and the average range of CDS dealer quotes was
about unchanged.  In Treasury coupon markets, on-the-run premiums and yield-curve
fitting errors stayed within their recent ranges.
Supported by the TALF, ABS issuance picked up in November and $400 million
of CMBS came to market—the first CMBS issuance since June 2008.  (See box
entitled “Balance Sheet Developments.”)  Two other single-borrower CMBS deals
came to market without TALF support, reflecting improved investor appetite for the
asset class.
FOREIGN MARKET DEVELOPMENTS
On net, the dollar depreciated about ½ percent on a trade-weighted basis
against both the major currencies and the currencies of our other important trading
partners over the intermeeting period (Chart 4).  The dollar declined early in the
period, apparently due in part to a continued normalization of risk attitudes.
Additionally, the dollar fell broadly after the meeting of the G-20 ministers over the
weekend of November 7-8, with market participants noting that the meeting’s
communiqué failed to mention concern over the dollar’s recent depreciation.  Late in
the period, however, the dollar reversed course and appreciated sharply following the
release of the stronger-than-expected November employment report.  The U.S. dollar
depreciated another 3 percent against the yen over the intermeeting period, and
Japanese officials have voiced unease over the yen’s strength.  Several emerging
economies, including Brazil and Korea, intervened to stem the appreciation of their
currencies, while others are reportedly contemplating tightening capital controls.
Foreign stock markets generally rose on net, with notable gains in Brazil and Mexico,
amid increasing commodity prices and a better-than-expected Mexican GDP report.
China’s stock market climbed 4 percent, in part due to strong trade data, while
European equity indexes rose by 2 percent.  Japanese equities were unchanged on
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 13 of 72
Balance Sheet Developments during the Intermeeting Period
Since the November FOMC meeting, the Federal Reserve’s total assets have 
edged up to about $2.2 trillion.1  As a result of ongoing asset purchases, securities 
held outright increased by $89 billion, which more than offset a $71 billion decline 
in lending through liquidity and credit facilities.
The Open Market Desk purchased $9 billion in agency debt securities and $80 
billion in agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) during the intermeeting period.2  
In contrast, most of the System’s liquidity and credit programs contracted further, 
consistent with continued improvements in global bank funding markets.  Term 
auction credit declined $53 billion, foreign central bank liquidity swaps declined $15 
billion, and primary credit declined $3 billion.3  Net portfolio holdings of 
Commercial Paper Funding Facility LLC (CPFF) declined slightly to $14 billion.  
Lending under the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF), loans extended under 
the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility 
(AMLF), and securities lent through the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) all 
remained at zero.4
The Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) expanded slightly in 
size to $44 billion.  Three subscriptions were conducted during the intermeeting 
period, two of which have settled.  The first loan subscription, totaling $1.1 billion, 
financed the issuance of asset-backed securities (ABS) collateralized by credit card, 
equipment, floorplan, small business, and student loans.  The second subscription 
included $1.4 billion in loan requests to finance purchases of legacy commercial 
mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) and $72 million in loan requests to finance 
purchases of the first newly issued CMBS since June 2008.  About three-fourths of 
the newly issued TALF-eligible CMBS were purchased by non-TALF investors.  
The third subscription, which settles December 10, garnered loan requests totaling 
$3.1 billion and will finance the issuance of ABS collateralized by credit card, 
equipment, floorplan, servicing advances, small business, and student loans.5  More
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 14 of 72
than half of the ABS brought to market with this subscription were financed 
through TALF, a substantial pickup from recent months.  The subscription 
included student loan and credit card ABS, which tend to be more heavily financed 
through TALF.  Approximately $1 billion of TALF loans were prepaid over the 
intermeeting period.
In conjunction with the restructuring of the government’s support for 
American International Group (AIG) announced on March 2, 2009, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York received $25 billion of preferred interests in two special 
purpose vehicles, AIA Aurora LLC and ALICO Holdings LLC on December 1 and 
reduced the balance and amount available of revolving credit provided to AIG by a 
commensurate amount.  These two limited liability companies were created to hold 
all of the outstanding common stock of American International Assurance 
Company (AIA) and American Life Insurance Company (ALICO), two life 
insurance subsidiaries of AIG.
On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, the U.S. Treasury’s 
general account decreased $25 billion, and the Treasury’s supplementary financing 
account remained unchanged at $15 billion.  Reserve balances of depository 
institutions increased $41 billion over the intermeeting period.
Currently, the LLC has only about $270 million in assets, funded by a commitment fee paid by the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York and initial funding from the TARP.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 15 of 72
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet 
Billions of dollars
Change 
since last 
FOMC
Current 
(12/9/2009)
Maximum 
level
Date of 
maximum
Market Desk committed to purchase an additional $113 billion of MBS, on net. Total MBS purchases are about  
$1,071 billion.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 16 of 72
balance.  Foreign sovereign yields generally declined since the November FOMC
Although the central banks of the major foreign industrial economies kept policy
rates on hold, there were some noteworthy changes to other policy measures.  The
Bank of England increased its Asset Purchase Facility by a somewhat smaller-than-
expected £25 billion to £200 billion.  The European Central Bank took some initial
steps toward scaling back emergency lending by announcing that the upcoming one-
year refinancing operation on December 16 will be its last of that tenor and that funds
will be offered at a rate equal to the average of the benchmark rates set in the weekly
main refinancing operations over the life of the operation.  Amid concerns about
deflation and the strength of the yen, the Bank of Japan announced an additional ¥10
trillion three-month secured lending facility at an unscheduled meeting on December
News that the Dubai government had requested a standstill on debts owed by
Dubai World, a government-owned corporation, temporarily roiled financial markets.
Global equity markets and sovereign bond yields fell immediately following the
announcement, while the dollar rose roughly 1 percent, as investors pulled back from
riskier investments on concerns that problems in Dubai could have knock-on effects
elsewhere.  However, these movements subsequently eased somewhat as investors
concluded that Dubai World’s difficulties were likely to be isolated and not spill over
to other markets.  Concerns about the potential for default by some sovereign nations
also rose over the period, most notably for Greece, whose sovereign debt rating was
lowered because of long-standing concerns over its public finances.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 18 of 72
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY
The level of private-sector debt is projected to have fallen slightly in the fourth
quarter on a further decline in household debt and a tick down in nonfinancial
business debt (Chart 5).  The growth of federal government debt slowed somewhat
from its recent rapid pace, while state and local government debt continued to expand
at a moderate rate.  All told, the growth rate of domestic nonfinancial-sector debt is
projected to have declined from an annual rate of 2½ percent in the third quarter to
about 1½ percent in the fourth quarter.
Commercial bank credit is estimated to have decreased further in November,
although the pace of decline slowed relative to October.  Total loans contracted in
November at an annual rate of about 4 percent while securities decreased at a pace of
about 2½ percent.  (See box entitled “Commercial Bank Loan Growth and Bank
Health.”)  C&I loans fell at a 16 percent rate, likely reflecting weak demand and a
continued tightening of terms.  The Survey of Terms of Business Lending (STBL)
conducted in November indicated that the average C&I loan rate spread over
comparable-maturity market instruments rose for the fifth consecutive survey; the
increase was broadly apparent across most loan categories.4  The decline in
commercial real estate loans continued, consistent with the further weakening of
fundamentals in that sector.  On the household side, a slowdown in loan sales to the
GSEs resulted in a 5½ percent increase in on-balance-sheet holdings of closed-end
residential mortgages in November.  However, home equity loans fell again.
Consumer loans originated by banks also declined sharply as credit card loan
originations dropped.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 19 of 72
Commercial Bank Loan Growth and Bank Health
Decomposing the change in total loans and leases on the books of domestic 
banks into two components – the change at “strong” banks and the change at “weak” 
banks – reveals that in 2009, unlike in 1990-1993, loan portfolios have contracted at 
strong as well as weak banks.
Strong banks are defined here as banks 
with CAMELS ratings of 1 or 2 and weak 
banks as those with ratings of 3, 4, or 5.1  
Over the past two years, CAMELS 
downgrades have been widespread, and as 
the top figure shows, at the beginning of the 
third quarter, weak banks held more than 40 
percent of all loans outstanding, nearly as 
large a share as in the early 1990s.2
As shown in the second panel, the 
growth rates of loans at strong and weak 
banks generally move in parallel, with the 
growth rate at weak banks consistently 
running well below that at strong banks.  
This difference presumably is a result of 
greater concerns about asset quality and the 
high cost of funding at weak banks, which 
may cause such banks to constrain lending.  
It may also reflect the relatively poor 
condition of the customers of weak banks, 
and their resulting lower demand for loans.
The panel at the top of the next page puts these pieces together, showing the 
four-quarter percent change in total loans held by all domestic banks (the black line) 
as well as colored vertical bars representing the contributions to the aggregate growth 
rate from strong (blue) and weak (red) banks (that is, the percent change of loans at 
banks in each category multiplied by the share of loans held by banks in that 
category).  As can be seen, during the early 1990s, the sharp contraction in loans at 
weak banks accounted for the bulk of the runoff in aggregate loans, while lending at 
strong banks contracted only slightly.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 21 of 72
Similarly, in the current period, the significant increase in the fraction of industry 
loans held by weak banks and the substantial contraction in loans held at those banks 
have accounted for much of the decline in U.S. bank loans.  In addition, in the current 
period strong banks have contributed importantly to this contraction.  The declines at 
both strong and weak banks in the current episode suggest that a confluence of 
factors is affecting lending across the industry.  These factors include widespread 
weakness in loan demand from creditworthy borrowers as a result of the sharp 
economic slowdown, and reduced loan supply, perhaps reflecting concerns about the 
economic outlook and balance sheet constraints.
The significance of supply factors is evident in recent Senior Loan Officer 
Opinion Surveys.  Similar fractions of strong and weak banks tightened lending 
standards during the first three quarters of 2009.3  This was also the case during the 
early 1990s.4  This similarity across weak and strong banks indicates that deterioration 
in the condition of banks is only one factor inducing banks to tighten their lending 
standards.  In contrast, demand reportedly fell more at weak banks in the first quarter 
of 2009, which may explain part of the larger decline in loans observed at those 
institutions.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 22 of 72
According to Call Report data, the aggregate profitability of the banking sector
edged into positive territory in the third quarter, but most of the increase was due to a
few large institutions that reported significant decreases in loan-loss provisioning,
even as industry-wide measures of credit quality appeared to worsen.  Regulatory
capital ratios increased further in the third quarter as banks received equity infusions
from their parent holding companies and shrank their balance sheets.  Unused loan
commitments contracted for the seventh consecutive quarter, though the rate of
decline slowed, especially for commitments to lend to businesses.
M2 expanded at a 4½ percent annual rate in November, in line with its modest
growth in September and October.  As has been the case in recent months, liquid
deposits grew rapidly, while small time deposits and retail money market mutual funds
continued to contract, albeit at slightly slower paces.  Currency ran off at a 5 percent
annual rate in November, likely reflecting weak demand for U.S. banknotes from
abroad, consistent with the continued stabilization in most global financial markets.
The monetary base expanded at an annualized pace of about 50 percent last month,
reflecting the continued strong growth in reserve balances due to ongoing large-scale
asset purchases, which more than offset the decreased usage of liquidity and credit
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 23 of 72
ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
Information received over the intermeeting period has been largely consistent
with the staff projection provided in the October Greenbook.  As a result, the staff
has made only modest changes to its forecast, with the trajectories for output and
inflation revised up a bit.  The staff continues to expect that the expansion of real
GDP will outpace the rise in potential output, causing the output gap to narrow over
the next couple of years.  As was the case in the last forecast, the expected level of the
unemployment rate declines over time as the output gap narrows, but it ends the
projection period slightly higher than in the previous projection because the staff has
raised its estimates of the boost to labor force participation from extended and
emergency unemployment benefits.  The rates of core and total PCE inflation are
expected to slow appreciably further over the next two years, with both running a
little above 1 percent in 2011.
The staff assumes that the federal funds rate will remain in its current range for
the next seven quarters and then begin to rise in the last quarter of 2011, a slightly
earlier start to policy tightening than in the October forecast.  No significant changes
have been made to the assumptions regarding the sizes or timing of the Federal
Reserve’s LSAP programs.5  Fiscal policy is expected to add about 1 percentage point
to real GDP growth in 2010, the same as in the current year, but to impose a slight
drag on growth in 2011.  House prices are projected to decline over the next year as
foreclosure activity continues, but then to rise a bit in 2011.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 24 of 72
The rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages and longer-term Treasuries are
projected to rise through 2011, with the spread between them widening a bit as the
Federal Reserve completes its purchases of agency MBS.  By contrast, yields on
investment-grade corporate bonds are expected to edge down as risk spreads narrow
considerably further against a backdrop of continued improvements in financial
markets and the economic outlook.  With the equity risk premium also expected to
narrow, stock prices are projected to rise briskly at an annual rate of around 15
percent over the next two years.  Bank lending conditions for firms and households
are anticipated to ease over time but to remain tight by historical standards.  The real
foreign exchange value of the dollar is assumed to fall at about a 2¼ percent pace, on
average, over 2010 and 2011.  Based on readings from futures markets, the staff
expects oil prices to rise over the forecast period to about $86 a barrel at the end of
Against this backdrop, the staff expects real GDP to grow at an annual rate of just
over 3 percent in the second half of 2009, about 3½ percent in 2010, and about 4½
percent in 2011, very close to the October projection.  The unemployment rate is
projected to be at its peak of around 10 percent this quarter and early next year before
declining slowly to about 9½ percent at the end of 2010 and 8¼ percent at the end of
percent estimate of the NAIRU.  In light of the current and prospective level of
economic slack, the staff projects core PCE inflation to slow to around 1½ percent in
the fourth quarter of this year and to just over 1 percent in 2010 and 2011.  Total
PCE inflation remains slightly higher than core inflation.
Looking further ahead, the staff assumes that the federal funds rate will rise
steadily starting in the fourth quarter of 2011, climbing to about 3¾ percent in late
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 25 of 72
average pace of almost 3 percent per year from 2012 through 2014, and so with real
GDP growth outstripping that of potential, the unemployment rate falls rapidly for a
time, but then levels out in 2014 at just under 4¾ percent, a bit below the staff’s
estimate of the NAIRU in that year.  Longer-term inflation expectations remain
stable, and, as the output gap nearly closes, total PCE inflation slowly rises to just
under 1¾ percent by 2014, still somewhat below the central tendency of
policymakers’ long-run projections for inflation.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 26 of 72
MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES
r*.  Relative to the estimates reported in the October Bluebook, this rolling forward would 
yield upward revisions to r* of 0.2 to 0.4 percentage points.
As depicted in Chart 8, the outcome-based estimated policy rule prescribes a
trajectory for the federal funds rate (upper-left panel) similar to the one in the
previous Bluebook.  The funds rate starts rising above the effective lower bound in
FRB/US model, the 90 percent confidence band for the funds rate in 2011Q4 spans
an interval from the effective lower bound to about 2½ percent.8  Market participants’
expectations regarding the path of the funds rate have shifted noticeably lower over
the intermeeting period (upper-right panel).  Staff models indicate, however, that term
premiums may also have declined over the period, suggesting that the drop in the
expected trajectory of the federal funds rate could be smaller than that shown here.
Financial market quotes imply that the 90 percent confidence interval for the federal
funds rate in 2011Q4 spans a range from about ½ percent to about 4½ percent; the
width of this interval is slightly smaller than in the previous Bluebook.
The lower panel of Chart 8 provides near-term prescriptions from simple policy
rules.  The two variants of the Taylor rule, as well as the two estimated policy rules,
leave the federal funds rate at its effective lower bound over the next two quarters.
When this bound is not imposed, all rules prescribe funds rates that are higher (less
negative) than in the previous Bluebook, reflecting the upward revision to the staff’s
projection of the output gap.  The first-difference rule—because it responds to
economic growth rather than to the estimated level of resource utilization—prescribes
a slight upward trajectory for the policy rate, with the funds rate increasing to about
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 31 of 72
POLICY ALTERNATIVES
This Bluebook presents three policy alternatives—labeled A, B, and C—for the
Committee’s consideration.  Table 1 provides an overview of the key elements of
these alternatives.  Draft statements are provided in subsequent pages, followed by
summaries of the cases for each alternative.
The characterization of the economic outlook differs somewhat across the three
alternatives.  Alternatives A and B note that economic activity has continued to pick
up, while Alternative C states that a recovery is under way.  All three acknowledge that
the deterioration in labor markets is abating and that activity in the housing sector has
increased.  Alternatives A and B, however, note that household spending continues to
be constrained by a variety of factors.  Alternatives B and C point to financial market
conditions that have become more supportive of economic growth.  In contrast,
Alternative A indicates that the recovery will be sluggish and slack in resource
utilization will decline quite slowly absent further policy action.  As in the November
statement, Alternatives A and B note that the Committee expects that inflation will
remain subdued for some time because resource slack is likely to dampen cost
pressures and because longer-term inflation expectations remain stable.  Alternative A
mentions that inflation has fallen considerably over the past year.  Alternative C
indicates that the Committee expects inflation to remain stable, but in response to
appropriate monetary policy adjustments rather than because of resource slack.
Each of the three alternatives maintains the target range for the federal funds rate
at 0 to ¼ percent, but the alternatives differ in the specification of the size and
completion dates of the Federal Reserve’s purchase programs for agency MBS and
agency debt, and also in their forward guidance regarding the path of the target federal
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 33 of 72
funds rate.  Under Alternative A, the Committee would increase its purchases of
agency MBS to a total of $1.5 trillion (from the currently planned amount of $1.25
trillion) and extend the timeframe for these purchases to the end of the second
quarter of 2010.  The Committee also would complete its purchases of about $175
billion of agency debt by the end of the first quarter of 2010.  The increase in
purchases of MBS would provide additional macroeconomic stimulus, while the
extension would permit the pace of transactions to be tapered to promote a smooth
transition in markets as the purchases come to an end.  Under Alternative B, the
statement would be very similar to that for the November meeting.  The Committee
would reiterate its intention to purchase $1.25 trillion of agency MBS and about $175
billion of agency debt and the plan to complete these purchases by the end of the first
quarter of 2010.  Alternatives A and B maintain the forward guidance from
November that the Committee anticipates maintaining exceptionally low levels of the
federal funds rate for an extended period, with this expectation explicitly conditioned
on low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation
expectations.  Alternative A specifies that the exceptionally low level of the federal
funds rate anticipated is the current 0 to ¼ percent target range.
Under Alternative C, the amount of agency MBS purchases would be reduced to
$1.1 trillion while agency debt purchases would be reduced to $160 billion.  The
statement would also indicate that the Committee anticipates that these purchases
would be completed by the end of January 2010.  Alternative C changes the forward
guidance by indicating that the Committee anticipates “low” levels of the federal
funds rate “for some time.”
The alternatives also differ in their treatment of the discussion of policy tools.
Alternative A indicates that the Committee will continue to employ a wide range of
policy tools to promote economic recovery and price stability.  Alternatives B and C
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 34 of 72
remove the reference to the use of a wide range of policy tools and note that the
Committee and the Board of Governors anticipate that a number of liquidity
programs will expire on February 1 and that amounts auctioned through the Term
Auction Facility will be scaled back further over the first quarter of 2010.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 35 of 72
Table 1:  Overview of Alternative Language  
for the December 15‐16, 2009 FOMC Announcement
November FOMC
December Alternatives
A B C 
Forward Guidance on Funds Rate Path
“exceptionally low 
levels of
the federal funds rate 
for an extended period”
“this exceptionally low 
range for
the federal funds rate  
for an extended period”
“exceptionally low 
levels of
the federal funds rate 
for an extended
“low  
levels of
the federal funds rate  
for some time”
Agency MBS Purchases
Total  
Amount
“a total of”  
$1.25 trillion
“a total of”  
$1.5 trillion $1.25 trillion
“cap” at 
$1.1 trillion
Pace pace will “gradually slow”  “is gradually slowing”
Completion 
by the end of the
first quarter of 2010 
through the
second quarter of 2010 
by the end of the
first quarter of 2010 
by the end of  
January 2010
Agency Debt Purchases
Total 
Amount
“about” 
$175 billion
$175 billion
“about”  
$175 billion
“cap” at  
$160 billion
Pace pace will “gradually slow”  “is gradually slowing”
Completion 
by the end of the
first quarter of 2010 
by the first quarter of
first quarter of 2010 
by the end of  
January 2010
Evaluation of LSAP Timing and Overall Amounts
timing and amounts of
all LSAPs 
will continue to be evaluated
timing and amounts of 
all LSAPs
will continue to be evaluated
Liquidity Facilities
adjustments as warranted adjustments as warranted expire on February 1
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 36 of 72
November FOMC Statement
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September suggests 
that economic activity has continued to pick up.  Conditions in financial markets were 
roughly unchanged, on balance, over the intermeeting period.  Activity in the housing sector 
has increased over recent months.  Household spending appears to be expanding but 
remains constrained by ongoing job losses, sluggish income growth, lower housing wealth, 
and tight credit.  Businesses are still cutting back on fixed investment and staffing, though at 
a slower pace; they continue to make progress in bringing inventory stocks into better 
alignment with sales.  Although economic activity is likely to remain weak for a time, the 
Committee anticipates that policy actions to stabilize financial markets and institutions, fiscal 
and monetary stimulus, and market forces will support a strengthening of economic growth 
and a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability.
With substantial resource slack likely to continue to dampen cost pressures and with longer-
term inflation expectations stable, the Committee expects that inflation will remain subdued 
for some time.
In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve will continue to employ a wide range of tools to 
promote economic recovery and to preserve price stability.  The Committee will maintain 
the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and continues to anticipate that 
economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, 
and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal 
funds rate for an extended period.  To provide support to mortgage lending and housing 
markets and to improve overall conditions in private credit markets, the Federal Reserve will 
purchase a total of $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities and about $175 billion 
of agency debt.  The amount of agency debt purchases, while somewhat less than the 
previously announced maximum of $200 billion, is consistent with the recent path of 
purchases and reflects the limited availability of agency debt.  In order to promote a smooth 
transition in markets, the Committee will gradually slow the pace of its purchases of both 
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities and anticipates that these transactions 
will be executed by the end of the first quarter of 2010.  The Committee will continue to 
evaluate the timing and overall amounts of its purchases of securities in light of the evolving 
economic outlook and conditions in financial markets.  The Federal Reserve is monitoring 
the size and composition of its balance sheet and will make adjustments to its credit and 
liquidity programs as warranted.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 37 of 72
December FOMC Statement—Alternative A
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 38 of 72
December FOMC Statement—Alternative B
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 39 of 72
December FOMC Statement—Alternative C
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 40 of 72
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
If policymakers believe that completion of the Committee’s large-scale asset
purchase programs as previously announced as well as the maintenance of
exceptionally low levels of the funds rate for an extended period is a reasonable
course of action given current economic circumstances, the Committee might adopt
the policy actions and language of Alternative B.  Such a choice might be appealing if
the Committee shares the staff’s assessment that incoming economic data and recent
financial market developments are consistent with sustained but moderate growth in
output and subdued inflation over coming quarters.  In the staff forecast, output
expands at a pace above trend over the forecast period, and the unemployment rate
gradually declines.  Nevertheless, even by the end of 2011, the unemployment rate
remains above 8 percent, significantly higher than the staff’s estimate of the NAIRU,
suggesting that a very accommodative stance of policy will remain appropriate for a
considerable amount of time.  While the Greenbook-consistent measures of short-run
r* have been revised up a bit since the November meeting, these measures are still
negative and below the actual level of the real federal funds rate.  Moreover, the funds
rate path implied by the estimated outcome-based rule (Chart 8) seems consistent
with the statement that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low
levels of the funds rate for an extended period.
Even if participants believed that the economy might recover more quickly than
in the staff forecast, they may nevertheless believe that they have considerable time
before policy firming becomes appropriate.  For example, in the “Stronger Recovery”
scenario in the Greenbook, inflation still remains low over the forecast period even
though policy firming does not commence until the end of 2010.  Accordingly,
policymakers may prefer to accumulate more conclusive evidence that the economic
recovery is firmly established before tightening policy.  This preference may be
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 41 of 72
reinforced by a view that some of the observed pickup in aggregate spending may
reflect government policy actions whose influence is expected to wane in 2011.  More
generally, participants may simply view the strength and sustainability of the recovery
as still highly uncertain.
While policymakers may view the current and projected slack in resource
utilization, particularly the persistently high unemployment rate, as unsatisfactory, an
expansion of the LSAPs or other policy actions to provide more stimulus might be
judged as likely to be relatively ineffective and as entailing significant potential costs.
Additional actions to stimulate the economy could boost inflation expectations, which
may call for a reversal in the stance of policy before the recovery is sufficiently well
established.  Moreover, a larger Federal Reserve balance sheet could also present
challenges for the Committee’s exit strategy, either because the greater size could
result in larger unrealized mark-to-market losses on the portfolio in the event of an
abrupt upward movement in interest rates or because of the potentially greater
difficulty in controlling short-term interest rates that could result from even higher
reserve balances.
The Federal Reserve announced in June that many of the liquidity facilities that
have been supporting financial markets would be extended until February 1, 2010.
Because that date is approaching and financial market functioning has improved to a
great extent, policymakers may wish to confirm expectations that those liquidity
facilities will in fact be wound down early next year and that the Federal Reserve is in
the process of normalizing its support for markets.  The proposed statement in
Alternative B provides language to describe that development.
Market participants generally appear to expect a statement along the lines of
Alternative B, so the announcement of this action would likely elicit only modest
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 42 of 72
reaction in financial markets.  To the extent that some market participants may place
some odds on a further extension of liquidity programs, the confirmation that these
programs will likely be discontinued early in the new year could result in some
pressures in money markets.  Moreover, the announcement could be seen as another
milestone in the normalization of monetary policy implementation and—even with
the language to the contrary in the statement—may be viewed as suggesting that the
date at which policy firming would commence was drawing near.  On the other hand,
market participants might view the statement as reassuring because it would reiterate
the Committee’s and the Board’s assessment that financial conditions have improved
enough to allow the withdrawal of Federal Reserve support.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
If policymakers viewed the incoming data as indicating that the recovery is gaining
strength and that inflation pressures could begin to mount before long, they might
wish to trim the size of the LSAPs and suggest in the policy statement that the
Committee may need to raise the federal funds rate target in the not-too-distant
future, as in Alternative C.  Under this alternative, the Committee would reduce its
total purchases of agency MBS and agency debt compared with the previously
announced amounts and bring the LSAPs to a more rapid close.  The statement
would also suggest a somewhat earlier start to policy firming by stating that the federal
funds rate would remain at “low levels” for “some time” as opposed to the current
characterization of “exceptionally low levels” for “an extended period.”  The
statement for Alternative C would use the same language as proposed for Alternative
B regarding the likely expiration of most of the liquidity facilities.
Participants might be particularly attracted to Alternative C if they saw greater
upside risks to inflation and inflation expectations than does the staff.  With a
somewhat brighter labor market outlook, a falling foreign exchange value of the
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 43 of 72
dollar, and readings on some measures of longer-term inflation expectations that are
at the high end of their ranges over recent years, a significant further expansion of the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet could be seen as risking a significant increase in
inflation expectations that might prove costly to reverse later.  The “Higher Inflation
Expectations” scenario in the Greenbook presents such an outcome.  A change in the
stance of monetary policy at this point in time could be viewed as appropriate in order
to keep inflation expectations stable.
Members’ inflation concerns could be amplified if the recent spending,
production, and labor market indicators were seen as suggesting that aggregate
demand going forward could be stronger than had been expected and that the
softness in labor costs that had prevailed might be coming to an end, along the lines
of the “Stronger Recovery” scenario presented in the Greenbook.  Although bank
lending continues to contract, large firms have ready access to capital markets, and
broader financial market conditions became more supportive of growth, on balance,
over the intermeeting period, with a lower foreign exchange value of the dollar, lower
interest rates, and rising equity prices.  While business executives no doubt remain
quite cautious, recent data on employment may indicate that firms will become willing
to hire and expand production sooner than anecdotal information might suggest,
pointing to a more rapid rise in employment and investment than in the staff forecast.
Members may also believe that measures of resource slack are subject to
considerable error and, as a result, are not reliable guides for the conduct of monetary
policy.  Consequently, they may put less weight on the estimated level of output and
unemployment gaps in forecasting inflation trends and more weight on inflation
expectations and the change in output than does the staff.  Misinterpreting the
readings from the output gap could lead to undesirable outcomes for inflation.  For
this reason, participants may wish to signal that they are prepared to raise the federal
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 44 of 72
funds rate sooner than had been anticipated, in addition to reducing the size of
Finally, the Committee may be concerned that even the present size of the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet could pose challenges when it comes time to begin removing
policy accommodation.  Some participants may believe that the current extremely
high level of reserves could give significant impetus to bank lending as banks become
more confident about the outlook and their own capital positions.  A very sharp
pickup in lending could be unwelcome if it comes at a time when the Committee
wishes to remove policy accommodation.  The level of reserves might also be of
concern if participants are not confident that the tools at the Committee’s disposal
will prove sufficient to allow it to raise short-term rates when doing so becomes
appropriate.  In either case, the Committee might choose to cap its purchases in order
to limit the resulting risks.  As in Alternative B, the Committee may also view it as
appropriate to affirm that the various liquidity facilities will be winding down.
The adoption of Alternative C would greatly surprise market participants and lead
them to reevaluate, perhaps significantly, their beliefs regarding the Committee’s
intentions.  The expected near-term path of the federal funds rate could rise notably
as investors inferred that a tightening in policy might be drawing near.  Longer-term
rates presumably would also rise as the path for policy was shifted up, and equity
prices might fall.  Importantly, MBS and primary mortgage rates could well move
sharply higher; Federal Reserve MBS purchases currently exceed the pace of new
issues significantly, and the adoption of Alternative C would imply a dramatic scaling
back of those purchases.  As a result, functioning in the MBS market might become
impaired for a time.  Forward measures of inflation compensation would probably
decline if the Committee’s decision led investors to mark down their longer-term
inflation expectations, and the exchange value of the dollar would likely rise.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 45 of 72
Given the strong reaction that curtailing the purchases of securities might
provoke, the Committee might prefer to consider combining the forward guidance on
the federal funds rate path in Alternative C with the LSAP purchases proposed in
Alternative B.  By indicating that the Committee anticipated low interest rates for
some time (instead of an extended period), such a combination would be less likely to
generate disruptions in the functioning of MBS and mortgage markets.  Nevertheless,
the change in the forward guidance about the path of the federal funds rate would still
prompt a strong revision to investors’ expectations, pushing up interest rates and
likely causing equity prices to fall somewhat.  Another possible combination is to
reduce the LSAPs as in Alternative C and maintain the forward guidance language
from Alternative B.  Such a combination would have the possible advantage of exiting
from unconventional policy earlier.  However, this combination would also come as a
considerable surprise to market participants and could well also disrupt MBS and
mortgage markets to some degree and push up longer-term interest rates, although
the rise in longer-term rates might be attenuated by the Committee’s continued
expectation that economic conditions would warrant maintaining an exceptionally low
rate for the federal funds rate for an extended period.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
If the members’ views of the economic outlook were similar to the staff forecast,
with the unemployment rate remaining at very high levels for many quarters to come
and inflation expected to fall further below a range consistent with price stability, then
they might be inclined to put in place additional policy stimulus.  To do so, the
Committee could increase the quantity of agency MBS purchases and extend the
timeframe for those purchases while continuing to signal that the federal funds rate
will remain at the effective zero lower bound for an extended period, as in Alternative
A.  Even if they anticipate an outcome similar to the staff forecast as most likely,
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 46 of 72
participants may see a significant risk that the economy could fall back into recession
next year, perhaps after some of the support from government policies and liquidity
facilities is removed.  Also, even without a relapse in the real economy, additional
policy accommodation may be seen as appropriate in view of the staff’s projection
that, for many years, unemployment will remain very high and inflation below the
majority of Committee participants’ long-run projections.
The Committee may view some of the recent stronger readings on economic
activity as reflecting temporary forces, such as fiscal policy, that may be overstating
the underlying momentum of the economy.  Moreover, the staff may be
underestimating the restraint that weakness in the balance sheets of households and
some firms will put on the expansion.  Indeed, the continued sharp contraction in
bank credit and the sluggishness in M2 growth may point to slower economic
expansion than is captured by the staff’s forecast.  The “Weaker Aggregate Demand”
scenario provided in the Greenbook illustrates these downside risks to the economy.
The Committee’s previous decisions to maintain the size of LSAPs, rather than
increase them, may have been based partly on concerns about potential complications
associated with the exit strategy.  Staff work on the various tools to drain reserves may
have provided greater confidence to policymakers that additional purchases of
securities can be undertaken without significantly complicating the exit strategy.  In
order to promote a smooth transition in financial markets, given the greater quantity
of purchases, the Committee may view it as desirable to extend the time period over
which the purchases are to be completed to the end of the second quarter.
An announcement such as that in Alternative A would come as a surprise to
market participants.  Most likely, short-term interest rates would fall as investors
priced in a later liftoff of the federal funds rate, and the resulting decline in mortgage
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 47 of 72
and other longer-term rates would most likely be amplified by the increase in MBS
purchases.  Equity prices might rise, while the foreign exchange value of the dollar
would likely decline.  Inflation compensation could increase to some degree if
investors revised up their inflation expectations based on a larger size of the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet and greater policy accommodation.  Alternative A does not
explicitly mention the expiration of the various liquidity facilities as do the other
alternatives.  While this omission would in no way preclude policymakers from letting
the facilities expire in February, participants may prefer to explicitly signal that the
Federal Reserve’s support for financial markets is winding down by including in
Alternative A the paragraph proposed on the facilities’ expiration proposed for
Alternatives B and C.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 48 of 72
LONG‐RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE
In this section, three scenarios for the balance sheet are presented that correspond
to the different paths for large-scale asset purchases (LSAP) of agency debt securities
and agency MBS proposed in the three policy alternatives discussed in the “Policy
Alternatives” section of the Bluebook.  The baseline scenario corresponds to
Alternative B in which agency MBS purchases of $1.25 trillion and agency debt
securities purchases of $175 billion are executed by the end of the first quarter of
to a total $1.5 trillion and are completed by the end of the second quarter of 2010;
purchases of agency debt securities under this alternative remain at $175 billion and
are executed by the end of the first quarter of 2010.  Under Alternative C, the
quantities of agency MBS purchases and agency debt purchases are reduced to $1.1
trillion and $160 billion, respectively; all purchases under this alternative are
completed by January 2010.
Projections for these scenarios are developed based on assumptions about each
component of the balance sheet.9  Details of these assumptions are contained in
Appendix C.  Substantive revisions to these assumptions, relative to the October
Bluebook, are outlined below.
In all three scenarios, total assets are lower over the majority of the projection
period than in the October Bluebook, largely due to a projected decrease in credit
extended through the liquidity facilities that more than offsets an increase in the
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 49 of 72
forecasted level of agency MBS holdings.  The projected levels of credit extended
through the primary credit program, Term Auction Facility (TAF), and the Term
Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) were revised down in response to lower
use of these facilities over the intermeeting period.  Projections of these and other
Federal Reserve liquidity programs and credit facilities implicitly incorporate a
judgment about the potential interactions between their level and the level of reserve
balances.  The upward revision to the level of agency MBS holdings reflects a lower
assumed pace of prepayments.10
On the liability side of the balance sheet, the projected levels of reverse
repurchase agreements with foreign official and international accounts and of deposits
held at the Federal Reserve other than by depository institutions or the U.S. Treasury
were revised down reflecting decreases over the intermeeting period.11  On net, the
revisions in the asset and liability components of the balance sheet imply an upward
revision in the level of reserve balances over the projection period.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 50 of 72
Balance Sheet Projections Summary
Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Agency Debt Securities
Total Purchased $175 billion $175 billion $160 billion
December 2016 $20 billion $20 billion $15 billion
Agency MBS
Total Purchased $1.5 trillion $1.25 trillion $1.1 trillion
December 2016 $0.8 trillion $0.7 trillion $0.6 trillion
Total Assets
Peak month September 2010 June 2010 December 2009
Peak amount $2.5 trillion $2.4 trillion $2.2 trillion
December 2016 $1.5 trillion $1.5 trillion $1.5 trillion
Reserve Balances
Peak month September 2010 December 2009 December 2009
Peak amount $1.3 trillion $1.2 trillion $1.1 trillion
The size and timing of the peak level of the balance sheet varies in each scenario,
primarily because of the different paths for the LSAPs.  For the baseline and
Alternative A scenarios, the balance sheet reaches a peak of $2.4 trillion and $2.5
trillion, respectively, with the peak occurring a quarter after the agency MBS LSAPs
are assumed to be completed.  In Alternative C, the size of the balance sheet peaks at
$2.2 trillion in December 2009.  By the end of 2016, the size of the balance sheet
under each scenario declines to roughly $1.5 trillion.12
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 51 of 72
With respect to the level of reserve balances, the peak occurs at the end of 2009
under the baseline and Alternative C scenarios at $1.2 trillion and $1.1 trillion,
respectively.  Although LSAPs continue into 2010 in each of these scenarios, reserve
balances begin to decline at the beginning of the year because of the decline in lending
through liquidity and credit facilities and a return of the U.S. Treasury’s
supplementary financing account to $200 billion following an assumed increase in the
debt ceiling.  In contrast, under Alternative A, reserve balances do not peak until the
third quarter of 2010 at $1.3 trillion, reflecting the extension of asset purchases
through the middle of next year.  Since the monetary base is derived from the balance
sheet projections of Federal Reserve notes in circulation and reserve balances, the
path of the monetary base in each scenario largely mirrors the path of reserve
balances.  Specifically, in each scenario, the monetary base peaks at essentially the
same time as reserve balances, and as reserve balances decline, the monetary base
contracts.  Towards the end of the projection period, when reserve balances are
assumed to stabilize at $25 billion, the growth rate of the monetary base roughly
matches the growth rate of Federal Reserve notes in circulation.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 52 of 72
Baseline Scenario
Source.  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
B
ill
io
ns
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasury securities Agency debt Agency MBS
Repurchase agreements TAF Central bank swaps
Other loans and facilities SDR and other assets
$ 
B
ill
io
ns
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 53 of 72
Alternative A
Source.  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
B
ill
io
ns
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasury securities Agency debt Agency MBS
Repurchase agreements TAF Central bank swaps
Other loans and facilities SDR and other assets
$ 
B
ill
io
ns
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 54 of 72
Alternative C
Source.  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
B
ill
io
ns
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasury securities Agency debt Agency MBS
Repurchase agreements TAF Central bank swaps
Other loans and facilities SDR and other assets
$ 
B
ill
io
ns
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 55 of 72
Memo:
October 
Baseline
Growth Rates for the Monetary Base
Date Baseline Alternative A Alternative C
Percent, annual rate
Annual - Q4 to Q4
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 56 of 72
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY FORECASTS
The staff projects that domestic nonfinancial sector debt will expand at an annual
rate of about 1¾ percent in the fourth quarter of 2009 and then at about a 5½
percent pace, on average, over 2010 and 2011.  The forecast reflects rapid growth in
federal government debt and a moderate increase in state and local government debt.
By contrast, increases in household and nonfinancial business debt are projected to be
sluggish.  Staff anticipates that household debt will not begin to expand noticeably
until the second half of next year, and the pace of borrowing is expected to be
subdued through 2011 because of roughly flat home prices, a higher household saving
rate, relatively tight lending standards, and loan charge-offs that remain elevated for
some time.  The growth of nonfinancial business debt is anticipated to be modest, as
demand for external funds remains soft, banks’ terms and standards for business
loans ease only gradually, and the commercial real estate market remains very weak.
Commercial bank credit is expected to contract at an annual rate of 8½ percent in
the fourth quarter, reflecting continued steep drops in loans—especially to
businesses—and only a small increase in banks’ holdings of securities.  Bank credit is
expected to increase about 1½ percent in 2010 as moderate growth in securities
offsets a further decline in loans for much of the year.  Loan growth resumes late in
a gradual easing of standards and terms, and in 2011 bank credit growth accelerates to
about 5 percent.  C&I loans are projected to continue to contract until late in 2010
and to expand only sluggishly in 2011.  Weak fundamentals for commercial real estate
and soft home prices hold down real estate loans through most of 2010, and that loan
component is expected to expand only modestly in 2011.  Consumer loans on banks’
books are expected to be about flat in 2010 before rising at a moderate rate in 2011.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 57 of 72
M2 is projected to expand at an annual rate of only 2½ percent in the fourth
quarter, as a reallocation of household wealth toward higher-yielding assets continues
to weigh on money demand to some degree.  Over the next two years, outflows from
money market mutual funds and small time deposits are expected to diminish, while
growth in liquid deposits is expected to remain strong.  As a result, the staff
anticipates that M2 will accelerate gradually over 2010 and will expand at a pace closer
to that of nominal GDP by 2011.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 58 of 72
Monthly Growth Rates Greenbook Forecast*
Quarterly Growth Rates
(percent, annual rate)
Growth Rates for M2
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
*This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Actual data through November 30, 2009; projections thereafter.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 59 of 72
The November directive and draft language for the December directive are
provided below.
NOVEMBER FOMC MEETING
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee directs
the Desk to purchase agency debt and agency MBS during the intermeeting period
with the aim of providing support to private credit markets and economic activity.
The timing and pace of these purchases should depend on conditions in the markets
for such securities and on a broader assessment of private credit market conditions.
The Desk is expected to execute purchases of about $175 billion in housing-related
agency debt and about $1.25 trillion of agency MBS by the end of the first quarter of
completion. The Committee anticipates that outright purchases of securities will cause
the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet to expand significantly in coming
months. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the
Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet
that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 60 of 72
DECEMBER FOMC MEETING — ALTERNATIVE A
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further
its long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to purchase agency debt and agency MBS during the intermeeting period with
the aim of providing support to private credit markets and economic activity.  The
timing and pace of these purchases should depend on conditions in the markets for
such securities and on a broader assessment of private credit market conditions.  The
Desk is expected to execute purchases of about $175 billion in housing-related agency
debt by the end of the first quarter of 2010 and about $1.5 trillion of agency MBS by
the end of the second quarter of 2010.  The Desk is expected to gradually slow the
pace of these purchases as they near completion.  The Committee anticipates that
outright purchases of securities will cause the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance
sheet to expand significantly in coming months.  The System Open Market Account
Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing
developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the attainment
over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
DECEMBER FOMC MEETING — ALTERNATIVE B
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further
its long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to purchase agency debt and agency MBS during the intermeeting period with
the aim of providing support to private credit markets and economic activity.  The
timing and pace of these purchases should depend on conditions in the markets for
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 61 of 72
such securities and on a broader assessment of private credit market conditions.  The
Desk is expected to execute purchases of about $175 billion in housing-related agency
debt and about $1.25 trillion of agency MBS by the end of the first quarter of 2010.
The Desk is expected to gradually slow the pace of these purchases as they near
completion.  The Committee anticipates that outright purchases of securities will
cause the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to expand significantly in coming
months.  The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the
Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet
that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
DECEMBER FOMC MEETING — ALTERNATIVE C
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further
its long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to purchase agency debt and agency MBS during the intermeeting period with
the aim of providing support to private credit markets and economic activity.  The
timing and pace of these purchases should depend on conditions in the markets for
such securities and on a broader assessment of private credit market conditions.  The
Desk is expected to execute purchases of about $160 billion in housing-related agency
debt and about $1.1 trillion of agency MBS by the end of January 2010.  The Desk is
expected to slow the pace of these purchases as they near completion.  The System
Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed
of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the
attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
December 10, 2009 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 62 of 72
Measure  Description
Single-
equation
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and its 
lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.
Small 
Structural
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for six variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, the real 
bond yield, and the real federal funds rate.
EDO 
Model
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using EDO—an estimated dynamic-stochastic-
general-equilibrium (DSGE) model of the U.S. economy—depend on data for major 
spending categories, price and wages, and the federal funds rate as well as the model’s 
structure and estimate of the output gap.
FRB/US 
Model
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.
Greenbook-
consistent
Two measures are presented—based on the FRB/US and the EDO models.  Both models 
are matched to the extended Greenbook forecast.  Model simulations determine the value of 
the real federal funds rate that closes the output gap conditional on the extended baseline.
TIPS-based 
Factor 
Model
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’ expectations of 
the future path of real interest rates.  The TIPS-based measure of the equilibrium real rate is 
constructed using the seven-year-ahead instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS 
yields as of the Bluebook publication date.  This forward rate is adjusted to remove 
estimates of the term and liquidity premiums based on a three-factor arbitrage-free term-
structure model applied to TIPS yields, nominal yields, and inflation.
