Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Content last modified 01/29/2016.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
APRIL 22, 2010
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 1 of 59
RECENT  DEVELOPMENTS
Investors seemed to become more upbeat about economic prospects over the
intermeeting period. Equity prices moved higher, buoyed by positive earnings news,
and spreads on corporate bonds edged down further on signs of improvement in
corporate credit quality. Yields on Treasury securities rose slightly, on net, and the
expected path of the federal funds rate edged down.  Market functioning was
generally stable, with no apparent adverse reaction to the end of the Federal Reserve’s
programs to purchase agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) at
quarter-end. Corporate bond issuance surged over the intermeeting period, while
bank loans to both businesses and households continued to decline in March.  Results
from the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey (SLOOS) indicated that the
tightening of bank lending standards likely came to an end, on net, in the first quarter,
but banks continued to tighten loan terms, particularly for risky borrowers, and to
experience weaker loan demand. Across the globe, equity indexes rose, evidently
reflecting growing confidence that the global recovery is gaining momentum, although
concerns about fiscal sustainability in Greece intensified.
MONETARY  POLICY  EXPECTATIONS  AND  TREASURY  YIELDS
Despite the more optimistic tone in financial markets regarding the economic
outlook, policy expectations edged down, on net, over the intermeeting period. The
expected path of the federal funds rate declined modestly after the release of the
statement following the March FOMC meeting, as some market participants
reportedly interpreted the retention of the “extended period” language as pointing to
a longer period of low rates than previously expected.  That downward revision in
policy expectations was reinforced by subsequent communications by Federal Reserve
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 2 of 59
officials that were read by investors as somewhat more cautious about the economic
recovery than had been expected.
Futures quotes combined with the staff’s standard assumption regarding the term
premium suggest that the expected path of the funds rate starts to rise above 25 basis
points in the fourth quarter of this year and reaches just above 1½ percent by the end
of 2011, a bit lower than at the time of the last FOMC meeting (Chart 1).  Market
quotes for interest rate caps provide information about the distribution of the
anticipated federal funds rate at points in the future, and these data suggest that the
modal path of the federal funds rate lies well below the mean path captured by federal
funds futures.  The April survey of primary dealers asked them to assign probabilities
to the event that the first increase in the FOMC’s target funds rate would occur in a
given quarter over the next couple of years.  The responses indicated that the dealers
see probabilities that the first target rate increase will occur in the second half of this
year, the first half of next year, or in the second half of next year and beyond of about
On net, yields on 2- and 10-year Treasury securities edged up, on balance, over
the intermeeting period, reportedly reflecting in part some concerns about the fiscal
outlook and modestly improved prospects for economic growth.  Trading was volatile
at times, particularly in late March, and option-implied measures of uncertainty about
longer-term Treasury yields moved higher, on balance.  The rise in implied volatility is
consistent with model estimates pointing to an increase in term premiums.  Near-term
inflation compensation rose some over the period.  Longer-term inflation
compensation increased 11 basis points, but survey measures of longer-term inflation
expectations were about unchanged.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 3 of 59
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 4 of 59
The Treasury auctioned about $200 billion in coupon securities of various
maturities over the intermeeting period.  Some of the auctions held in late March,
particularly those for 5- and 7-year notes, had stop-out rates that were somewhat
above when-issued rates.  By contrast, the coupon auctions that took place in April
had strong bid-to-cover ratios and stopped out at rates just above or somewhat below
when-issued rates. The 10-year TIPS auction in April also experienced robust
demand. Concerns about the fiscal outlook seemed to be a factor contributing to the
continued narrowing of ten-year swap spreads over the period.  (See box entitled
“Determinants of the Ten-Year Swap Spread.”)
CAPITAL  MARKETS
Broad equity indexes rose 5 to 9 percent, on balance, over the intermeeting
period, with bank shares gaining 12 percent (Chart 2).  Equity prices were supported
by generally positive macroeconomic data and a favorable response by investors to
the initial batch of first-quarter corporate earnings reports.  The first-quarter earnings
of banking institutions were well above expectations, on balance, with the largest
banks posting strong capital markets revenue, and banks of all sizes reporting a
decrease in loan loss provisioning that boosted earnings more broadly.  The equity
premium, measured as the staff’s estimate of the expected real return on equities over
the next 10 years relative to the real 10-year Treasury yield, remained well above levels
observed during the past decade, while option-implied volatility on the S&P 500,
which spiked briefly on the news of the SEC’s fraud case against Goldman Sachs,
declined, on balance, over the intermeeting period.
Yields on investment-grade corporate bonds edged down, leaving their spreads to
comparable-maturity Treasury securities a bit lower at levels around those that
prevailed in late 2007. Consistent with more favorable investor sentiment toward
risky assets, yields and spreads on speculative-grade corporate bonds declined, and
‐20 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80
Basis points 10y swap spread 
fitted value
Basis points United States 
United Kingdom 
Germany 
Canada
Basis points 
10y swap spead (LHS)
average budget surplus/GDP over 
the next 10 years (RHS)
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 5 of 59
Determinants of the Ten‐Year Swap Spread
The ten-year swap spread 
(based on dollar Libor rates) has 
narrowed significantly since the fall 
of 2008 and recently turned 
slightly negative.1  Several factors 
have been mentioned as 
contributing to the decline in U.S. 
swap spreads:  (1) concerns about 
the U.S. fiscal outlook, (2) reduced 
mortgage hedging demand as a 
consequence of large MBS 
purchases by the Federal Reserve, 
(3) recent elevated bond issuance 
by firms that subsequently 
swapped fixed rates on the bonds 
into floating rates, (4) diminished  
credit risks of the banking sector, 
(5) concerns about U.S. sovereign 
credit risk, and (6) effects of 
ongoing deleveraging by financial 
firms.
Based on regression analysis 
over the 1993:Q1 to 2009:Q4 
period, the deterioration in the 
fiscal outlook appears to be the 
single most important factor 
influencing the ten-year swap 
spread. We measure this variable 
by the average ratio of the federal 
budget surplus to nominal GDP 
over the next ten years based on 
the baseline projections by the
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 6 of 59
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) and plotted it as the red line in the top panel.  
This variable alone explains about 80 percent of the variation in swap spreads over 
the sample period. A proxy for the credit risk of the banking sector (the Libor-OIS 
spread) and a measure of mortgage hedging demand (MBS duration adjusted for 
purchases by the Federal Reserve and the Treasury) also have significant 
explanatory power; available proxies for all other factors mentioned above appear 
to be insignificant over this period as a whole.
This model accounts for about 2/3 of the swap spread narrowing since late 
2008. However, as shown in the middle panel, the model is unable to account for 
the recent sharp drop in swap spreads into negative territory, suggesting that other 
transitory market factors—such as strong corporate bond issuance and the 
unwinding of swap-spread-widening positions amid narrowing swap spreads—may 
have been at play in recent weeks.  In addition, market participants reportedly saw 
the passage in March of health care reform by the Congress as implying more 
deterioration in the fiscal outlook than suggested by the CBO budget estimates.
Of note, as shown in the bottom panel, swap spreads in other countries have 
behaved similarly to those in the United States.  Staff work suggests that these 
spreads are also reflective, in part, of concerns about the future supply of 
government securities.
Asset Market Developments
S&P 500
S&P 500 Bank Index
Equity prices
Source. Bloomberg.
Mar.
FOMC
Apr. 
 22
Implied volatility on S&P 500 (VIX)
Source. Chicago Board Options Exchange.
Mar.
FOMC
Apr. 
 22
Corporate bond spreads
Mar.
FOMC
Apr. 
 22
Source. LSTA/LPC Mark-to-Market Pricing.
Secondary loan market average bid price
Mar.
FOMC
Apr. 
 21
Percent of outstandings
H1
H2
Q1
Upgrades
Annual rate
Bond ratings changes of nonfinancial companies
Nonfinancial bond default rate*
* 6-month trailing defaults divided by beginning-of-period outstandings,
at an annual rate.
Source. Moody’s Investors Service.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 7 of 59
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 8 of 59
secondary market prices of syndicated leveraged loans rose further.  Indicators of
credit quality for nonfinancial firms continued to improve.  The number of
nonfinancial corporate bonds that Moody’s upgraded in the first quarter far exceeded
the number it downgraded. No defaults on nonfinancial bonds were recorded in
March, bringing the six-month trailing average down even further.  The year-ahead
expected default frequency for nonfinancial firms from Moody’s KMV declined again
in March, but remained somewhat elevated.
Overall, net debt financing by nonfinancial firms was solidly positive in March
(Chart 3). Issuance of nonfinancial bonds surged and net issuance of commercial
paper rebounded appreciably. Reportedly, a portion of the proceeds from the
increased bond issuance went to pay down other debt. Institutional investors,
including collateralized loan obligation pools, were said to have used the significant
amount of cash provided by the resulting loan prepayments to purchase new loans in
the primary market. Consequently, issuance of leveraged loans picked up in the first
quarter. Meanwhile, the contraction in C&I loans at banks continued at roughly its
recent pace; anecdotal information from banks indicated this decline was also
attributable in part to continued paydowns of existing loans.  Net equity issuance by
nonfinancial firms was negative again in the first quarter as the solid pace of gross
public equity issuance was more than offset by equity retirements from both cash-
financed mergers and share repurchases.  Financial firms issued a robust volume of
debt securities in the first quarter, and also raised a moderate amount of gross funds
in the equity market; this pattern appears to have continued in the first half of April.
The conclusion of purchases under the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS program
had only a modest market effect. The spread of yields on 30-year current coupon
MBS over yields on 10-year Treasury securities retraced much of the increase seen
around the time of the program’s conclusion, ending the period roughly where it
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 9 of 59
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 10 of 59
began it. However, the spread of option-adjusted yields on MBS over yields on
Treasury securities widened some. The average interest rate on 30-year conforming
fixed-rate mortgages increased about 10 basis points to 5.07, about in line with the
increase in 10-year Treasury yield, leaving the spread between these two rates roughly
unchanged.  Market-based indicators of investor expectations do not point to a
widening of MBS spreads in the near term.  The factors contributing to the still-low
MBS and mortgage spreads include the low level of mortgage originations, which has
damped the supply of new MBS, and the GSEs’ increased purchases of mortgages
through their buyouts of delinquent loans. In addition, market participants have
over recent months have reportedly become active buyers of mortgages since the
conclusion of the Federal Reserve’s purchases of MBS.
Consumer credit continued to trend lower in recent months, pushed down by a
steep decline in revolving credit. Spreads on high-quality credit card and auto loan
asset-backed securities (ABS) edged down over the period, with little upward pressure
evident from the end of the portion of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan
Facility (TALF) supporting ABS. Still, fewer ABS were issued in the first quarter than
in the fourth quarter, reflecting continued weakness in loan originations.  Delinquency
rates on consumer loans edged down further in February but remained very elevated.
Spreads of interest rates on credit cards over yields on two-year Treasury securities
continued to drift upward. By contrast, interest rates on new auto loans at dealerships
and their spread over yields on five-year Treasury securities declined further.
MARKET  FUNCTIONING  AND  FEDERAL  RESERVE  PROGRAMS
Overall, conditions in short-term funding markets remained generally stable
during the intermeeting period. Libor-OIS spreads at the one-, three-, and six-month
tenors stayed around levels that prevailed in late 2007, as did spreads in the
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 11 of 59
commercial paper market.1  The effective federal funds rate was somewhat firm
relative to the recent past, averaging 18 basis points compared to 13 basis points over
the previous intermeeting period. The firming was likely the result in part of higher
levels of the Treasury general collateral (GC) repo rate, which in turn largely reflected
continued increases in the supply of Treasury debt including Supplementary Financing
Program bills. Moreover, Fannie Mae reportedly reduced its lending in the federal
funds market over the intermeeting period, using a substantial portion of its short-
term liquidity to fund part of its buybacks of delinquent loans.  Futures market quotes
suggest that market participants expect the effective federal funds rate to stay near
current levels for some time.
Funding pressures in financial markets were muted in the run-up to quarter-
end. Rates in some money markets, including those on very short-term Treasury bills,
did decline sharply on the quarter-end, but not as sharply as at the December year-
end, and they normalized quickly thereafter. Market participants indicated that rates
may have been supported at the end of the quarter by a number of factors, including a
large month-end settlement of Treasury coupon issues that provided approximately
$90 billion in net new collateral to the market, issuance of Treasury bills under the
Supplementary Financing Program, and a decrease in quarter-end window dressing by
banks as fewer were subject to FDIC fee assessments after opting out of the
Transaction Account Guarantee Program (TAGP) following year-end.2
market rates. Now that most large banks are no longer subject to the assessment fee, the 
shift into GC repo at quarter-end has eased, implying less downward pressure on rates.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 12 of 59
Outflows from institutional money market mutual funds intensified in March.
The acceleration appears to reflect at least in part the increase in rates in money
markets over the period. Rates on money market mutual funds adjust to changes in
rates paid on underlying instruments with a lag, and some investors apparently reacted
to the widening in spreads by substituting away from money market mutual funds and
directly into higher-yielding money market instruments.
The volume of fails in the MBS market dropped significantly relative to its recent
peak in March, apparently reflecting in part the active efforts of market participants to
reduce their fails positions. Investors noted the announcement by the Treasury
Market Practices Group that it planned to expand its scope to include the agency
MBS and agency debt markets. Some market participants reportedly interpreted the
announcement as likely to presage the establishment of a fails charge in the MBS
market similar to the one instituted in the Treasury market in May 2009.
In addition to completing its purchases of agency MBS, the Federal Reserve also
concluded its purchases of agency debt and held its last TALF subscription for legacy
commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS).  (See box entitled “Balance Sheet
Developments during the Intermeeting Period.”)  These events passed with no major
adverse effects on markets or institutions.  The last purchase of agency debt was made
on March 24; since then, agency debt spreads to Treasury securities have been roughly
unchanged.  The final legacy CMBS TALF subscription settled on March 29.  Spreads
of AAA-rated CMBS to 10-year Treasury securities, which remain elevated relative to
pre-crisis levels, decreased substantially over the intermeeting period, reportedly
reflecting increased demand. These developments suggest that the end of the portion
of the TALF program supporting legacy CMBS did not cause significant strains in the
Open Market Desk committed to purchase, but has not settled, an additional $25.8 billion of MBS, on net. 
3 The remaining assets of CPFF LLC—investments of the fees paid by issuers that sold commercial paper to
the facility—will remain on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet until the LLC is dissolved, which will likely 
occur in late May 2010.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 13 of 59
Balance Sheet Developments during the Intermeeting Period
The Federal Reserve’s total assets edged up over the intermeeting period to just 
over $2.3 trillion.1  An increase in securities held outright, as purchases under the 
large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) continued to settle, more than offset a decline 
in lending through liquidity and credit facilities.
During the intermeeting period, securities held outright rose, on net, $39 billion, 
reflecting increases of $1 billion in agency debt securities and $38 billion in agency 
mortgage-backed securities (MBS).2  The Desk completed purchases of agency debt 
under the agency LSAP program by the end of March.  However, given the lags in 
the settlement of agency MBS purchase transactions and the dollar roll transactions 
conducted by the Desk, the final agency MBS purchases under the agency MBS 
LSAP program will likely not settle until late June.
Credit provided through the System’s liquidity and credit programs contracted 
further over the intermeeting period.  Credit outstanding under the Term Auction 
Facility (TAF) dropped to zero on April 8, and primary credit declined by $5 billion 
to $7 billion over the period.  The last $3 billion of commercial paper holdings of the 
Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) will mature on April 26.3
Loans extended through the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility 
(TALF) decreased by about $1 billion, on net.  About $857 million in loans backed 
by legacy commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) settled in the final legacy 
TALF subscription on March 29.  This increase in lending was offset by about 
$2 billion in loan prepayments. No loans secured by newly issued CMBS were 
requested at the April 21 subscription, and it appears unlikely that there will be any 
such loan requests before the facility closes on June 30.
On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, the U.S. Treasury’s 

general account declined $39 billion over the period.  However, the Treasury’s 

supplementary financing account increased $125 billion, bringing the balance to 

$200 billion, the level the Treasury intends to maintain going forward.  Reserve 

balances of depository institutions decreased by $49 billion over the intermeeting 

period.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 14 of 59
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet 
Billions of dollars
Change 
since last 
FOMC
Current 
(04/21/2010)
Maximum 
level
Date of 
maximum
Market Desk committed to purchase an additional $25.8 billion of MBS, on net.  Total MBS purchases are about 
$1.25 trillion.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 15 of 59
CMBS market. Prices of indexes of CDS on AAA-rated CMBS rose, and the first
multi-borrower CMBS deal since the summer of 2008 was issued by the Royal Bank
of Scotland without TALF support. This deal was well received by the market, with
spreads narrower than the single-borrower deals issued last spring. Although the
portion of TALF supporting new-issue CMBS deals does not close until the end of
June, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York requested that investors submit term
sheets by April 19 for any new-issue CMBS they intended to finance through the
TALF; no new term sheets were received. The first new-issue non-agency residential
MBS deal since 2007 came to market on April 21.  The deal is relatively small in size,
at roughly $200 million dollars, and backed by high-quality jumbo mortgages.  There
reportedly has been significant demand for the syndication.
FOREIGN  MARKET  DEVELOPMENTS
During the intermeeting period, equity indexes rose across the globe, implied
volatilities remained low, and emerging-market risk spreads generally declined
(Chart 4). These moves appeared to reflect growing confidence that the global
recovery is gaining momentum, particularly in emerging market economies.  However,
Greek sovereign debt remained under pressure despite the European Union’s
announcement that a substantial package of financial assistance would be offered by
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and euro-area countries.
Spreads of Greek sovereign debt over German debt rose in the second half of
March and early April prompting the European Union to announce details of an
assistance package for Greece, consisting of up to €45 billion in bilateral loans from
euro-area countries and the IMF; Greek spreads fell on the news.  However, spreads
moved higher again over the following days as market participants recognized that
parliamentary approval for the aid would be required in several countries, including
Germany. After Greece’s deficit figures were again revised higher, spreads on Greek
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 16 of 59
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 17 of 59
debt increased further to a record level of 580 basis points.  Debt spreads of other
peripheral euro-area countries generally moved in synch with Greek spreads since the
last FOMC meeting, but these moves were muted by comparison; Portuguese debt
spreads increased the most, rising to about 190 basis points.  After the close of the
European sovereign bond markets today, Moody’s downgraded Greece’s sovereign
debt rating one notch to A3, and Greek CDS spreads widened considerably further.
The trade-weighted value of the dollar, as measured by the staff’s broad nominal
index, changed little, on net, over the intermeeting period; gains against the euro and
yen were offset by declines against the Canadian dollar and most emerging market
currencies.  Chinese authorities did not allow the renminbi spot exchange rate to
fluctuate meaningfully against the dollar, but by the end of the intermeeting period,
rumors were widespread that China would let the renminbi appreciate soon, and the
dollar continued to depreciate against most other emerging-Asian currencies.  The
dollar ended the period up 2½ percent, on balance, versus the euro, which was
buffeted daily by news and rumors about the fiscal situation in Greece.  The
depreciation of the euro also prompted the Swiss National Bank to renew its
intervention operations, purchasing euros in order to limit further appreciation of the
Swiss franc. The dollar also rose against the yen as Japanese investors reportedly
sought to invest in higher-yielding foreign assets.
Yields on ten-year German sovereign issues and on debt of other core euro-area
countries were little changed, on balance, over the intermeeting period, as were yields
on U.K. and Japanese debt. However, Canadian yields rose about 20 basis points, and
market expectations of policy tightening in Canada increased sharply as strong
economic growth and rising inflation prompted the Bank of Canada to drop its
conditional commitment to keeping rates steady through the first half of this year.
Policy rates of central banks in the major advanced economies were unchanged, but
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 18 of 59
the terms of some lending facilities were adjusted.  The European Central Bank
(ECB) announced that it would extend its relaxed collateral rules into 2011 and that it
would not impose further haircuts on lower-rated sovereign debt.  Both moves helped
reduce some of the pressure on Greek banks. The Bank of Japan doubled the size of
its 3-month fixed-rate funds supplying operations to ¥20 trillion.  The Reserve Bank
of Australia raised its policy rate 25 basis points to 4¼ percent.
DEBT,  BANK  CREDIT,  AND  MONEY
Aggregate debt of the U.S. domestic private sectors appears to have expanded
slightly in the first quarter after having contracted for the previous five quarters
(Chart 5). The staff estimates that the growth rates of both nonfinancial business
debt and household debt turned positive in the first quarter.  Issuance of federal
government debt remained rapid over the same period, while state and local
government debt continued to expand moderately.  All told, the growth rate of
domestic nonfinancial sector debt appears to have increased to an annual rate of
about 5 percent in the first quarter, up from roughly 1½ percent in the final quarter of
After adjusting to remove the effects of banks’ adoption of Financial Accounting
Standards (FAS) 166 and 167, bank credit continued to contract in March, as both
loans and securities holdings declined.  (See box entitled “Effects of FAS 166/167 on
Banks’ Balance Sheets.”) This decrease was driven by a fall in core loans, which ran
off at a 9 percent annual rate, about the same pace as in recent months.  The
contraction in C&I loans remained pronounced.  The drop in commercial real estate
loans also persisted, reflecting weak fundamentals in the sector as well as charge-offs
of existing loans. Bank holdings of residential real estate loans fell again in March, as
did credit card and other consumer loans. Securities declined in March for the second
consecutive month as robust growth in banks’ holdings of Treasury and agency debt
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 19 of 59
domestically chartered commercial banks, and 4 foreign-related institutions were affected by FAS 166/167.  
The March Call Report may show that balance sheet positions of some banks that are not in our weekly 
sample were also affected by FAS 166/167.  The estimated net effect on total assets of the accounting 
changes was an increase of about $400 billion or 4 percent (total assets are measured net of banks’ allowance 
for loan and lease losses, and banks’ adoption of FAS 166/167 extinguished some asset-backed securities 
previously held on banks’ books).  The major liability item affected was borrowings from nonbanks.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 20 of 59
Effects of FAS 166/167 on Banks’ Balance Sheets
By the end of the first quarter of this year, all U.S. banks were required to 

adopt the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (FASB) Financial Accounting 

Statements No. 166 (FAS 166), Accounting for Transfers of Financial Assets, and No. 

167 (FAS 167), Amendments to FASB Interpretation No. 46(R).  The new standards 

made achieving off-balance-sheet treatment of assets much more difficult.  As a 

result, according to the Federal Reserve’s weekly bank balance sheet data through 

March 31, 2010, a total of 29 banks had brought about $450 billion in gross loans 

back onto their balance sheets, increasing banks’ books by 7 percent.1
Some earlier estimates by industry analysts of the likely effects of these 
changes in accounting rules had been quite a bit higher, with some reaching          
$1 trillion. However, subsequent to those estimates, FASB indefinitely deferred the 
implementation date for the consolidation of certain bank-sponsored investment 
funds such as mutual funds. Additionally, since the publication of the new rules 
last June, Federal Reserve data indicate that securitized credit card pools have run 
off significantly, and some banks reportedly also sold the residual tranches of their 
institution’s private mortgage-backed securities issues in order to avoid having to 
consolidate the underlying loans.
Despite the increase in loans on banks’ books, the capital ratios of the banks 
affected by the accounting change are estimated to have remained well in excess of 
the levels required to maintain well-capitalized status under regulatory standards.  
In addition, according to a special question in the April Senior Loan Officer 
Opinion Survey, none of the banks surveyed indicated that they had changed their 
lending standards or terms on loans to businesses and households in response to 
the new accounting rules.
As shown in the table below, the reported on-balance-sheet amounts of credit 

card loans and related plans nearly doubled as a result of the accounting changes, 

while other categories of loans increased to a lesser degree.  Nearly all previously
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 21 of 59
Effects of FAS 166/167 on Selected Bank Loan Categories
Loan Category 
Effects of
FAS 166/167 
($billions)
Memo: 
Level
March 31, 2010 
($billions)
* Includes closed-end residential mortgages and revolving home equity lines of credit.
Source. Federal Reserve.
the bank holding company.
securitized credit card loans were returned to the balance sheets.2  Other consumer 
loans increased $41 billion; commercial and industrial loans rose $33 billion; and 
residential real estate loans increased $27 billion.  In addition, banks augmented the 
allowance for loan and lease losses by $36 billion.
The effects of FAS 166 and 167 on bank balance sheets was much larger than 
previous changes to accounting standards that forced the grossing up of balance 
sheets. For instance, FASB’s Interpretation No. 46(R), Consolidation of Variable 
Interest Entities, brought about $160 billion of assets, or 2 percent of the total at the 
time, back onto banks’ books between 2003 and 2005.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 22 of 59
securities was more than offset by declines in their holdings of MBS and other
securities. Reflecting the decline in bank credit as well as a drop in cash assets (which
includes reserve balances), total commercial bank assets decreased in March.
The April SLOOS indicated that banks’ lending standards changed little, on
balance, in the first quarter, and demand for loans declined further.  Information from
this survey, taken together with the survey results from the fourth quarter, suggests
that the episode of substantial tightening of lending standards that took place over the
past several years is drawing to a close.  Indeed, if bank responses are weighted by
outstanding loan amounts, domestic banks eased standards somewhat last quarter, on
net, for the first time in about three years, a move that mainly reflected an easing in
standards on some loans to both businesses and households by a few large banks.
However, banks continued to tighten some terms on loans to both businesses and
households, on balance, particularly for riskier borrowers.  In addition, moderate net
fractions of banks continued to report that demand for all major categories of loans
weakened further in the first quarter. For most loan categories, the net fraction of
banks reporting weaker demand waned, but more banks experienced weaker demand
for residential mortgages than in the fourth quarter.
M2 decreased at an annual rate of 4 percent in March, reflecting a slowing in the
expansion of liquid deposits along with a further contraction in small time deposits
and a steep runoff in retail money market mutual funds. Currency grew at an annual
rate of about 6 percent; staff estimates suggest this was a result of  continued demand
for U.S. banknotes from abroad coupled with solid domestic demand.  The monetary
base contracted in March as the effect on reserves of purchases under the Federal
Reserve’s large-scale asset purchase programs was more than offset by a further
contraction in credit outstanding under liquidity and credit facilities and an increase in
the Treasury’s balances at the Federal Reserve.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 23 of 59
ECONOMIC  OUTLOOK
On balance, the data on economic activity received over the intermeeting period
were a little stronger than anticipated by the staff while core inflation came in
somewhat below expectations. In response, the staff marked up slightly its outlook
for real activity this year and revised down its projection for core inflation a bit.  The
broad contours of the staff’s medium-term forecast are the same as those in the
March Greenbook—a moderate recovery in economic activity, unemployment
declining slowly from an elevated level, and subdued rates of inflation through 2014.
The staff forecast assumes that the current target range for the federal funds rate
will not be raised until early 2012—as in the March projection—and that no further
asset purchases will be conducted.3  As in the March Greenbook, fiscal policy is
expected to add about 1 percentage point to real GDP growth this year and then be a
neutral influence on growth next year. House prices are projected to decline about
to edge up in 2011 as demand gradually picks up.
Interest rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages and longer-term Treasury securities
are projected to rise moderately through 2011.  The spread between the two rates is
assumed to widen about 20 basis points by the end of this summer—slightly less than
in the March projection—in response to the cessation of purchases of agency MBS by
the Federal Reserve, and then level off over the medium term.  Risk spreads on
investment-grade bonds are expected to narrow somewhat more as the economic
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 24 of 59
expansion becomes more firmly established; as a result, yields on these securities
move only slightly higher over the remainder of this year and in 2011.  With the equity
risk premium also expected to decline over the forecast period, stock prices are
projected to rise at an annual rate of 13½ percent over the next two years, slightly less
than in the March Greenbook, but starting from a higher level because of an increase
in equity prices since the previous projection.  Credit conditions are anticipated to
improve slowly as banks gradually ease their lending standards and terms.
The spot price of West Texas intermediate crude oil has risen about $1 per barrel
since the March projection, to $83 per barrel, and, consistent with futures prices, the
staff projects a further rise to about $90 per  barrel by the end of next year.  Following
an appreciation in the first quarter, the real foreign exchange value of the dollar is
expected to decline at an annual rate of 5 percent in the current quarter and at a rate
of about 3½ percent over the remainder of this year and during 2011.
Against this backdrop, the staff expects real GDP to grow about 3½ percent this
year, slightly more than in the March projection, and about 4½ percent in 2011.  In
light of incoming data on the labor market and the higher projection for output
growth in 2010, the trajectory for the unemployment rate has been lowered marginally
compared to the last Greenbook. The projected rate now declines to about
staff’s estimate of the effective NAIRU over this period.  With inflation expectations
stable and economic slack forecast to remain substantial, the staff projects that core
PCE prices will rise just under 1 percent this year and next.  Total PCE inflation is
expected to be a bit above core inflation this year, reflecting the rise in energy prices,
but to move close to the rate of core inflation in 2011.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 25 of 59
Looking farther ahead, the staff forecasts above-trend output growth, falling
unemployment, and slowly rising inflation  over 2012-2014.  The federal funds rate is
assumed to start rising in early 2012 and to reach a bit more than 3½ percent by late
declines to 5¼ percent in late 2014, about in line with the staff’s estimate of the
NAIRU at that time. With a steadily narrowing output gap and stable expectations
for longer-term inflation, total PCE inflation rises slowly after 2011 and reaches
policymakers’ long-run projections for inflation.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 26 of 59
MONETARY  POLICY  STRATEGIES
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 27 of 59
( ( (
( ( (
( ( (
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 28 of 59
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 29 of 59
would stay appreciably below 2 percent through late 2014.  The chart also displays the
optimal-control results obtained if the nominal funds rate were not constrained by the
effective lower bound (blue dashed lines). Absent the constraint, the nominal funds
rate would move down to about -3¾ percent early next year; this more
accommodative policy would bring the unemployment rate back to the NAIRU more
quickly and move the inflation trajectory closer to the assumed 2 percent goal.  The
unconstrained path for the funds rate is slightly lower than in the last Bluebook, as the
effects on the optimal policy path of the staff’s somewhat lower outlook for inflation
later this year and in early 2011 outweigh the effects of slightly lower unemployment.
As shown in Chart 8, the outcome-based policy rule prescribes a trajectory for the
federal funds rate virtually identical to the one in the previous Bluebook (upper-left
panel). The nominal funds rate starts rising above the effective lower bound in
market futures quotes, market participants’ expectations regarding the path of the
funds rate also were little changed over the intermeeting period (upper-right panel).5
The lower panel of Chart 8 provides near-term prescriptions from simple policy rules,
all of which are nearly identical to their counterparts in the March Bluebook.  The two
variants of the Taylor rule and the two estimated policy rules would keep the federal
funds rate at its effective lower bound over the next two quarters.  In contrast, the
first-difference rule is more responsive to the projected pace of economic recovery
rather than the current level of resource slack and hence prescribes a rising funds rate.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 30 of 59
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 31 of 59
POLICY  ALTERNATIVES
This Bluebook presents three policy alternatives—labeled A, B, and C—for the
Committee’s consideration. The alternatives vary somewhat in their characterization
of current conditions and the outlook; they also provide different forward guidance
about the federal funds rate.  The drafts offer paragraphs on reinvestment strategy—
and in Alternative C, on asset sales—that the FOMC may wish to consider including
in its statement. Table 1 shows key elements of the alternatives.  Draft statements
follow the table. Subsequent pages summarize the arguments for each alternative.
Each of the draft statements begins by noting that economic activity has
continued to strengthen, that the labor market shows some improvement, and that
growth in household spending has picked up.  The wording of Alternative A is more
tentative than that of Alternative B. Alternative C offers the most upbeat summary of
current conditions by omitting the list of factors that are restraining household
spending, a list that Alternatives A and B carry over from the March statement.  All
three alternatives provide a somewhat more positive characterization of economic
conditions than did the Committee’s March statement, which said the labor market
was stabilizing and household spending was increasing at a moderate rate.
The alternatives differ more substantially in their characterization of recent and
prospective inflation. Alternative B repeats the words of the March statement:  “With
substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term
inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.”
Alternative C highlights recent increases in energy prices but notes that inflation has
remained subdued. It then states that “The Committee will adjust the stance of
monetary policy as necessary over time to ensure that longer-term inflation
expectations remain well anchored and that inflation outcomes are consistent with
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 32 of 59
price stability.” Alternative A observes that longer-term inflation expectations have
been stable but also notes that recent data suggest inflation has been trending down in
response to substantial resource slack; moreover, Alternative A indicates that the
Committee expects inflation to remain “quite subdued.”
Each alternative would maintain the 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal
funds rate during the upcoming intermeeting period.  In light of the Committee’s
implicit judgment at its recent meetings that the costs of purchasing additional longer-
term assets would outweigh the benefits—except perhaps if the economy were to
weaken—none of the alternatives includes such purchases.  Instead, the alternatives
provide markedly different forward guidance.  Alternative B says, as in recent FOMC
statements, that the Committee anticipates that economic conditions “are likely to
warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.”
Alternative C modifies the final words to “for some time,” signaling an earlier increase
in the funds rate.  Alternative A sharpens the conditionality in the extended period
language and suggests that an increase in the federal funds rate is likely to come later
than markets now expect. After observing that inflation has been trending down in
response to substantial slack, Alternative A says:  “To promote a more robust
economic recovery in a context of price stability, the Committee anticipates
maintaining the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent for an
extended period—until economic conditions such as appreciably higher rates of
resource utilization, increasing inflation pressures, or rising inflation expectations
warrant a less accommodative monetary policy.”
The Desk, at the Committee’s direction, has been pursuing an interim approach
of rolling over the proceeds of maturing Treasury securities while not reinvesting the
proceeds of agency debt and MBS that mature or prepay. That practice will, if
continued, gradually shrink the SOMA portfolio and move it back toward a more
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 33 of 59
normal “Treasuries-only” composition. The fourth paragraph of Alternative A (in
brackets) illustrates language that the Committee might add to its statement if it
wished to announce a more permanent adoption of that approach.  The fourth
paragraph of Alternative B (also in brackets) offers a choice between continuing to
roll over maturing Treasuries or stopping. Policymakers might view a decision to
maintain the current reinvestment policy as a matter to be noted in the minutes rather
than in the statement, but they may see a decision to stop reinvesting the proceeds of
maturing Treasury securities as a change in policy that warrants mention in the
statement. Or they might prefer to indicate such a decision in the directive.  The
fourth paragraph of Alternative C (not in brackets) offers language that the
Committee could use to announce that it will no longer roll over maturing Treasuries
and that—to further reduce the size of the balance sheet and return it to a more
normal composition—the Committee anticipates that it will soon begin gradual sales
of agency debt and MBS. If the statement for this meeting were to include a new
fourth paragraph on reinvestments and perhaps sales, it would seem natural to move
the final sentence of the third paragraph (“The Committee will continue to monitor
the economic outlook and financial developments and will employ its policy tools as
necessary to promote economic recovery and price stability”) to the end of that new
All three draft statements conclude by noting that the TALF, the one remaining
special liquidity facility, is scheduled to close on June 30 for loans backed by new-issue
CMBS and that it closed on March 31 for loans backed by all other types of collateral.
Table 1: Overview of Alternatives for the April 28 FOMC Statement
March April Alternatives 
Statement A B C
Economic Activity
Recent 
Developments
has continued 
to strengthen
has continued 
to strengthen
has continued 
to strengthen
has continued 
to strengthen
Labor 
Market
is stabilizing; 
high unemployment;
employers remain 
reluctant to add to
is showing signs of 
improving;
high unemployment; 
employers remain 
reluctant to add to
is beginning to improve; 
high unemployment;
employers remain 
reluctant to add to
is improving
recovery likely to be 
moderate for a time;
gradual return to higher 
levels of resource
recovery likely to be 
moderate for a time;
gradual return to higher 
levels of resource
recovery under way; 
gradual return to higher
levels of resource 
utilization
Recent 
Developments
substantial slack is 
restraining cost
pressures; 
stable inflation 
expectations
stable inflation 
expectations but recent 
data suggest inflation is
trending down in 
response to slack
substantial slack is 
restraining cost pressures;
stable inflation 
expectations
energy prices have risen 
on balance in recent 
months but inflation
remains subdued
Outlook 
likely to be subdued
for some time 
likely to be quite subdued
for some time 
likely to be subdued
for some time
policy adjustments 
will ensure inflation 
outcomes consistent 
with price stability
Federal Funds Rate Target
Intermeeting 
Period
Forward 
Guidance
economic conditions are 
likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels 
for an extended period
anticipate maintaining the 
0 to ¼ percent target 
range for an extended
period—until economic 
conditions such as . . .
warrant a less 
accommodative policy
economic conditions are 
likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels 
for an extended period
economic conditions are 
likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels 
for some time
Reinvestment and Sales of SOMA Assets
[do not reinvest proceeds 
of agency debt and MBS 
but continue to roll over
maturing Treasuries]
[do not reinvest proceeds 
of agency debt and MBS 
but continue to roll over
maturing Treasuries] 
OR
[no reinvestment]
no reinvestment; 
“Committee anticipates 
that it will soon begin 
gradual sales of agency
debt and MBS”
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 34 of 59
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 35 of 59
March  FOMC  Statement
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 36 of 59
April  FOMC  Statement—Alternative  A
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 37 of 59
April  FOMC  Statement—Alternative  B
To gradually reduce the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over time, the 
Committee will maintain its approach of not reinvesting the proceeds of maturing 
agency debt and payments on mortgage-backed securities held by the System 
Open Market Account.  In addition, on May 3 the Committee will stop 
reinvesting the proceeds of maturing Treasury securities.]
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 38 of 59
April  FOMC  Statement—Alternative  C
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 39 of 59
THE  CASE  FOR  ALTERNATIVE  B
If policymakers expect the pace of economic recovery to be moderate and
inflation to be subdued for some time, as they did at the time of the Committee’s
March meeting, and if they still judge that the potential benefits of further purchases
of longer-term assets would not outweigh the costs, then they might choose to
maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate and reiterate that economic
conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for
an extended period, as in Alternative B.
FOMC participants may see economic and financial developments during the
intermeeting period as broadly consistent with their assessments of the outlook at the
time of the March meeting; they, like the staff, may have made only modest revisions
to their forecasts for economic activity and inflation.  Nonetheless, recent data on
nonfarm payrolls and consumer spending, in combination with indications that some
banks have begun to reverse the extraordinary tightening of lending standards
implemented during the past three years, may have given policymakers somewhat
greater assurance that the recovery will be sustained and that private demand will
grow at a rate sufficient to generate a gradual decline in unemployment going forward.
Policymakers may, however, continue to anticipate that elevated unemployment, tight
credit conditions for small businesses and many households, and waning fiscal
stimulus will weigh on growth of aggregate demand over coming quarters.  In line
with such an outlook, both of the Greenbook-consistent measures of short-run r*
shown in Chart 6 indicate that a real federal funds rate at least as low as the current
level of -1.2 percent would be required to close the output gap in three years.
Recent readings on inflation and inflation expectations may have strengthened
participants’ confidence that inflation will remain subdued for some time and reduced
their concerns that expected inflation might rise appreciably.  Core PCE inflation has
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 40 of 59
trended lower in recent months, and growth in both hourly compensation and the
employment cost index slowed substantially during 2009, consistent with the view that
substantial resource slack is continuing to reduce cost pressures.  The median of the
Reuters/Michigan survey of longer-term inflation expectations is noticeably lower
than its level at any time from the spring of 2005 through the fall of 2008 and remains
close to the lower ends of its historical range.
Reflecting subdued inflation as well as sizable resource slack, the two versions of
the Taylor rule shown in Chart 8, along with the outcome-based rule and the forecast-
based rule, prescribe a substantially negative nominal federal funds rate for the current
quarter and next quarter, with the constrained prescriptions of these rules remaining
at the effective lower bound.  Participants may see retaining the extended period
language as consistent with these prescriptions.
Even if some policymakers remain worried that inflation expectations could rise
in response to continued highly accommodative monetary conditions, they may see
risk management considerations as supporting a reiteration of the extended period
forward guidance. The effective lower bound on the funds rate could bind severely if
a move toward tighter policy proved premature and led to a substantial deterioration
in the economic outlook. In contrast, with considerable economic slack prevailing,
and with inflation below levels deemed appropriate over the longer run, participants
might be reasonably confident that in the event of a surprisingly rapid economic
recovery or a surge in inflation expectations, they could firm policy sufficiently quickly
to avoid a significant runup in actual inflation.
Some participants may see the outlook for moderate growth, a gradual decline in
unemployment, and subdued inflation as arguing not only for keeping the federal
funds rate at exceptionally low levels but also for caution in shrinking the Federal
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 41 of 59
Reserve’s balance sheet and the supply of reserve balances.  If so, they may judge it
appropriate to continue rolling over maturing Treasury securities, at least for the time
being, while allowing redemptions and prepayments on agency debt and MBS to
gradually reduce the share of such securities in the SOMA portfolio.  Other
participants may judge that greater confidence about the economic outlook offers an
opportunity to shrink the balance sheet and the supply of reserve balances somewhat
more rapidly, by not reinvesting the proceeds of maturing Treasuries, even if they
expect that economic conditions will warrant an exceptionally low federal funds rate
for an extended period. Also, they may see some benefit from allowing the quantity
of Treasury coupon securities in the SOMA portfolio to decline in coming years
because doing so could facilitate a subsequent shift toward short-term Treasuries once
the portfolio shrinks enough that Treasury purchases resume.  Alternative B offers a
choice between the two approaches. As noted earlier, the Committee might conclude
that the statement should contain neither version of the fourth paragraph of
alternative B; policymakers may judge it better to communicate reinvestment policy in
the minutes or in the directive.
Language along the lines of that proposed in Alternative B—if it did not include
an announcement that the Committee will stop reinvesting the proceeds of maturing
Treasury securities—probably would result in little change in bond yields, equity
prices, or the foreign exchange value of the dollar.  The Desk’s recent survey of
primary dealers indicates that they do not anticipate changes in the federal funds rate
target or in the Committee’s forward policy guidance at this meeting, though half
expect a more positive characterization of current economic conditions.  The dealers
see a near-zero probability that the Committee will increase its target for the federal
funds rate this quarter; they see substantial probabilities (ranging from 15 to 25
percent) that the first increase in the funds rate will occur during each of the next four
quarters. Market quotes are broadly consistent with the Desk’s survey:  Money
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 42 of 59
market futures indicate that the expected federal funds rate remains below 25 basis
points until the fourth quarter of this year and rises to 50 basis points during the first
quarter of next year; interest rate caps suggest that investors place high odds on the
first increase in the funds rate occurring during the fourth quarter of 2010 or first
quarter of 2011.
The size of the market reaction to an announcement that the Federal Reserve
will no longer roll over maturing Treasuries is difficult to judge.  That move would
come as a surprise: On average, dealers see a probability of roughly one-third that the
Committee will, by the middle of this year, stop reinvesting the proceeds of some or
all maturing Treasury securities, and a probability of one-half that the Federal Reserve
will stop reinvesting the proceeds of at least some maturing Treasuries by mid-2011.
The direct effect on yields of a decision to stop rolling over maturing Treasury
securities could be modest because the resulting increase in the amount of long-term
debt held by the public, though sizable, would not be all that large relative to the
projected stock. Moreover, the increase would be fairly gradual.6  However, the
increase in yields resulting from this step could be considerably greater if investors
inferred that the FOMC had embarked on a path leading to an earlier-than-expected
onset of policy firming or to asset sales, or if investors became more uncertain about
the likelihood of future asset sales; either outcome could result in larger term
premiums. In addition, allowing maturing Treasuries to roll off would reduce the
SOMA’s holdings of on-the-run securities and thereby limit the ability of the Desk’s
securities-lending program to address market pressures.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 43 of 59
THE  CASE  FOR  ALTERNATIVE  C
If policymakers are confident that a sustainable economic recovery is now
under way and see substantial upside risks to the medium-term inflation outlook—or
significant risks that financial imbalances could emerge—in the absence of prompt
monetary policy adjustments, then they might choose to issue a statement such as that
proposed in Alternative C. In particular, if participants anticipate that it might well be
appropriate to begin removing policy accommodation this summer, they may prefer
to modify the forward guidance now to indicate that exceptionally low levels of the
funds rate are likely to be warranted “for some time” rather than “for an extended
period.” This change would suggest that the Committee will begin moving to a less
accommodative stance of monetary policy sooner than markets now appear to expect.
In addition, policymakers may judge it important to indicate that the Federal Reserve
will shrink its balance sheet not only by allowing maturing assets to run off but also by
gradually selling agency debt and MBS.
Policymakers may expect the pace of recovery over coming quarters—in the
housing sector and in the economy more broadly—to be determined largely by the
speed of structural adjustments and see a substantial risk that attempting to accelerate
the economic recovery by keeping the real funds rate well below zero for much longer
would result primarily in higher expected and hence actual inflation.  To the extent
that policymakers see inflation outcomes as linked mainly to expected inflation rather
than to resource slack, they may view the level of forward inflation compensation,
which remains near 3 percent, and the continuing dispersion in professional
forecasters’ longer-run inflation projections, as worrisome indicators that inflation
expectations may not be firmly anchored.  If so, participants might see prompt policy
firming, and an announcement that the Federal Reserve will shrink its balance sheet
by selling assets, as necessary to reduce the risk of outcomes in which inflation
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 44 of 59
expectations become unhinged. Such steps could be seen by the public as reinforcing
the Federal Reserve’s commitment to low and stable inflation, and thus could help
keep inflation expectations well anchored.  Moreover, policymakers may judge that
the Federal Reserve’s support for housing finance is no longer necessary or warranted
and see gradual sales of MBS as likely to reduce distortions in that market.
In addition, in light of the extraordinarily high level of excess reserves held by the
banking system and indications that banks might be starting to ease credit standards,
participants may have become more concerned about the possibility of a brisk
turnaround in lending and resulting rapid growth in broad monetary aggregates that
could put significant upward pressure on inflation.  Furthermore, some may judge
that the current very accommodative stance of policy risks allowing financial
imbalances to build, potentially leading to another boom-bust credit cycle.  Even if
the probabilities of such outcomes are judged to be low, the possible adverse
consequences might be seen as sufficiently severe to warrant a tightening of financial
conditions. For these reasons, policymakers may want to signal an earlier increase in
the federal funds rate than investors currently anticipate and ensure a noticeable
reduction in the supply of reserve balances over coming quarters.  To increase the rate
at which the supply of reserve balances will decline, policymakers might consider it
appropriate to immediately stop reinvesting the proceeds of maturing Treasury
securities held by the SOMA and to begin selling agency debt and MBS in the near
future. If so, they may choose to announce those decisions—and the reasons for the
decisions—by issuing a statement like that in Alternative C.
The adoption of Alternative C would surprise financial market participants, who
appear to expect only small changes in the statement at this meeting, in part because
the minutes of the FOMC’s March meeting emphasized the conditionality and
flexibility of the existing language and noted that it would not limit the Committee’s
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 45 of 59
ability to commence monetary policy tightening promptly if necessary.  Investors
likely would read the shift to “for some time” as a signal that the FOMC intends to
begin firming policy considerably sooner than markets currently expect.
An announcement that the Committee will no longer roll over maturing Treasury
securities, and soon will begin to sell agency debt and MBS, also would surprise most
of the primary dealers and likely the markets as well.  As noted earlier, dealers see a
probability of roughly one-third that the Committee will stop reinvesting the proceeds
of some or all maturing Treasury securities by the middle of 2010, and a probability of
one-half that it will do so by mid-2011.  The dealer survey also asked respondents to
report their perceptions of the probability that the Federal Reserve would conduct
asset sales during the next two years and the next five years.  The median reported
probability of sales during the next two years is about 20 percent.  But the median
probability of sales at some time during the next five years is 50 percent for agency
debt and 75 percent for MBS.
Thus the adoption of Alternative C would surprise investors on several fronts.
Investors likely would read the statement of Alternative C as signaling earlier policy
firming than they had previously anticipated and hence short-term interest rates would
increase. Intermediate- and longer-term yields would rise as well, perhaps
substantially. Indeed, in response to another question in the Desk’s survey, dealers
indicated their expectation that, abstracting from any signal that sales would convey
about future monetary policy, Federal Reserve sales of MBS at a pace of $150 billion
per year would push up the current coupon yield on MBS by about 40 basis points
and would raise the yield on 10-year Treasury notes by about 25 basis points.
Forward measures of inflation compensation might decline if investors became less
concerned about risks to the longer-term inflation outlook.  Equity prices likely would
fall, and the dollar appreciate.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 46 of 59
THE  CASE  FOR  ALTERNATIVE  A
Policymakers’ primary concern may be that, for the next several years,
unemployment will remain well above, and inflation well below, the levels they see as
most consistent with their dual mandate.  Accordingly, they may judge that not only is
the federal funds rate likely to remain exceptionally low for an extended period, but
that, as in the staff forecast, economic conditions are likely to make it appropriate to
keep the funds rate at or close to its current level for an appreciably longer period
than markets currently appear to expect.  If so, policymakers may want to issue a
statement like that in Alternative A in an effort to bring market expectations for the
federal funds rate into closer alignment with their own.
Participants may see the simulations of constrained and unconstrained optimal
monetary policy depicted in Chart 7 of the Bluebook as supporting the conclusion
that increased monetary stimulus would be desirable and that, in the absence of
additional stimulus, the funds rate will need to remain at its effective lower bound
longer than markets currently appear to anticipate.  Moreover, recent progress in
developing tools for draining reserve balances may have given participants greater
confidence that the Committee would be able to reduce the supply of reserve balances
quickly and by a substantial amount if doing so were to become necessary.
Policymakers might perceive an even stronger case for keeping the funds rate at
its effective lower bound longer than markets now think likely if their assessment of
the outlook is substantially weaker than that of the staff or if they judge the risks to
economic activity or inflation to be tilted predominantly to the downside.  They may
of private forecasts. Participants may be concerned that the recovery of the labor
market will be less rapid than projected in the Greenbook, and that slower job growth
would contribute to tepid growth in household spending, perhaps along the lines of
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 47 of 59
the “Jobless Recovery” alternative scenario in the Greenbook.  Moreover, low and
declining readings on core inflation in recent months may have underscored
participants’ concerns about downside risks to price stability.  While the staff assumes
that inflation expectations will remain steady, and thus projects that core inflation will
be essentially constant at a rate just below 1 percent over the next two years,
participants may assign a higher probability to alternative scenarios—such as the
Greenbook’s “Greater Disinflation” scenario—in which persistently large resource
slack weighs more heavily on expected inflation and labor compensation and hence
generates stronger downward pressure on prices.  If policymakers see a significant risk
of such outcomes, they may judge it appropriate to signal, as in Alternative A, that
monetary policy will remain unusually accommodative until measures of resource
utilization increase appreciably or inflation pressures rise.
To reinforce that signal, policymakers might decide to announce that they plan to
continue on a more permanent basis the practice of reinvesting the proceeds of
maturing Treasury securities even as they allow the System’s holdings of agency debt
and MBS to run off over time. If so, they could include paragraph 4 of Alternative A
in the statement.
A statement like Alternative A—with or without paragraph 4—would come as a
surprise to financial market participants, who appear to anticipate only minor
updating of the language. Short- and intermediate-term interest rates would fall as
investors lengthened the horizon over which they expect the federal funds rate to
remain at exceptionally low levels. However, any potential decline in longer-term
yields might be offset by an increase in inflation compensation if the Committee’s
statement undermined investors’ confidence in a timely exit from the period of
exceptionally accommodative monetary policy.  Equity prices would probably rise,
while the foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely fall.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 48 of 59
DEBT,  BANK  CREDIT,  AND  MONEY  FORECASTS
The staff projects that domestic nonfinancial sector debt will expand at an annual
rate of about 6¾ percent in the second quarter of 2010, reflecting rapid growth in
government debt and a modest expansion in private-sector debt. Over 2010 and
of about 5½ percent; federal government debt is projected to increase at a substantial
pace over this period—though more slowly than in the current quarter—but
household and business borrowing is expected to be modest.  Household debt is
projected to edge up in the second quarter of 2010 and expand only slowly thereafter,
with house prices remaining about flat and households deleveraging.  Standards on
bank lending are projected to ease only gradually, and loan charge-off rates, which
subtract directly from reported loan growth, are likely to remain elevated for some
time. The debt of nonfinancial businesses is expected to grow modestly in the current
quarter and throughout the forecast period, despite a projected increase in investment
outlays, as large cash balances and solid profits limit firms’ needs for external funds.
Although federal government debt is projected to expand rapidly through 2010 and
fiscal pressures limiting spending on new capital projects.
Commercial bank credit is expected to contract at an annual rate of about
whole. Declines in most categories of lending for 2010 are expected to be only
partially offset by increases in securities holdings.  C&I loans are projected to contract
through the third quarter of 2010, reflecting tight lending standards that have only
begun to ease slightly and subdued demand for bank loans from nonfinancial firms.
Real estate loans are expected to decline throughout 2010 due to weak fundamentals,
tight lending standards, and rising delinquency and charge-off rates for commercial
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 49 of 59
real estate loans, as well as continued strains in residential housing markets.
Consumer loans are projected to run off through the second quarter, but then rise
over the remainder of the forecast period, buoyed by robust spending on consumer
durables. Total bank loans are expected to resume growth by the fourth quarter of
this year, and commercial bank credit is projected to expand at about a 4½ percent
annual rate in 2011.
The staff anticipates that M2 growth will gradually rise from near zero in the
current quarter to roughly 4¼ percent at an annual rate by 2011.  Throughout the
forecast period, M2 is projected to expand at a slower pace than nominal GDP as the
safe-haven flows generated by the financial crisis unwind, and as the opportunity cost
of holding M2 assets rises along with short term interest rates in 2011.  Liquid
deposits are expected to expand rapidly in both 2010 and 2011.  However, some of
this increase will likely reflect a reallocation from other M2 assets, including small time
deposits and retail money market mutual funds.  Both of these components of M2 are
expected to continue to decline through 2011, though the pace of that decline should
moderate. Currency is also predicted to slow from its robust 2009 pace as
precautionary holdings continue to unwind.
The staff projects that the monetary base will expand, on net, into the third
quarter of this year as the last of the LSAP purchases settle.  Over that period,
however, monthly growth rates of the base are expected to be volatile due to the
effects on reserve balances of swings in the Treasury’s account at the Federal Reserve.
The monetary base is projected to contract over the remainder of the forecast period,
as securities in the SOMA portfolio mature or are prepaid.  The contraction in reserve
balances over the projection period swamps the moderate increase expected for
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 50 of 59
Growth Rates for M2 and Monetary Base 

(percent, annual rate)
M2 Monetary Base 
Growth* Growth**
*Seasonally adjusted. Forecasts are consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook 
forecast.
**Seasonally adjusted, break adjusted. Forecasts are consistent with Greenbook baseline scenario in 
which the Federal Reserve reduces the size of its balance sheet only gradually over time by not investing 
the proceeds of maturing securities or prepayments on agency mortgage‐backed securities.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 51 of 59
Draft language for an April directive corresponding to each of the alternatives
follows the March directive shown on the next page.  In each case, the April directive
drops the sentence that instructs the Desk to complete the execution of purchases of
agency debt and MBS but retains the authorization to engage in dollar roll
transactions to facilitate the settlement of transactions.  The directive for Alternative
A directs the Desk to not reinvest the proceeds of maturing agency debt and
payments on agency MBS. With no instruction to the contrary, the Desk would
continue the standing practice of rolling over maturing Treasury securities.  The
directive for Alternative C directs the Desk to not reinvest the proceeds of maturing
Treasury and agency debt as well as payments on MBS.  Alternative C does not direct
the Desk to begin asset sales during the intermeeting period, so the directive for
Alternative C does not mention asset sales. The directive for Alterative B offers the
option of directing the Desk to not reinvest the proceeds of agency debt and MBS, or
to not reinvest the proceeds of Treasury as well as agency securities.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 52 of 59
MARCH  2010  FOMC  DIRECTIVE
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further
its long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to complete the execution of its purchases of about $1.25 trillion of agency MBS
and of about $175 billion in housing-related agency debt by the end of March.  The
Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to
facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.  The System
Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed
of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the
attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 53 of 59
APRIL  2010  FOMC  DIRECTIVE  —  ALTERNATIVE  A
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further
its long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the
Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions. [To gradually reduce the size of the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and return it to a more normal composition
over time, the Committee directs the Desk to not reinvest the proceeds of
maturing agency debt and payments on mortgage-backed securities held by
the System Open Market Account.]  The System Open Market Account Manager
and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments
regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the
Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 54 of 59
APRIL  2010  FOMC  DIRECTIVE  —  ALTERNATIVE  B
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further
its long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the
Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions. [To gradually reduce the size of the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and return it to a more normal composition
over time, the Committee directs the Desk to not reinvest the proceeds of
maturing agency debt and payments on mortgage-backed securities held by
the System Open Market Account.  OR  To gradually reduce the size of the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over time, the Committee directs the Desk to
not reinvest the proceeds of maturing Treasury and agency debt and payments
on mortgage-backed securities held by the System Open Market Account.]
The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the
Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet
that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 55 of 59
APRIL  2010  FOMC  DIRECTIVE  —  ALTERNATIVE  C
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further
its long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the
Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions. To gradually reduce the size of the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over time, the Committee directs the Desk to
not reinvest the proceeds of maturing Treasury and agency debt and payments
on mortgage-backed securities held by the System Open Market Account.  The
System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee
informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could
affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
Measure Description
Single-
equation
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and its 
lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.
Small 
Structural
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for six variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, the real 
bond yield, and the real federal funds rate.
EDO 
Model
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using EDO—an estimated dynamic-stochastic­
general-equilibrium (DSGE) model of the U.S. economy—depend on data for major 
spending categories, price and wages, and the federal funds rate as well as the model’s 
structure and estimate of the output gap.
FRB/US 
Model
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.
Greenbook-
consistent
Two measures are presented—based on the FRB/US and the EDO models.  Both models 
are matched to the extended Greenbook forecast.  Model simulations determine the value of 
the real federal funds rate that closes the output gap conditional on the extended baseline.
TIPS-based 
Factor 
Model
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’ expectations of 
the future path of real interest rates.  The TIPS-based measure of the equilibrium real rate is 
constructed using the seven-year-ahead instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS 
yields as of the Bluebook publication date.  This forward rate is adjusted to remove 
estimates of the term and liquidity premiums based on a three-factor arbitrage-free term-
structure model applied to TIPS yields, nominal yields, and inflation.
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 56 of 59
APPENDIX  A:   MEASURES  OF  THE  EQUILIBRIUM  REAL  RATE
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to 
return output to its potential level over time. The short-run equilibrium rate is defined as the rate 
that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the corresponding model’s projection of 
the economy.  The medium-run concept is the value of the real federal funds rate projected to keep 
output at potential in seven years, under the assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual 
and potential output into line in the short run and then keeps them equal thereafter.  The TIPS-
based factor model measure provides an estimate of market expectations for the real federal funds 
rate seven years ahead.
The actual real federal funds rate is constructed as the difference between the nominal rate and 
realized inflation, where the nominal rate is measured as the quarterly average of the observed 
federal funds rate, and realized inflation is given by the log difference between the core PCE price 
index and its lagged value four quarters earlier. If the upcoming FOMC meeting falls early in the 
quarter, the lagged inflation measure ends in the last quarter.  For the current quarter, the nominal 
rate is specified as the target federal funds rate on the Bluebook publication date.
Proxy used for 
expected inflation
Actual real 
federal funds
rate 
(current value)
Greenbook‐consistent 
FRB/US‐based measure of 
the equilibrium real funds
rate (current value)
Average actual 
real funds rate 
(twelve‐quarter
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 57 of 59
Estimates of the real federal funds rate depend on the proxies for expected inflation used.  The table 
below shows estimated real federal funds rates based on lagged core PCE inflation, the definition 
used in the Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate chart; lagged four-quarter headline PCE inflation; 
and projected four-quarter headline PCE inflation beginning with the next quarter.  For each 
estimate of the real rate, the table also provides the Greenbook-consistent FRB/US-based measure 
of the short-run equilibrium real rate and the average actual real federal funds rate over the next 
twelve quarters.
= 2 + πt + 0.5(πt – *π ) + 0.5( *t ty y− )
= 2 + πt + 0.5(πt – *π ) + ( *t ty y− )
April 22, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 58 of 59
