Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Content last modified 01/29/2016.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
JANUARY 21, 2010
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Financial market conditions remained supportive of economic growth over the
intermeeting period.  Corporate bond spreads fell substantially and broad equity
indexes edged higher, on net.  Yields on longer-dated Treasury securities were about
unchanged and market-based measures of near-term inflation compensation rose
modestly.  The dollar rose against most other major currencies.  The expected path of
monetary policy moved lower over the period, reportedly as a result of Federal
Reserve communications that were read as suggesting that policy would be
accommodative for somewhat longer than previously expected.  Markets exhibited
few, if any, signs of strain in connection with the pending expiration of several
extraordinary Federal Reserve lending facilities in early February and the ongoing
tapering of purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities and agency debt.
Consistent with the stability and improved liquidity observed in funding markets over
recent months, borrowing from Federal Reserve facilities declined further over the
The level of private-sector debt contracted in the fourth quarter as a result of
continued declines in the debt of households and businesses.  However, federal
borrowing remained robust, supporting a modest expansion in total domestic
nonfinancial sector debt.  Banks largely stopped tightening lending standards outside
of the commercial real estate sector, but modest net fractions continued to tighten
terms.  Commercial bank loans declined in December as standards and terms
remained tight and loan demand weakened further.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 1 of 72
MONETARY POLICY EXPECTATIONS AND TREASURY YIELDS
The FOMC’s decision to keep the target range for the federal funds rate
unchanged at the December meeting and its retention of the “extended period”
language in the statement were widely anticipated and elicited little reaction in
markets.  However, market participants apparently viewed statements by some
Federal Reserve officials over the intermeeting period and the minutes of the
December meeting as suggesting policy would likely be accommodative for somewhat
longer than they had been expecting.  Investors were reportedly surprised by the
statement in the minutes that a few members of the Committee “observed that it
might become desirable at some point in the future to provide more policy stimulus
by expanding the planned scale of the Committee’s large-scale asset purchases” and
by the indication that only one member saw improvements in financial markets and
the economic outlook as potentially warranting asset sales.  Incoming economic data
were, on balance, in line with market expectations and had little net impact on implied
policy rates, except for the weaker-than-expected December employment report
which was interpreted by market participants as providing additional support for
continued accommodation.1
Futures quotes combined with the staff’s standard assumption of a one-basis
point-per-month term premium in interbank rates imply that policy expectations
moved modestly lower over the intermeeting period (Chart 1).  Futures rates now
suggest that market participants anticipate that the target federal funds rate will be
increased beginning in the third quarter of 2010 and will reach about 2 percent by the
end of 2011.  The timing of the lift-off is roughly consistent with results from the
January survey of primary dealers.  That survey indicated that about two-thirds of
respondents expect the first rate increase to occur by the end of 2010, in line with
1 The effective federal funds rate averaged 0.11 percent over the intermeeting period, and the 
intraday standard deviation averaged 3.3 basis points.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 72
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
2010 2011
0.0
3.0
Percent
January 21, 2010
December 15, 2009
Central tendencies of the expected federal funds rate
Implied distribution of federal funds rate six 
months ahead
Recent: 1/21/2010
Last FOMC: 12/15/2009
Percent
Note. Derived from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, with term
premium and other adjustments to estimate the distribution of the federal
funds rate.
Source. CME Group.
Distribution of expected quarter of first rate increase
from the Desk’s Dealer Survey
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Recent: 17 respondents
Last FOMC: 16 respondents
2010 2011 2012
Source. Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
7
Percent
10-year
2-year
Nominal Treasury yields
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 21
Next 5 years*
5-to-10 year forward
Inflation compensation
*Adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Note. Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves.
Source. Barclays, PLC., and staff estimates.
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 21
16
Percent
Jan. 
 21
Dec.
FOMC
10-year Treasury implied volatility
Jan. May Sept. Jan. May Sept. Jan. May Sept. Jan.
2007 2008 2009
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 72
what was observed in the December survey.  Staff models suggest that term
premiums were unchanged over the intermeeting period and are about in line with our
standard assumption.
In contrast to the decline in the expected policy path, yields on two-year and ten-
year nominal Treasury securities were about unchanged, on net, amid some notable
volatility.  Yields on five-year TIPS, however, fell somewhat over the intermeeting
period, leaving near-term inflation compensation about 15 basis points higher.  Staff
models indicate that a rise in inflation expectations (which likely owed in part to the
sharp rise in oil prices over the intermeeting period), higher inflation risk premiums,
and improved liquidity conditions in the TIPS market contributed about equally to the
rise in near-term inflation compensation.  Five-year inflation compensation five years
ahead moved down slightly, while survey measures of long-term inflation expectations
were about unchanged.
The Treasury auctioned $202 billion in coupon securities of various maturities
over the intermeeting period.  The auctions were generally well received.  On
December 24, Congress approved an increase in the debt ceiling of $290 billion,
which provides the Treasury with several more months of borrowing capacity.
Market participants reported that the passage of only a relatively small increase in the
debt ceiling resulted in continued market uncertainty about the future of the
Supplementary Financing Program.
CAPITAL MARKETS
Broad equity price indexes rose about 1 percent, on balance, over the intermeeting
period.  Stock prices trended higher over much of the period as incoming data
reportedly confirmed investors’ beliefs that the economy was continuing to recover
(Chart 2).  Analysts’ forecasts of year-ahead earnings were little changed through mid-
January, while option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index continued to decline.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 72
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
2008 2009
 20
Jan. 02, 2008 = 100
S&P 500
Equity prices
Source. Bloomberg.
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 21
S&P 500 earnings per share
Quarterly, s.a.
Source. Thomson Financial.
100
Percent
Implied volatility on S&P 500 (VIX)
Source. Chicago Board Options Exchange.
2009
1750
Basis points Basis points
10-year BBB (left scale)
10-year high-yield (right scale)
Corporate bond spreads
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 21
Jan. May Oct. Mar. Aug. Jan. May Oct.
2007 2008 2009
110
Basis points Percent of par
Bid-ask spread (left scale)
Bid price (right scale)
Source. LSTA/LPC Mark-to-Market Pricing.
Secondary loan market pricing
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 20
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 21
Jan 2, 2009 = 100
Large banks
Regional banks
Bank ETFs
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 21
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 72
However, equity prices retraced most of those gains recently on concerns about
potential downside risks to the global recovery and the Administration’s proposal to
limit the size of financial institutions and restrict their trading activity.  The equity
premium, measured as the staff’s estimate of the expected real return on equities over
the next ten years relative to the real 10-year yield on Treasury securities, was little
changed over the intermeeting period and remained well above levels observed during
the past decade.
Financial sector shares, on the whole, outperformed the broader market during
the period.  Available fourth-quarter earnings reports have generally been in line with
market expectations.  Capital market trading revenues moderated more than expected
and net interest margins declined due to reduced loan levels and higher non-
performing loans; changes in delinquency rates were mixed.  Following Bank of
America’s equity offering in early December, both Wells Fargo and Citigroup issued
shares, and all three used the proceeds to repay TARP capital.  Including these three
repayments, the eight major financial institutions that received initial disbursements of
funds under the TARP in October of 2008 have all now repurchased the preferred
equity shares that they issued to the government.  Late in the period, the
announcement of the Financial Crisis Responsibility Fee and the Administration’s
proposal regarding financial institutions’ size and trading activity pressured financial
shares lower and boosted spreads on their credit default swaps as market participants
assessed the potential impact of these proposals on the affected institutions.2
Yields on both investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds declined over
the intermeeting period, leaving their spreads over Treasury yields lower by about 45
and 65 basis points, respectively.  Spreads on investment-grade corporate bonds have
2 The proposed fee would consist of a 15 basis point levy on total assets less Tier 1 capital 
and FDIC-assessed deposits and would be applied to firms with over $50 billion in total 
consolidated assets that own insured depository institutions and broker-dealers.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 72
moved back to levels last seen in late 2007.  The recent decline appears to owe in part
to continued strong net inflows into taxable bond mutual funds.  On balance, the
credit quality of nonfinancial firms improved slightly in recent months.  Based on data
through the fourth quarter, the pace of downgrades of nonfinancial bonds was about
the same as that of upgrades, although the bonds of a single domestic automaker
accounted for much of the latter.  The year-ahead expected default frequency for
nonfinancial firms from Moody’s KMV fell only slightly in January, but the six-month
trailing corporate bond default rate has dropped sharply and now stands below 1
percent, a level that is comparable to averages over the last decade before the
Overall, net debt financing by nonfinancial businesses was near zero in the fourth
quarter, after having dipped into negative territory in the third quarter (Chart 3).
Adjusting for the normal slowing of issuance around year-end, gross issuance of
investment-grade bonds remained robust in December (and in early January).
However, commercial paper outstanding was little changed and C&I loans continued
to decline sharply.  In contrast, net equity issuance by nonfinancial firms was negative
during the quarter for the first time since 2008, due to a rebound in cash-financed
mergers.  For financial firms, public equity issuance surged in conjunction with the
repayment of TARP capital, while gross bond issuance continued to be somewhat
slower than observed in the third quarter.
Over the intermeeting period, the average interest rate on 30-year conforming
fixed-rate mortgages increased slightly, on net, to 5 percent.  Yields on agency
mortgage-backed securities (MBS) were unchanged, even as net issuance of MBS by
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac dropped sharply in November, partly reflecting seasonal
factors.  The tapering of MBS purchases and the anticipated completion of such
transactions by the end of the first quarter have yet to have a discernable impact on
MBS spreads as purchase amounts continue to outpace mortgage origination.  The
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 72
Chart 3
Credit Market Developments
100
Billions of dollars
2007 2008 2009
Bonds
  C&I loans
  Commercial paper
Q3 O
Monthly rate
Changes in selected components of debt of the
nonfinancial business sector
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov. Jan.
2009
7
Percent
30-year fixed rate mortgage
MBS yield
On-the-run 10-yr Treasury
Dec.
FOMC
Select interest rates
Jan. 
 20
Jan. 
 21
40
Billions of dollars
Credit card
  Auto
  Student loan
H2
Q1
Q2 Q3
Gross ABS issuance
*As of January 15, 2010, there has been no issuance in January.
Note. Auto ABS include car loans and leases and financing for buyers
of motorcycles.
Source. Inside MBS & ABS, Merrill Lynch, Bloomberg, and the Federal
Reserve.
Sept. Dec. Feb. Apr. June Aug. Oct. Dec.
2008 2009
500
Basis points
1-month
3-month
6-month
Dec.
FOMC
Libor over OIS spreads
Source. British Bankers’ Association and Prebon.
Jan. 
 20
July Nov. Mar. July Nov. Mar. July Nov.
2007 2008 2009
700
Basis points
ABCP
A2/P2
Jan. 
 20
Dec.
FOMCDaily
Spreads on 30-day commercial paper
Jan. June Nov. Apr. Oct. Mar. Aug. Jan.
2007 2008 2009
Billions of dollars Billions of dollars
Other facilities*
(left scale)
TALF
(right scale)
Jan. 
 20
Usage of TALF and other lending facilities
* Includes primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; TAF; PDCF; dollar
liquidity swaps; CPFF; and AMLF.
Source. Federal Reserve.
Dec.
FOMC
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 72
Desk’s survey of mortgage market analysts indicates that market participants expect
MBS spreads to rise by an average of 20 to 25 basis points in March and April as
purchases come to an end.  Analysts noted, however, that there was considerable
uncertainty about the possible effects of the end of the purchase program.
On December 24th, the Treasury expanded its capital commitment to Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac to any amount necessary to offset cumulative reductions in net
worth over the next three years.  Market participants generally welcomed the news,
although it elicited little immediate price reaction.  Analysts suggested that the
announcement failed to resolve long-run uncertainty surrounding the status of these
government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) and, partly as a consequence, they remain
unsure whether the commitment will encourage the return of investors who have
reduced their holdings of agency debt and MBS.  Additionally, at year-end the
Treasury allowed its unused GSE Credit Facility as well as its MBS purchase program
to expire.
Revolving and nonrevolving consumer credit continued to contract in November
and delinquency rates on consumer loans remained high.  Credit card interest-rate
spreads continued to widen, likely reflecting several factors, including lenders’
preparations for the implementation of the CARD Act next month, regulatory and
accounting changes which increase the cost of funds, and the continued high rate of
charge-offs.  In contrast, spreads of rates on new auto loans over those on
comparable-maturity Treasuries dropped further in December as captive finance
companies offered lower rates to spur sales.  Consumer ABS issuance was about flat
in December, although credit card issuance picked up relative to previous months
following the FDIC’s announcement of a temporary extension of safe harbor rules
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 72
regarding its handling of securitized assets should a sponsoring bank be taken into
MARKET FUNCTIONING AND FEDERAL RESERVE PROGRAMS
Conditions in short-term funding markets remained stable over the intermeeting
period.  Year-end pressures were generally modest amid ample liquidity.  One- and
three-month Libor-OIS spreads remained low while six-month spreads edged down
somewhat further.  Spreads of rates on A2/P2-rated commercial paper and AA-rated
ABCP over the AA nonfinancial rate were also little changed.  Demand for Treasury
bills in the cash and repo markets was strong around year-end.  Elevated demand
persisted in subsequent weeks amid the seasonal decline in bills outstanding and the
reduction in the Supplementary Financing Program, resulting in continued downward
pressure on both bill yields and short-term Treasury repo rates.  No signs of stress in
short-term funding markets were visible in association with the impending expiration
of several extraordinary Federal Reserve lending facilities on February 1.4  Indicators
of functioning in other markets were largely unchanged.5  Consistent with these
developments, borrowing from Federal Reserve facilities declined further over the
3 The box entitled “The Effects of FAS 166 and FAS 167 on Commercial Banks” on pages 
10-11 of the December 10, 2009, Bluebook provides additional information.
4 The facilities set to expire are the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual 
Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Primary Dealer Credit 
Facility, and the Term Securities Lending Facility.  In addition, the temporary liquidity swap 
arrangements with foreign central banks are expected to expire on February 1.
5 Market participants continue to evaluate the potential impact of the Financial Crisis 
Responsibility Fee on market functioning.  Leverage created through the use of repurchase 
agreements would not be exempt from the fee under the announced structure, leading 
some market participants to suggest that imposition of the fee could raise the cost of 
financing and put modest pressure on short-term interest rates.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 72
Two TALF operations settled during the intermeeting period: a CMBS operation
for $1.3 billion in mid-December and an ABS operation for $1.1 billion in early
January.  (See box entitled “Balance Sheet Developments during the Intermeeting
Period.”)  The January TALF operation supported the issuance of only one ABS,
likely because of the proximity of the holiday season.  Preliminary indications suggest
that the February and March ABS subscriptions are likely to be substantial as market
participants seek to take advantage of the TALF program before its expiration.
The Federal Reserve proposed amendments to Regulation D in late December
that would enable the establishment of a term deposit facility.  Under the proposal,
Federal Reserve Banks would offer interest-bearing term deposits to eligible
institutions through an auction mechanism.  The news was generally well received by
markets and elicited little price response.
FOREIGN MARKET DEVELOPMENTS
Over the intermeeting period, benchmark sovereign yields in the advanced foreign
economies displayed some volatility but ended little changed on net (Chart 4).  Global
sovereign bond offerings have been reasonably well received since the start of the
year, although mounting fiscal concerns have made investors more reluctant to hold
debt issued by the Greek government.  As a result, the spread between 10-year Greek
and German sovereign yields has increased 60 basis points to almost 3 percentage
points.  Investors have also displayed increasing concern about fiscal problems in
Spain and Portugal, though spreads over German debt for these countries are closer
to 1 percentage point.
The European Central Bank (ECB), the Bank of England (BOE), the Bank of
Japan (BOJ), and the Bank of Canada (BOC) held their policy rates constant over the
period.  The BOE kept the size of its asset purchase facility at £200 billion and
announced that it expected to reach this limit by the end of this month.  The
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 72
Balance Sheet Developments during the Intermeeting Period
The Federal Reserve’s total assets edged up to about $2.3 trillion over the 
intermeeting period.1  As a result of ongoing asset purchases, securities held 
outright increased by $78 billion, which more than offset the $61 billion net decline 
in lending through liquidity and credit facilities.
The Open Market Desk purchased $5 billion in agency debt securities and $74 
billion in agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) during the intermeeting period.2 
In contrast, most of the System’s liquidity and credit programs contracted further.  
Consistent with the continued improvement in short-term funding markets over 
recent months, term auction credit declined $47 billion, foreign central bank 
liquidity swaps declined $13 billion, and primary credit declined $4 billion.  Net 
portfolio holdings of Commercial Paper Funding Facility LLC (CPFF) declined $1 
billion to $13 billion, of which $8 billion is commercial paper.3  Lending under the 
Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) and under the Asset-Backed Commercial 
Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (AMLF) remained at zero 
during the intermeeting period.  Securities lent through the Term Securities 
Lending Facility (TSLF) also remained at zero.4  The final scheduled Schedule 2 
TSLF operation was held on January 7, 2010; it garnered no participation.  As 
previously announced, the final day for operations under the foreign central bank 
liquidity swaps, the CPFF, the PDCF, and the AMLF is expected to be February 1, 
2010.  Credit extended through these liquidity facilities now stands at about $9 
billion.
Lending through the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 
edged up $1 billion over the period.  Two TALF operations settled during the 
intermeeting period.  About $1.3 billion in loans backed by commercial mortgage-
backed securities (CMBS) were extended in December, and about $1.1 billion in 
loans against non-mortgage asset-backed securities (ABS) were extended in January.  
This increase in lending was offset by about $1.4 billion in loan prepayments.  The 
January CMBS subscription, which took place on January 20, saw $1.5 billion in 
loan requests backed by legacy CMBS; these loans will settle on January 28.
1 These data are through January 20, 2010. 
2 The figures for securities holdings reflect only trades that have settled.  Over the intermeeting period, the
Open Market Desk committed to purchase, but has not settled, an additional $79 billion of MBS, on net. 
3 The remaining assets of CPFF LLC are investments of the fees paid by issuers that have sold commercial
paper to the facility. 
4 Securities lent through TSLF do not affect the level of Federal Reserve assets because the Federal Reserve
retains ownership of the securities lent.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 72
On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, the U.S. Treasury’s 
general account increased $127 billion, while the Treasury’s supplementary 
financing account (SFA) decreased $10 billion.  The Treasury reduced the level of 
the SFA to $5 billion to allow greater flexibility in debt management as it 
approached the debt ceiling last year.  Reserve balances of depository institutions 
decreased $74 billion over the intermeeting period.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 72
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet 
Billions of dollars
Change 
since last 
FOMC
Current 
(1/20/2010)
Maximum 
level
Date of 
maximum
Total assets 18 2,255 2,295 01/13/10
Selected assets: 
Liquidity programs for financial firms -64 56 1,247 11/06/08
/08 
/09
/08 
/08
/08 
/09
/09
/09 
/09
/08
/08 
/10
/07
/10 
/10 
/08
/09
/09 
/09
/08 
/09
09
Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (AMLF) 0 
Lending through other credit facilities -0
Net portfolio holdings of Commercial Paper 
Funding Facility LLC (CPFF) -1
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 1 
Support for specific institutions 3
Credit extended to AIG, net 3 
Preferred interests in AIA Aurora LLC and ALICO
Holdings LLC +0 
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, Maiden
Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC -0 
Securities held outright* 78 1
U.S. Treasury securities +0 
Agency securities 5 
Agency mortgage-backed securities** 74
Memo: Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) 0 
Total liabilities 19 2
25 25 01/20
0 236 10/01
,203 2,243 01/13/
Selected liabilities: 
Federal Reserve notes in circulation -3 
Reserve balances of depository institutions -74 1
U.S. Treasury, general account 127 
U.S. Treasury, supplementary financing account -10 
Other deposits -27
Total capital -1 
+0 (-0) denotes positive (negative) value rounded to zero.
*   Par value. 
** Includes only mortgage-backed security purchases that have already settled.  Over the intermeeting period, the O
Market Desk committed to purchase an additional $79 billion of MBS, on net.  Total MBS purchases are about 
$1,149 billion.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 72
Chart 4
International Financial Indicators
110Broad
Major currencies
Other important trading partners
Nominal trade-weighted dollar indexes
Dec. 31, 2006 = 100
Source. Federal Reserve.
Dec.
FOMC
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Nominal 10-year government bond yields
Percent Percent
Source. Bloomberg.
Dec.
FOMC
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock price indexes
Industrial countries
Dec. 31, 2006 = 100
Source. Bloomberg.
Dec.
FOMC
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock price indexes
Emerging market economies
Dec. 31, 2006 = 100
Source. Bloomberg.
Dec.
FOMC
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 72
announcement was widely expected, and gilt yields moved little in response.  Market
participants continue to expect that the BOE and the BOC will raise rates in the
second half of this year, while they expect the ECB will raise rates early in 2011 and
that the BOJ will keep its policy rate at its current low level for at least two more
Foreign equity prices ended the intermeeting period mixed.  Although stock price
changes in most countries remained in positive territory for much of the period, news
that the People’s Bank of China had moved in the direction of tighter monetary policy
caused a correction in many stock markets.  European financial stocks declined about
4 percent, as early profit reports for the fourth quarter from a few banks rekindled
some concern as to the health of the banking system.
The broad nominal index of the dollar rose almost 1 percent.  The dollar
appreciated 1 percent against the yen and over 3 percent against the euro, seemingly
driven by a growing realization that U.S. growth prospects appear considerably better
than those in Europe and Japan.  Concerns regarding the risks that policy tightening
by China might pose for the global recovery also seemed to drive the dollar higher
against many currencies late in the period.
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY
The level of private-sector debt appears to have fallen in the fourth quarter as a
result of further declines in both household and nonfinancial business debt (Chart 5).
Federal government debt expanded significantly, albeit a bit less than in previous
quarters, while state and local government debt continued to expand at a moderate
pace.  All told, the growth rate of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to
have declined from an annual rate of 2¾ percent in the third quarter to 2 percent in
the fourth quarter.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 72
Chart 5
Debt and Money
Growth of debt of nonfinancial sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
H1
H2
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4 p
Total_____
8.7
5.9
4.4
7.2
Business__________
13.4
5.1
7.1
3.1
Household__________
6.6
0.2
1.7
Government__________
6.1
17.5
5.6
Source. Flow of Funds.
p Projected.
Growth of debt of household sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
credit
Home
mortgage
Source. Flow of Funds, Federal Reserve G.19 release.
Jan May Sep Jan May Sep Jan May Sep
2007 2008 2009
Bank loans
Jan. 2008 = 100
Monthly average
Source. Federal Reserve.
Aggregated supply
Aggregated demand
NBER
peak
Index of supply and demand for bank loans
Source. Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.
Credit card lines
Home equity lines of credit
Other*
NBER
peak
Growth in unused commitments
Quarterly, n.s.a.a.r
Source. Call Report data, adjusted for the effects of merger and failure
activity involving large thrift institutions.
*Total unused commitments excluding home equity and credit cards.
Growth of M2
p Preliminary.
Source. Federal Reserve.
2007 H1 H2 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
2008 2009
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 72
6 Staff recently revised measures of the money stock and its components to incorporate 
updated seasonal factors and a new quarterly benchmark.  The net effect of the inclusion of 
updated seasonal factors and the benchmark was to lower the growth rate of M2 by about 
½ percentage point in the first half of 2009 and increase the growth rate by roughly 1 
percentage point in the second half of 2009.
Bank credit contracted at a somewhat slower pace in December than earlier in the
fall.  However, the moderation was due to increased growth in banks’ Treasury and
agency securities holdings; total loans contracted more steeply than in November.
C&I loans plummeted at large domestic banks and foreign banks, while the
contraction at other domestic banks was milder.  Banks’ holdings of closed-end
residential mortgages edged up again in December, but home equity loans continued
to run off.  Consumer loans originated by banks continued to fall in December,
reflecting ongoing weakness in credit card loans.  According to the January Senior
Loan Officer Opinion Survey, banks left standards on most categories of loans to
businesses and households little changed during the fourth quarter, while small net
fractions of banks tightened terms on most major loan types.  The exception was
commercial real estate loans, where standards and terms continued to be tightened by
a significant fraction of respondents.  The demand for loans generally weakened
further.  (See box entitled “Interpretation of the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion
Survey.”)  The drop in bank credit in December more than offset a further increase in
cash and equivalent assets (a category that includes reserve balances), and total bank
assets continued to trend lower.
M2 expanded at a 2 percent annual rate in December, a slight deceleration from
its relatively modest growth earlier in the fourth quarter.6  Growth in liquid deposits
remained robust, but small time deposits and retail money market mutual funds
continued to run off.  Currency grew at an annualized rate of around ½ percent in
December, with the modest pace of expansion likely a result of continued moderation
of demands for U.S. currency from abroad.  The monetary base was roughly flat in
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 72
Interpretation of the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey
The January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey (SLOOS) suggests that the 
prolonged bout of tightening of credit standards at U.S. commercial banks came to 
an end in the fourth quarter of last year for most types of loans.  As shown in the 
panel below, the staff’s composite index of the change in credit standards on all 
major categories of loans to both businesses and households fell to about zero in 
the latest survey, indicating that banks left their credit standards essentially 
unchanged, on net, in the fourth quarter. Credit conditions, however, remain very 
tight, given banks’ pronounced moves 
over the past two years toward much
more stringent lending standards and
terms.
The staff has developed a number 
of statistical models that allow one to 
estimate the unanticipated changes in 
banks’ lending standards over time. In 
essence, these models attempt to 
remove from the change in standards 
reported in the SLOOS the effects on 
standards of changes in loan demand, 
the economic outlook, and other 
variables likely to play an important 
role in the determination of banks’ 
credit policies.  One model used to make such adjustments is a small-scale vector 
autoregression (VAR) that includes real GDP growth, inflation, the growth of 
banks’ core lending capacity (defined as the sum of core loans outstanding and 
unused core loan commitments), a corporate bond credit spread index, the federal 
funds rate, and the change in aggregate credit standards.  This simple model 
incorporates the effects on aggregate credit standards of only a small set of 
macroeconomic variables and cannot incorporate bank-specific factors that may 
also influence changes in banks’ credit policies. An alternative model developed by 
the staff explains bank-level indexes of the change in credit standards using 
indicators of bank-specific conditions as well as changes in expected 
macroeconomic conditions from the Survey of Professional Forecasters.1
1 Among bank-specific explanatory variables are profitability indicators such as the bank’s net interest margin
and the parent bank holding company’s realized return on equity; indicators of credit quality and capital 
adequacy such as delinquency rates and leverage ratios; and indicators that capture differences in the
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 72
The solid red line in the panel below depicts the unanticipated changes in credit 
standards implied by the bank-level model, whereas the dotted blue line shows the 
unanticipated changes in standards based on the small-scale VAR model.  Negative 
indicate an easing of the banks’ credit standards not caused by the other variables 
in the model; positive values, conversely, represent a tightening of credit standards 
independent of the effects of the other variables. Both estimates are subject to 
considerable coefficient and model uncertainty; in addition, each of the empirical 
approaches faces significant challenges in identifying exogenous moves in credit 
standards and probably fails to account fully for the effects on bank lending
standards of the various traditional and nontraditional policy actions taken by the 
Federal Reserve and the federal 
government to mitigate the effects 
of the recent crisis.
Subject to these caveats, both 
models indicate that credit standards 
eased in the fourth quarter relative 
to the changes in standards the 
models would project based on the 
explanatory variables.  In absolute 
terms, this unanticipated easing of 
standards was considerably smaller 
when estimated using the bank-level 
model than when estimated using 
the VAR model. In both models, this relative easing of credit standards—in the 
absence of other shocks—provides an impetus to growth in banks’ core lending 
capacity and economic activity over the coming year.
composition of assets and liabilities across banks.  In addition, the model includes the realized equity 
volatility of the parent bank holding company to control for difference in riskiness across banks; a bank-
specific index of the change in loan demand as reported in the SLOOS; and bank fixed effects, which 
capture any (time-invariant) unobservable differences among the respondent banks. Because banks’ changes 
in credit standards tend to be fairly persistent, the model also includes a lag of the dependent variable.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 72
December as the effect on reserves of gradually diminishing purchases under the
Federal Reserve’s large-scale asset purchase programs was mostly offset by a further
contraction in credit outstanding under liquidity and credit facilities and an increase in
the U.S. Treasury’s general account.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 72
7 Purchases
projected
of $1.25 trillion of agency MBS and about $175 billion of agency debt are 
to be completed by the end of the first quarter of 2010.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 72
ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
On balance, the staff forecast has changed little from that presented in the
December Greenbook.  The incoming information on final sales was about as
expected, on net, with stronger readings on business equipment outlays offsetting
somewhat weaker federal purchases, net exports, and housing activity.  A smaller-
than-expected inventory reduction appears to have provided a temporary boost to real
GDP growth last quarter that is expected to be substantially reversed in this and the
next few quarters.  The information received since December on wages and prices
also was in line with the staff expectations.  Accordingly, the staff outlook for real
activity this year and next is only a bit stronger and the projection for inflation is
about unchanged.
As in the December Greenbook, the staff assumes that the target for the federal
funds rate will remain unchanged until the last quarter of 2011.  No significant
changes have been made to the assumptions regarding the magnitude or timing of the
Federal Reserve’s LSAP programs.7  Fiscal policy is expected to add about 1
percentage point to real GDP growth in 2010 but to exert a slight drag on growth in
2011, the same as in the December Greenbook.  House prices are projected to decline
somewhat further this year as foreclosures increase, and then rise a bit in 2011 as
demand picks up more notably.
Interest rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages and longer-term Treasury securities
are projected to rise through 2011, with the spread between them widening about 25
basis points as the Federal Reserve completes its purchases of agency MBS.  By
contrast, yields on investment-grade corporate bonds are expected to remain about
flat this year and to increase less than Treasury yields next year, as risk spreads narrow
somewhat further against a backdrop of continued improvements in the economic
outlook.  With the equity risk premium also expected to narrow, stock prices are
projected to rise at an annual rate of around 15 percent over the next two years.  Bank
lending conditions are anticipated to ease gradually over time but to remain tighter
than their average over the past decade.  The real foreign exchange value of the dollar
is assumed to depreciate at about a 2¾ percent pace, on average, over 2010 and 2011.
The spot price of West Texas intermediate crude oil currently stands at about $76 per
barrel, and based on readings from futures markets, the staff projects it to rise to
about $84 per barrel by late 2011; relative to the December Greenbook assumption,
these prices are about $3 per barrel higher in the near term and $2 per barrel lower in
the longer run.
Against this backdrop, the staff expects real GDP to grow about 3½ percent in
2010 and about 4¾ percent in 2011.  Following a trajectory similar to that in the last
Greenbook, the unemployment rate is projected to rise a notch to 10.1 percent this
quarter and then decline gradually to about 9½ percent at the end of 2010 and 8¼
percent at the end of 2011, well above the staff’s 5¼ percent estimate of the NAIRU
over this period.8  With inflation expectations stable and economic slack forecast to
remain substantial, the staff projects core PCE inflation to slow from 1½ percent in
2009 to about 1¼ percent in 2010 and to edge down to just above 1 percent in 2011.
Total PCE inflation has been running at around 2½ percent in recent quarters,
boosted by higher oil prices, but is expected to moderate to just under 1½ percent in
2010 and then decline a bit further next year.
Looking further ahead, the staff assumes that the federal funds rate will rise
steadily starting in the fourth quarter of 2011, climbing to 3¾ percent by late 2014.
8 As noted in the Greenbook, the “effective” NAIRU is, at about 6¼ percent, appreciably 
higher because of the effects of extended and emergency unemployment benefits on the 
measured unemployment rate.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 72
The staff forecasts that real GDP will expand 4½ percent in 2012 before decelerating
to 3¼ percent in 2014.  Potential output is forecast to rise at an average pace of about
2½ percent per year from 2012 through 2014, and so with real GDP growth
outstripping that of potential, the unemployment rate falls to about 5¼ percent in
2014, about in line with the staff’s estimate of the NAIRU.  Longer-term inflation
expectations remain stable and, as the output gap steadily closes, total PCE inflation
slowly rises to about 1¾ percent by 2014, still somewhat below the central tendency
of policymakers’ long-run projections for inflation.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 72
MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES
Chart 6 displays estimates of short-run r*, defined as the real federal funds rate
that, if maintained over time, would return output to potential in twelve quarters.  The
Greenbook-consistent short-run r* estimate generated by the FRB/US model is -1.5
percent, 40 basis points higher than its value in December.  Nevertheless, this
estimate remains about 20 basis points below the actual real federal funds rate.  The
Greenbook-consistent r* estimate associated with the EDO model has increased by a
larger amount (100 basis points), but, at -2.3 percent, remains even further below the
actual real funds rate.
Two factors account for the increases in the Greenbook-consistent r* estimates.
The first is the upward revision to the staff’s assessment of the recent level of
economic activity, which reduces the size of the output gap that needs to be closed in
the subsequent twelve quarters.  As can be seen by comparing the first two columns
in the table in Chart 6, the slightly narrower output gap produces only a small increase
in the FRB/US model’s Greenbook-consistent r* estimate, but is responsible for a 25
basis point increase in the EDO model’s Greenbook-consistent r* estimate.9  The
second reason for the increase in the r* estimates is the one-quarter shift of the time
window used in the calculations.  The twelve-quarter window now begins in 2010Q1;
the twelve-quarter horizon in the December Bluebook began in 2009Q4.  Less policy
stimulus is now required because the output gap that needs to be closed at the end of
the current window is smaller than the output gap at the end of the window that
began in the fourth quarter of 2009.  As examination of the middle and final columns
9 The second column in the table, “Current Estimate as of Previous Bluebook,” gives the 
estimate of r* in the current quarter that would be obtained using the December Bluebook 
assumptions regarding the current quarter.  This new column helps indicate the degree of 
the movement in r* that is due to changed assessments of current economic activity.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 72
Chart 6
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
8
Percent
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
The actual real funds rate based on lagged core inflation
Range of model-based estimates
70 Percent confidence interval
90 Percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure (FRB/US)
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Current Current Estimate Previous
Estimate as of Previous Bluebook Estimate
Short-Run Measures
Single-equation model -1.2 -1.5 -1.9
Small structural model -1.1 -1.3 -1.4
EDO model (0.6 (0.8 (0.5
FRB/US model -1.8 -1.9 -2.1
Confidence intervals for four model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval -2.6 to 0.9
90 percent confidence interval -3.5 to 1.9
Greenbook-consistent measures
EDO model -2.3 -2.5 -3.3
Single-equation model (1.2 (1.2 (1.2
Small structural model (1.9 (1.7 (1.8
Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval (0.6 to 2.5
90 percent confidence interval -0.3 to 3.0
TIPS-based factor model (2.0  2.0
    
Memo
Actual real federal funds rate -1.3  -1.4
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 72
of the table shows, the rolling forward of the window accounts for the bulk of the rise
in the Greenbook-consistent r* estimates.
The Greenbook-consistent r* estimate from the EDO model has increased more
than the corresponding Greenbook-consistent estimate from FRB/US because
aggregate demand is effectively less sensitive to changes in the real funds rate than it is
in the FRB/US model.  (See the box, “The Equilibrium Real Rate (r*):  Concepts,
Measurement, and Policy Implications,” for further details.)  As a result, when the
output gap that needs to be closed becomes narrower, there is a larger decline in the
required policy stimulus in the EDO model than in FRB/US.
The remaining four r* estimates shown in Chart 6 do not condition on the staff
outlook.  All of these estimates of r* have increased, primarily because of the shift in
the twelve-quarter window for the r* calculation, and to a lesser extent because of the
higher assessment of current economic activity.  The r* estimates generated using the
small structural model and the FRB/US model are both about 30 basis points higher
than in December, and the single-equation model’s r* estimate is about 70 basis points
higher.  All three of these estimates are near or below the current level of the real
funds rate of about -1.3 percent.  By contrast, the EDO model’s estimate of r*, at
about 60 basis points, is well above the actual real rate, reflecting that model’s
projection of a robust recovery combined with its assessment that there is less slack at
present than the staff estimates.
Chart 7 shows the results of optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model.
These simulations use the extended staff baseline projection, which incorporates the
liquidity and credit actions of the Federal Reserve, as a starting point.  Policymakers
are assumed to place equal weight on keeping core PCE inflation close to a 2 percent
inflation goal, on keeping unemployment close to the NAIRU (adjusted for the
temporary effects of emergency and extended unemployment benefits on the
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 72
The Equilibrium Real Rate (r*):  Concepts, Measurement, and Policy 
Implications
The Board staff produces several estimates of the equilibrium real federal funds 
rate, r*, for each Bluebook.  Short-run r* is defined as the value of the real funds 
rate that, if sustained, would be projected to close the output gap twelve quarters in 
the future.  Short-run r* estimates can be interpreted as a summary measure of the 
factors affecting aggregate demand, relative to aggregate supply, over that twelve-
quarter period.  In any particular model, the greater the amount of slack, the lower 
the real funds rate required to close the output gap.
It is important to note that estimates of r* are not prescriptions for the 
appropriate setting of the funds rate.  The calculation of r* does not involve any 
consideration of the path of inflation, and hence it does not incorporate potentially 
important monetary policy tradeoffs.  In addition, the r* measure is based on a 
criterion of closing the output gap at a given horizon, and consequently takes no 
account of the path of the output gap before and after that horizon.  Finally, r* is 
associated with a policy that fixes the value of the real funds rate for the coming 
twelve quarters.  Therefore, this concept does not recognize how the trajectories 
for output and inflation might be improved via policy adjustments over time.
Different models produce different estimates of r*, even when conditioning on 
the same outlook, because they differ with regard to the estimated dynamics of the 
economy.  In the Bluebook, short-run r* values are reported based on a single-
equation model, a small structural model, the FRB/US model, and the EDO 
model.  The FRB/US and EDO models are each used to compute two estimates of 
r*, one conditioned on the staff’s extended Greenbook projection and the other 
based on the models’ own projections.
The two Greenbook-consistent estimates of r* reported in the Bluebook take as 
given the staff outlook and assessment of the current degree of slack.  The 
estimates vary because the FRB/US and EDO models do not generate identical 
responses of slack to changes in the policy rate.  Rather, the two models embed 
different assumptions about the effects of the federal funds rate on broader 
financial conditions and the reaction of aggregate demand to those conditions.  
These differences tend to imply that aggregate demand is somewhat less sensitive 
to changes in the real federal funds rate in EDO than in FRB/US; thus, for a given 
change in projected slack, the EDO model will imply a larger change in the 
estimate of r*.  As shown in Chart 6 of the Bluebook, the Greenbook-consistent 
short-run r* estimate generated by FRB/US is 40 basis points higher than its
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 72
December value, while the corresponding EDO estimate has increased 100 basis 
points.
The model-based FRB/US and EDO estimates of r* are conditioned on the 
respective models’ projections of the output gap.  Accordingly, these two measures 
can differ not only because the models incorporate different sensitivities of slack to 
changes in monetary policy—as with the Greenbook-consistent estimates, but also 
because the models have different perspectives on current resource utilization and 
the outlook for the economic expansion.  In the current Bluebook, the r* estimate 
generated by the FRB/US model is about -1¾ percent.  By contrast, the EDO 
model-based estimate of r*, at about 60 basis points, is well above the actual real 
rate.  The EDO model estimates less slack currently and forecasts a stronger 
economic recovery than envisioned in either the FRB/US projection or in the 
Greenbook.  Such alternative views about the economic outlook, when combined 
with different characterizations of the monetary transmission mechanism, allow the 
model-based r* estimates potentially to convey information beyond that contained 
in the Greenbook-consistent r* measures.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 72
measured unemployment rate), and on minimizing changes in the federal funds rate.
As in recent Bluebooks, optimal monetary policy in these simulations is constrained
by the effective lower bound, and the nominal funds rate does not leave this bound
until the second half of 2012 (black solid lines).  Under this policy, the unemployment
rate would be projected to remain above the NAIRU until late 2012, while core PCE
inflation would stay appreciably below the 2 percent goal until late 2013.
Chart 7 also displays the optimal control results obtained if the nominal funds
rate were not constrained by the effective lower bound (blue dashed lines).  Absent
the constraint, a more accommodative policy stance would allow real activity to
recover faster and bring the inflation trajectory closer to the assumed 2 percent goal.
The unconstrained policy path for 2010 and 2011 is moderately higher than in
December, reflecting the slight upward revision to the staff’s assessment of aggregate
As shown in Chart 8, the prescriptions of the outcome-based estimated policy rule
are similar to those shown in the previous Bluebook.  The federal funds rate rises
from the effective lower bound in 2011Q4 (upper-left panel).  According to stochastic
simulations of the FRB/US model, the 90 percent confidence interval for the funds
rate in 2011Q4 runs from the effective lower bound to about 3.3 percent.  Market
participants’ expectations of the path of the funds rate beyond 2010 have shifted up a
little since the December Bluebook; the expected funds rate between 2011 and 2013
averages about 15 basis points higher than at the time of the previous Bluebook
(upper-right panel).10  Financial market quotes imply that the 90 percent confidence
interval for the federal funds rate in 2011Q4 is about 0.4 percent to about 4.8 percent;
the width of this interval is slightly greater than that in the previous Bluebook.
10 A considerable part of this shift in market expectations took place after the December 
Bluebook was completed but prior to the December FOMC meeting.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 72
The lower panel of Chart 8 provides near-term prescriptions from simple policy
rules under constrained policy.  The two variants of the Taylor rule and the two
estimated policy rules would keep the federal funds rate at its effective lower bound
over the next two quarters.  When this bound is not imposed, all four rules prescribe
funds rates that are lower (more negative) than in the previous Bluebook, reflecting a
slight downward revision to the staff projection for core PCE inflation (the measure
used in the rules).  In contrast, the first-difference rule—because it responds to
economic growth and does not take the level of resource utilization into account—
prescribes an upward trajectory for the policy rate, with the funds rate increasing to
about 70 basis points in 2010Q2.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 72
POLICY ALTERNATIVES
This Bluebook presents three policy alternatives—labeled A, B, and C—for the
Committee’s consideration.  The characterization of the economic outlook differs
somewhat across the three alternatives, and each alternative presents a different set
of judgments about the anticipated funds rate path, adjustments to the amount and
timing of agency MBS purchases, and prospects for engaging in asset sales.  Table 1
provides an overview of the key elements of these alternatives.  Draft statements are
provided in subsequent pages, followed by a summary of the case for each alternative.
Alternative A refers to the recent pickup in economic activity but points to the
sluggishness of housing activity, the weak labor market, and the prospects for a
subpar recovery in the absence of further monetary stimulus.  Alternative B notes the
continued strengthening of economic activity, the abatement of deterioration in the
labor market, and the likelihood of a moderate pace of recovery.  Alternative C
indicates that the economy is growing at a solid rate and that the labor market is
stabilizing and concludes that a sustainable recovery is now under way.
All three alternatives point out that overall inflation has been boosted recently by
higher energy prices.  Alternatives A and B each indicate that substantial resource
slack continues to restrain cost pressures and that longer-term inflation expectations
remain stable, making it likely that inflation will be subdued for some time.
Alternative C refers to appropriate monetary policy adjustments and stable longer-
term inflation expectations—but not to resource slack—in projecting that inflation
will return to levels consistent with price stability.
All three alternatives would maintain the target range of 0 to ¼ percent for the
federal funds rate during the upcoming intermeeting period.  As in recent statements,
Alternatives A and B indicate that the Committee expects the funds rate to remain
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 72
“exceptionally low...for an extended period.”  Alternative C modifies the forward
guidance by using the phrase “low...for some time.”
Alternative A expands the amount of agency MBS purchases by $250 billion and
indicates that these transactions will continue through the end of the third quarter.
Alternatives B and C do not make any changes to the amounts or timing of the
Federal Reserve’s previously announced securities purchases.  Alternative B states that
the Committee will continue to evaluate its purchases of securities based on the
economic outlook and financial conditions, leaving the door open to adjusting its
purchases should circumstances warrant.  Alternative C indicates that the Committee
will be evaluating the size and composition of its holdings of securities, thereby
signaling that asset sales could be used to manage the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
The reference to the Federal Reserve’s “holdings”—rather than “purchases”—is
also presented as a variant of Alternative B, as denoted by the square brackets.
All three alternatives conclude with identical language about the Federal Reserve’s
plans for winding down its special liquidity programs.  Most of these facilities—the
Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the
Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, and the Term
Securities Lending Facility—would be closed on February 1, and the temporary swap
lines with other central banks would also expire that day.  The TAF would continue
to be scaled back in February and March, and the decision of whether to conduct any
subsequent TAF auctions would be considered further over coming weeks.  Finally,
the TALF would expire on June 30 for loans backed by new-issue CMBS and on
March 31 for loans backed by all other types of collateral.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 72
Table 1:  Overview of Alternative Language  
for the January 26‐27, 2010 FOMC Announcement
December  
FOMC
January Alternatives
A B C 
Economic Activity
Recent 
Developments
“has continued  
to pick up”
“has continued  
to pick up”
“has continued  
to strengthen”
“is increasing  
at a solid rate”
Labor  
Markets
“the deterioration... 
is abating”
“the deterioration... 
is abating”
“the labor market  
is stabilizing”
Financial 
Markets
“conditions have  
become more supportive” ---
“conditions remain 
supportive”
“conditions have 
continued to become
more supportive”
Other  
Factors
fiscal and monetary 
stimulus, market forces
“housing activity  
remains sluggish”
“bank lending  
continues to contract” ---
Outlook 
“likely to remain weak
for a time”
further monetary stimulus 
warranted by prospects
for subpar recovery
pace of recovery  
“likely to be moderate”
sustainable recovery 
“now under way”
Recent 
Developments
--- 
energy prices have risen
but core inflation  
has remained low
energy prices have risen 
inflation somewhat 
elevated by pickup
in energy prices
Key Factors 
substantial resource slack,
stable expectations 
substantial resource slack,
stable expectations
appropriate monetary 
policy adjustments, 
stable expectations
Outlook 
“will remain subdued
for some time” 
“likely to be subdued
for some time”
“will be at levels 
consistent with price
Forward Guidance on Funds Rate Path
“exceptionally low...  for an extended period” “exceptionally low...for an extended period” “low...for some time”
Agency MBS Purchases
Amount $1.25 trillion $1.5 trillion $1.25 trillion
Timing 
by the end of
the first quarter 
by the end of
the third quarter 
by the end of
the first quarter
Evaluation of Balance Sheet Adjustments
“the timing and  
overall amounts  
of its purchases  
of securities”
“the timing and  
overall amounts  
of its purchases  
of securities”
“its purchases  
[or holdings]  
of securities”
“the size and 
composition of its 
securities holdings”
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 72
December FOMC Statement
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November suggests that 
economic activity has continued to pick up and that the deterioration in the labor market is abating.  
The housing sector has shown some signs of improvement over recent months.  Household 
spending appears to be expanding at a moderate rate, though it remains constrained by a weak labor 
market, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit.  Businesses are still cutting 
back on fixed investment, though at a slower pace, and remain reluctant to add to payrolls; they 
continue to make progress in bringing inventory stocks into better alignment with sales.  Financial 
market conditions have become more supportive of economic growth.  Although economic activity 
is likely to remain weak for a time, the Committee anticipates that policy actions to stabilize 
financial markets and institutions, fiscal and monetary stimulus, and market forces will contribute  
to a strengthening of economic growth and a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization 
in a context of price stability.
With substantial resource slack likely to continue to dampen cost pressures and with longer-term 
inflation expectations stable, the Committee expects that inflation will remain subdued for some 
time.
The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and 
continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, 
subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low 
levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.  To provide support to mortgage lending 
and housing markets and to improve overall conditions in private credit markets, the Federal 
Reserve is in the process of purchasing $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities  
and about $175 billion of agency debt.  In order to promote a smooth transition in markets,  
the Committee is gradually slowing the pace of these purchases, and it anticipates that these 
transactions will be executed by the end of the first quarter of 2010.  The Committee will continue 
to evaluate the timing and overall amounts of its purchases of securities in light of the evolving 
economic outlook and conditions in financial markets.
In light of ongoing improvements in the functioning of financial markets, the Committee and the 
Board of Governors anticipate that most of the Federal Reserve’s special liquidity facilities will 
expire on February 1, 2010, consistent with the Federal Reserve’s announcement of June 25, 2009.  
These facilities include the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity 
Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, and the  
Term Securities Lending Facility.  The Federal Reserve will also be working with its central bank 
counterparties to close its temporary liquidity swap arrangements by February 1.  The Federal 
Reserve expects that amounts provided under the Term Auction Facility will continue to be scaled 
back in early 2010.   The anticipated expiration dates for the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan 
Facility remain set at June 30, 2010, for loans backed by new-issue commercial mortgage-backed 
securities and March 31, 2010, for loans backed by all other types of collateral.  The Federal Reserve 
is prepared to modify these plans if necessary to support financial stability and economic growth.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 37 of 72
January FOMC Statement—Alternative A
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 38 of 72
January FOMC Statement—Alternative B
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 39 of 72
January FOMC Statement—Alternative C
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 40 of 72
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
If policymakers judge that the pace of economic recovery is likely to be moderate,
that inflation is likely be subdued for some time, and that these outcomes are the best
that can be achieved under current circumstances, then the Committee could choose
to reiterate its forward policy guidance and to carry out the remainder of its previously
announced securities purchases, as in Alternative B.  Members may anticipate that
aggregate demand will continue to be damped over coming quarters by a variety
of factors, including weak labor market conditions, tight credit conditions for
households and small businesses, and the waning effects of fiscal stimulus.  Indeed,
consistent with this outlook, both of the Greenbook-consistent measures of short-run
r* remain at low levels, and the staff projects resource slack to diminish only gradually
over the next several years.  Moreover, with longer-term inflation expectations stable
and with core inflation running at a fairly steady rate between 1¼ and 1½ percent,
members may be reasonably confident that overall inflation—which has been boosted
recently by higher energy prices—will moderate significantly going forward.   Thus,
the Committee may continue to judge that exceptionally low levels of the funds rate
are likely to be warranted for an extended period.
Even if policymakers are not satisfied with the outlook for protracted resource
slack and for inflation at rates persistently below those consistent with their dual
objectives, they might conclude that an increase in LSAPs would be undesirable at
this juncture.  As in recent meetings, the Committee may continue to view the likely
benefits of such a policy action as being outweighed by the risks associated with a
significant further expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  Indeed,
members may be concerned that an announcement of expanded agency MBS
purchases could have a counterproductive impact on private borrowing rates and
hence on economic activity if the announcement undermined investors’ confidence in
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 41 of 72
the Federal Reserve’s exit strategy and hence led them to demand greater
compensation for inflation risk in nominal lending contracts.
Nonetheless, given the approaching completion of the previously announced
LSAPs, the Committee may find it helpful to note that the Federal Reserve would
consider further securities purchases under some circumstances.  The spreads of
agency MBS yields and conventional mortgage rates over those on comparable
Treasuries have remained near their historical lows over recent weeks, and the staff
projects that these spreads will widen about 30 basis points over the next few months.
However, some analysts anticipate that the agency MBS spread could shift upward as
much as 75 or 100 basis points, with an associated rise in mortgage rates that could
adversely impact the housing sector and potentially even hinder the recovery of the
broader economy.  Thus, members may see substantial benefits to stating that
“The Committee will continue to evaluate its purchases of securities in light of the
evolving economic outlook and conditions in financial markets.”
The Committee might also prefer issuing such a statement because it suggests
that the Federal Reserve is not likely to engage in asset sales in the near term.  In
particular, policymakers might be concerned that heightened prospects of asset sales
could raise the level of uncertainty in the agency MBS market, potentially disrupting
market functioning, impairing liquidity conditions, and pushing up term premiums.11
As a result, members may view asset sales as likely to remain on the back burner,
at least temporarily, given the Federal Reserve’s development of other balance sheet
tools such as reverse repos and the term deposit facility.12
11 See the staff notes on “Strategies for Asset Sales and Redemptions” and “Balance Sheet 
Management Issues in the Longer Term” that were sent to the Committee on January 19.
12 See the note on “Strategies for Sequencing the Use of Reserve Draining Tools and 
Changes in Policy Rates” that was sent to the Committee on January 19.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 42 of 72
The financial market reaction to a statement like that of Alternative B would likely
be muted.  The Desk’s survey indicates that primary dealers are not anticipating any
changes in the Committee’s forward policy guidance at this meeting and that they
do not expect any further changes in the size or composition of the Federal Reserve’s
LSAPs.  Moreover, market quotes on fed funds futures and options indicate that
investors expect the funds rate to remain within the current target range at least
through the third quarter and hence would probably not be surprised if the
Committee’s announcement at this meeting expresses the same forward policy
guidance as in recent statements.  Thus, there would likely be little change in bond
yields, equity prices, or the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
Policymakers might also wish to consider a variant of Alternative B that refers
to the Committee’s evaluation of its securities “holdings” instead of its “purchases”.
That variant might be particularly appealing to members who judge that asset sales
should be used as a tool for influencing financial market conditions and for shrinking
the overall size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, perhaps well in advance of the
onset of funds rate firming.  Such a variant might also be seen as helpful in conveying
that the Committee is disinclined towards any further LSAP expansion but has not
ruled out that policy option.
A statement like this variant of Alternative B would probably cause a substantial
shift in investors’ expectations about the anticipated trajectory of the Federal
Reserve’s securities holdings.  The Desk’s survey indicates that none of the primary
dealers expect the Federal Reserve to sell any securities during the first two quarters
of this year; indeed, about three-fourths of the primary dealers do not anticipate
any asset sales by the Federal Reserve over the next several years, and the remainder
expect only modest amounts of such sales.  Thus, yields on agency MBS, agency debt,
and Treasury securities could increase significantly in response to a Committee
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 43 of 72
announcement along these lines, and the levels of actual and implied volatility in these
markets would also tend to move up.  Implied volatility in the agency MBS market
might also be boosted over the near term as investors perceived reduced prospects
that the Federal Reserve would engage in further purchases of agency MBS during
the second quarter, even if rates began rising sharply around the time of completion
of its previously announced LSAPs.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
If policymakers are confident that a sustainable economic recovery is now
under way and see substantial upside risks to the inflation outlook in the absence of
appropriate near-term monetary policy adjustments, then the Committee might wish
to issue a statement that shortens the horizon over which the funds rate is likely to
remain low and that raises the possibility of active unwinding of the Federal Reserve’s
securities holdings, as in Alternative C.  To the extent that inflation outcomes are seen
as linked mainly to expected inflation rather than to resource slack, members may
view the level of forward inflation compensation and the degree of dispersion in
professional forecasters’ longer-run inflation projections as worrisome indicators that
inflation expectations may not be anchored very firmly.  Under such circumstances,
policymakers might judge that moving promptly to commence the withdrawal of
extraordinary policy stimulus would play a key role in maintaining the public’s
confidence in the Federal Reserve’s commitment to foster price stability.
Participants may view the pace of economic recovery over coming quarters as
mainly determined by the speed of structural adjustments rather than the extent of
growth in aggregate demand, so that continuing to keep the real funds rate below zero
for an extended period might be seen as likely to push up the inflation rate while
having only a modest impact in stimulating real economic activity.  Moreover, with
risk spreads having declined substantially and banks no longer tightening standards on
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 44 of 72
C&I loans or consumer credit, participants may be increasingly concerned about the
possibility that the extraordinarily high level of excess reserves held by the banking
system might generate a brisk turnaround in lending and rapid growth in broad
monetary aggregates that could exert significant upward pressure on inflation.  Even
if the probability of such an outcome is judged to be low, the magnitude of the
adverse consequences in such circumstances might warrant a shift to policies aimed
at shrinking the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over coming months.
Thus, policymakers may judge that the size and composition of the Federal
Reserve’s portfolio should be actively managed via asset sales rather than relying
exclusively on the redemption of maturing securities and on other tools such as
reverse repos and the term deposit facility.  Asset sales may be viewed as particularly
helpful in communicating the Committee’s commitment to permanent reductions
in the balance sheet and thereby facilitate the anchoring of longer-term inflation
expectations.  Moreover, in light of the marked improvements in financial market
functioning since last spring, Committee members may anticipate that selling agency
debt and agency MBS would have only modest effects on their yields relative to those
of other securities.
The adoption of a statement like that of Alternative C would greatly surprise
financial market participants.  At present, investors understand the phrase
“exceptionally low levels of the funds rate” as pointing to the current target range
of 0 to 25 basis points, and hence the abbreviated phrase “low levels of the funds
rate” would probably be viewed as referring to rates of around 1 or 2 percent that
would still be quite low by historical standards.  Moreover, Alternative C uses the
phrase “for some time” to refer to the duration over which the funds rate target
would remain at low levels—not the time horizon preceding the onset of funds
rate firming.  Thus, investors would be likely to interpret a statement like that of
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 45 of 72
Alternative C as conveying the Committee’s intention to commence tightening
quite soon—perhaps as early as March—and to move fairly quickly to raise the funds
rate target to a level of around 1 or 2 percent.  Short-term interest rates would shift
up substantially.  In addition, as noted above, term premiums on agency MBS and
Treasury securities would likely shift upward as a result of heightened prospects that
the Federal Reserve might actively reduce its “holdings” of securities over coming
months.  As a result, longer-term yields would rise.  Forward measures of inflation
compensation might decline if investors became less concerned about risks to the
longer-term inflation outlook.  Equity prices would likely decline, and the foreign
exchange value of the dollar would increase.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
If meeting participants are concerned about prospects for a subpar recovery
and believe that further monetary stimulus would help improve the outlook for
economic activity and inflation, then they might wish to expand the amount of the
Federal Reserve’s agency MBS purchases by $250 billion and extend the horizon
of those purchases through the third quarter of this year, as in Alternative A.  With
these adjustments, agency MBS purchases could continue over coming months at
an average rate of around $10 billion per week, about the same as the volume of the
Desk’s purchases over recent weeks.
Participants, like the staff, may view the pace of economic recovery as likely to be
slow—with the unemployment rate still above 8 percent at the end of next year—and
see inflation running persistently below the rates they judge to be most consistent
with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate.  With such an outlook, policymakers might
conclude that expanded monetary stimulus is warranted to promote a more robust
recovery in a context of price stability.  Moreover, recent staff work on developing
various tools for draining reserves may have strengthened participants’ confidence
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 46 of 72
that additional securities can be purchased at this stage without undermining the
Committee’s ability to withdraw monetary stimulus at the appropriate time.
Members might see an even stronger rationale for providing additional monetary
stimulus if their outlook is substantially weaker than that of the Greenbook or if they
judge the risks to economic activity and inflation to be mainly tilted to the downside.
For example, incoming information on retail sales and nonfarm payrolls might be
read as suggesting that the economic recovery will be even more protracted, perhaps
similar to the “Weaker Aggregate Demand” alternative scenario in the Greenbook.
Furthermore, while the staff projects that core inflation will only decline slightly over
coming quarters, participants may place greater probability on outcomes in which the
persistence of substantial resource slack weighs more heavily on labor compensation
and hence causes a steeper downward trajectory for inflation.
Policymakers may also judge that augmenting the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS
purchases would be especially helpful at the current juncture in order to mitigate
increases in mortgage rates that could impair the recuperation of housing markets and
undermine the economic recovery.  Indeed, conventional mortgage rates have moved
up a quarter percentage point since mid-December, and in the absence of any agency
MBS purchases beyond those previously announced, the staff anticipates a further
increase of more than a quarter percentage point over the next few months.  Such
increases in home loan rates might be viewed as particularly undesirable under
current circumstances in which housing activity remains sluggish while the level of
foreclosures continues to be elevated.
An announcement like that of Alternative A would come as a surprise to market
participants, since they do not appear to be anticipating any changes in the overall
size or composition of the Federal Reserve’s LSAPs.  Staff estimates suggest that
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 47 of 72
a $250 billion increase in agency MBS purchases might reduce mortgage rates and
other longer-term yields by about 10 to 25 basis points.  Equity prices might rise,
while the foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely decline.  Inflation
compensation could increase if the Committee’s announcement undermined
investors’ confidence in the viability of the Federal Reserve’s exit strategy.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 48 of 72
LONG‐RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE
In this section, scenarios for the balance sheet are presented that correspond to
the paths for large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) of agency debt securities and agency
MBS proposed in the alternatives discussed in the “Policy Alternatives” section of the
Bluebook.  The baseline scenario corresponds to Alternative B in this Bluebook.  For
the baseline, we assume that agency MBS purchases of $1.25 trillion and agency debt
securities purchases of $175 billion are executed by the end of the first quarter of
2010.  We also present a projection for Alternative A, where the agency MBS
purchases are increased by $250 billion to a total of $1.5 trillion and are executed by
the end of the third quarter of 2010; purchases of agency debt securities under this
alternative remain at $175 billion and are executed by the end of the first quarter of
2010.  We do not present balance sheet projections for Alternative C in this Bluebook
because the Committee has not yet specified any strategy for asset sales or the use of
other reserve draining tools.  Each alternative assumes that assets decline gradually
over time due to redemptions and prepayments of securities holdings.  The
announced LSAP purchases in Alternative B and Alternative C are the same, so the
baseline projections for assets and reserves can serve as a reference for Alternative C.
Projections for the scenarios are based on assumptions about each component of
the balance sheet.13  Details of these assumptions are described in Appendix C.
Substantive revisions to these assumptions, relative to the December Bluebook, are
outlined below.
13 The Greenbook projection assumes that the federal funds rate begins to rise in the fourth 
quarter of 2011.  The balance sheet projections assume that no draining of reserve balances 
is required to achieve the higher target federal funds rate.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 49 of 72
Under the baseline, total assets are slightly higher over most of the projection
period than in the December Bluebook.  The modest upward revision in the size of
the balance sheet is largely the result of a projected increase in the level of agency
MBS holdings, which reflects a lower assumed pace of MBS prepayments.  The
change in the path for prepayments is due largely to the incorporation of a higher
assumed mortgage interest rate path.  In contrast, total support to AIG was revised
down, reflecting expectations regarding the possibility of an initial public offering and
the resulting disposition of preferred interests in AIA Aurora LLC & ALICO
Holdings LLC.14  The projected levels of credit extended through Federal Reserve
liquidity programs and credit facilities, except for the TALF, fall to zero fairly quickly
this year, as in the last Bluebook.  Alternative A projects a higher contour of total
assets because of the assumed larger purchases of agency MBS.
On the liability side of the balance sheet, given the small increase in the debt
ceiling in late December 2009, we assume that the Treasury’s Supplementary
Financing Account (SFA) remains at its current level of $5 billion until June 2010.
We assume that the Congress will pass a substantial boost in the debt ceiling at
around that point.  After June, the SFA returns to $200 billion, its level in the middle
of last year, and remains at this level until near the end of the projection period.  As
the aggregate level of reserve balances declines to very low levels at the end of the
projection period, balances in the SFA are drawn down, falling to zero in the baseline
scenario.  On net, the revisions in the asset and liability components of the balance
sheet imply a moderate upward revision in the level of reserve balances over the
majority of the projection period. 
                                           
14 On March 2, 2009, the Federal Reserve and Treasury jointly announced a restructuring of 
the government’s assistance to AIG.  As part of this restructuring, on December 1, 2009, 
the revolving credit facility was reduced in exchange for preferred interests in two special 
purpose vehicles, AIA Aurora LLC and ALICO Holdings LLC, created to hold the 
outstanding common stock of two AIG subsidiaries.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 50 of 72
Balance Sheet Projections Summary
Alternative A Baseline
Agency Debt Securities
Total purchased $175 billion $175 billion
December 2016 $19 billion $19 billion
Agency MBS
Total purchased $1.5 trillion $1.25 trillion
December 2016 $0.87 trillion $0.71 trillion
Total Assets
Peak month September 2010 April 2010
Peak amount $2.51 trillion $2.36 trillion
December 2016 $1.54 trillion $1.47 trillion
Reserve Balances
Peak month May 2010 March 2010
Peak amount $1.38 trillion $1.30 trillion
For the baseline scenario, the balance sheet reaches a peak of nearly $2.4 trillion in
April 2010.  The peak in the balance sheet occurs after the March 31 conclusion of
large-scale asset purchases because of substantial lags in settlement of MBS purchases.
In Alternative A, the size of the balance sheet peaks at $2.5 trillion, with the peak
occurring a few months before all MBS purchases settle because of the runoff of
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 51 of 72
other assets.  By the end of 2016, the size of the balance sheet under both scenarios
declines to roughly $1.5 trillion.15
Reserve balances decline in the second half of 2010 primarily because of the
return of the SFA to $200 billion.  Since the monetary base is derived from the
balance sheet projections of Federal Reserve notes in circulation and reserve balances,
and because currency is projected to follow a fairly gradual trajectory, the path of the
monetary base in each scenario largely mirrors the path of reserve balances.
Specifically, in each scenario, the monetary base peaks at essentially the same time as
reserve balances, and as reserve balances decline, the monetary base contracts.
Toward the end of the projection period, when reserve balances are assumed to
stabilize at $25 billion, the level of the monetary base moves more in line with
changes in Federal Reserve notes in circulation.
15 The composition of Federal Reserve assets in these projections differs notably from 
historical patterns.  Prior to August 2007, U.S. Treasury securities were about 90 percent of 
assets and the Federal Reserve did not hold any agency mortgage-backed securities.  By 
contrast, under the baseline scenario, Treasury securities are projected to account for only 
around 34 percent of total assets at the end of 2010 and rise to just 43 percent of total 
assets at the end of the projection period.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 52 of 72
Baseline Scenario (Alternative B)
Source.  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
B
ill
io
ns
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasury securities Agency debt Agency MBS
Repurchase agreements TAF Central bank swaps
Other loans and facilities SDR and other assets
$ 
B
ill
io
ns
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 53 of 72
Alternative A
Source.  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
B
ill
io
ns
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasury securities Agency debt Agency MBS
Repurchase agreements TAF Central bank swaps
Other loans and facilities SDR and other assets
$ 
B
ill
io
ns
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 54 of 72
Memo:
December 
Baseline
Growth Rates for the Monetary Base
Date Baseline Alternative A
Percent, annual rate
Annual - Q4 to Q4
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 55 of 72
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY FORECASTS
The staff projects that domestic nonfinancial sector debt will expand at an annual
rate of 2¾ percent this quarter, with this rise due almost entirely to an increase in
federal debt.  For 2010 as a whole and in 2011, debt is projected to increase 5¼
percent; this forecast reflects rapid expected growth in federal debt, a moderate rise in
state and local government debt, and a gradual turnaround in lending to households
and to nonfinancial businesses.  After contracting 2 percent last year, household debt
is expected to decline a bit further in the current quarter, and then grow tepidly
through 2011.  Debt of the nonfinancial business sector is projected to edge up in the
current quarter after having contracted slightly last year, with strong corporate bond
issuance offsetting weak C&I and commercial real estate lending.  We expect only a
modest rise in business debt over the forecast period, as demand for external funds
generally remains soft and the commercial real estate market remains particularly
Commercial bank credit is expected to contract at an annual rate of 3 percent in
the first quarter of 2010, reflecting continued drops in loans, especially to businesses.
Over the entire year, bank credit is expected to expand just ½ percent, as moderate
growth in securities continues to offset declines in loans during the first three
quarters.  Loans in most categories are expected expand by the fourth quarter, though
only weakly, reflecting a pickup in loan demand as the economic recovery gains steam,
as well as an improvement in bank health and a gradual easing of standards and terms.
Loans are expected to continue growing in 2011, with bank credit advancing 4¼
percent over the year.
M2 is expected to remain flat in the current quarter, as a reallocation of household
wealth toward higher-yielding non-M2 assets likely is continuing to weigh on money
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 56 of 72
demand.  As that process wanes over the rest of this year and into 2011, M2 growth is
expected to pick up to a pace that is closer to that of nominal GDP.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 57 of 72
Greenbook Forecast*
Monthly Growth Rates
Jul-09 -0.8
Aug-09 -3.3
Sep-09 5.6
Oct-09 4.1
Nov-09 3.9
Dec-09 2.1
Jan-10 -5.2
Feb-10 1.9
Mar-10 2.0
Apr-10 2.8
May-10 3.4
Jun-10 3.6
Jul-10 3.6
Aug-10 3.8
Sep-10 3.9
Oct-10 3.9
Nov-10 4.0
Dec-10 4.0
Quarterly Growth Rates
2010 Q1 -0.2
2010 Q2 2.7
2010 Q3 3.7
2010 Q4 3.9
Annual Growth Rates
2009 4.9
2010 2.6
2011 4.7
Growth From To
Dec-09 Jun-10 1.4
2009 Q4 Mar-10 0.3
2009 Q4 Jun-10 1.6
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Actual data through December 31, 2009; projections thereafter.
Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 58 of 72
The directive from the December meeting and draft language for the January
directive are provided below.  The staff recommends that the directive issued at
this meeting under Alternative B or Alternative C include the following sentence:
“The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary
to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency MBS purchases that are to
be conducted through the end of March 31, 2010, as directed above.”
The Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations (the “Authorization”)
permits the Desk to buy and sell agency MBS to the extent necessary to carry out
the most recent domestic policy directive.  (Dollar roll transactions are a particular
method of buying and selling agency MBS on a temporary basis.  Dollar roll
transactions have proven helpful to the Desk in settling MBS purchases. )  If the
Committee does not direct execution of agency MBS purchases beyond March 31,
the current authorization would not permit the Desk to engage in dollar roll
transactions after that date in the process of settling previous MBS purchases.
Including the recommended sentence in the directives for the next several
meetings would allow the Desk to conduct such transactions only as needed to settle
finally any agency MBS purchased through the end of March 31, 2010, and would
make clear to counterparties that the Desk has the necessary authority.  The additional
sentence would seem not to be needed under Alternative A, as the directive under
that alternative would instruct the Desk to continue to purchase MBS through the
third quarter, and thus dollar roll transactions would remain authorized through that
time as they are at present.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 59 of 72
DECEMBER FOMC MEETING
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs
the Desk to purchase agency debt and agency MBS during the intermeeting period
with the aim of providing support to private credit markets and economic activity.
The timing and pace of these purchases should depend on conditions in the markets
for such securities and on a broader assessment of private credit market conditions.
The Desk is expected to execute purchases of about $175 billion in housing-related
agency debt and about $1.25 trillion of agency MBS by the end of the first quarter
of 2010.  The Desk is expected to gradually slow the pace of these purchases as they
near completion.  The Committee anticipates that outright purchases of securities will
cause the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet to expand significantly in coming
months.  The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the
Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet
that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 60 of 72
JANUARY FOMC MEETING — ALTERNATIVE A
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the
Desk to purchase agency debt and agency MBS during the intermeeting period with
the aim of providing support to private credit markets and economic activity.  The
timing and pace of these purchases should depend on conditions in the markets for
such securities and on a broader assessment of private credit market conditions.  The
Desk is expected to execute purchases of about $175 billion in housing-related agency
debt by the end of the first quarter and to execute purchases of about $1.5 trillion of
agency MBS by the end of the third quarter.  The Desk is expected to gradually slow
the pace of these purchases as they near completion.  The Committee anticipates that
outright purchases of securities will cause the size of the Federal Reserve's balance
sheet to expand significantly in coming months.  The Committee directs the Desk to
engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal
Reserve’s agency MBS transactions to be conducted through the end of the third
quarter, as directed above.  The System Open Market Account Manager and the
Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the
System's balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee's
objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 61 of 72
JANUARY FOMC MEETING — ALTERNATIVES B AND C
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs
the Desk to purchase agency debt and agency MBS during the intermeeting period
with the aim of providing support to private credit markets and economic activity.
The timing and pace of these purchases should depend on conditions in the markets
for such securities and on a broader assessment of private credit market conditions.
The Desk is expected to execute purchases of about $175 billion in housing-related
agency debt and about $1.25 trillion of agency MBS by the end of the first quarter.
The Desk is expected to gradually slow the pace of these purchases as they near
completion.  The Committee anticipates that outright purchases of securities will
cause the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet to expand significantly in
coming months.  The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions
as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions
to be conducted through the end of the first quarter, as directed above.  The System
Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed
of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could affect the
attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
January 21, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 62 of 72
