Alternative A offers the Committee a choice between two new asset purchase programs:  one that is discrete in nature (buy $500 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by the end of December 2012), and one that reflects a more incremental but open-ended approach (initially buy $40 billion of agency MBS per month, and adjust the program as needed to foster .   Alternatives A and B maintain the maturity extension program that the Committee announced at its September meeting, while Alternative C reduces the size of this program by half and draws it to a close three months earlier.

Alternative B reiterates the Committee’s existing forward guidance by noting that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate “at least through mid-2013.   Alternative C begins to remove policy accommodation in part by shortening the projected period over which rates will stay low to “at least through 2012.   Alternative A provides further policy accommodation by lengthening the anticipated period of near-zero rates to “at least through the end of 2014.   Alternative A also would clarify the conditional nature of the forward guidance by adding forecasts for unemployment and inflation at the end of 2014.

In  describing the economy, Alternative B says that it has been expanding “moderately,” while Alternative A uses “modestly.   Alternative C instead describes the pace of economic activity as having strengthened somewhat.  Alternative B notes that some slowing in global growth is apparent.  In contrast, Alternative A states with a bit more assertion that “global growth appears to be slowing,” while Alternative C makes no mention of growth abroad.

Alternatives A and B both point to some improvement in overall labor market conditions, while Alternative C characterizes the unemployment rate as having declined of late and notes that “employment has continued to increase.   Alternatives A and B state that inflation has moderated since earlier in the year, while Alternative C says that inflation has moderated “only somewhat” over that period.

Regarding the economic outlook, Alternative B indicates that the Committee expects a “moderate” pace of growth over coming quarters and sees the unemployment rate declining “only gradually.   Alternative A says the Committee anticipates that, absent further policy action, the pace of economic growth would remain “modest” and the unemployment rate would decline “only very gradually.   In contrast, Alternative C states that the FOMC anticipates “some strengthening” in economic growth with a gradual decline in the unemployment rate.

Turning to  inflation, Alternatives A and B note that it will settle “at or below” mandate-consistent levels, while Alternative C instead refers to inflation settling “at” mandate-consistent levels.

Alternatives A and B say that strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook.  In addition, Alternative A includes the characterization that “the risks to the outlook for inflation also appear to be tilted to the downside.

Alternatives A and B alter the November statement to say the Committee will “monitor the economic outlook and financial developments” and is prepared to employ its tools to promote recovery.  Alternative C provides a more neutral final sentence, noting that the Committee is prepared to employ its tools as appropriate to promote its objectives.

Alternative B would be broadly in line with market expectations.

Market participants would greet a statement such as that of Alternative C with considerable surprise.

The scenario for Alternative A reflects the $500 billion agency MBS purchase program included in paragraph 3, but is consistent with the open-ended purchase program in paragraph 3’ if purchases last, and are expected to last, for one year.

As in Alternative B, reinvestment ends in April 2014, the target federal  funds rate lifts off in October 2014, sales of agency securities commence in April 2015,  and holdings of agency securities fall to zero over five years.4  The additional purchases  of agency MBS under Alternative A postpone the normalization of the size of the balance sheet until the February 2018, five months later than under Alternative B.

The size of the balance sheet normalizes one month later under Alternative B than in the October Tealbook baseline, reflecting the later liftoff date assumed in the staff economic forecast.

On the liability side of the balance sheet, the forecasted path for reserve balances  for Alternative B is a bit higher from the time that redemptions begin until reserve 25 billion than was the case in the previous Tealbook.

The monetary base under Alternative A expands along with the rise in reserve balances that come  from the additional asset purchases.

5 The prepayment paths for agency MBS holdings and the premiums calculated under Alternative C are based on the interest rate path used in Alternative B.

Annual - Q4 to Q4  Monthly  Growth Rates for the Monetary Base  Date Alternative B Alternative A Percent, annual rate Alternative C Memo : October Tealbook Quarterly DEBT,  BANK  CREDIT,  AND  MONEY FORECASTS The staff projects that domestic nonfinancial sector debt will grow at an annual rate of 4½ percent in 2012, reflecting continued rapid expansion in federal government debt and a modest rise in private nonfinancial debt.

In general,  under the directives for Alternatives B and C, the Desk would be instructed to leave the total face value of domestic securities in the SOMA about unchanged; under Alternative A, the Committee would instruct the Desk to increase the face value of domestic securities in the SOMA portfolio by purchasing agency MBS.

Specifically, the directive  for Alternative A would instruct the Desk either to execute purchases of agency MBS in 3.

In addition, the directives for Alternatives A and B would instruct the Desk to take appropriate steps to complete the $400 billion maturity extension program that was announced in September by the end of June 2012, while the directive for Alternative C would instruct the Desk to limit the amounts of purchases and sales associated with the maturity extension program to $200 billion each and to complete these operations by the end of March 2012.

The Tealbook projections for the scenarios corresponding to Alternatives A and B assume that the target federal funds rate begins to increase in October 2014, consistent with the monetary policy path in the Tealbook extension derived from the outcome-based rule, while the projection for the scenario corresponding to Alternative C assumes the target rate lifts off in January 2013.

The balance sheet projections assume  that no use of short-term draining tools is  necessary to achieve the projected path for the federal funds rate.1   ASSETS   Treasury Securities, Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and Agency Debt  Securities     The assumptions under Alternative B are: o Over the nine months beginning in October 2011, the FOMC is assumed to purchase $400 billion in par value of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of six years or more and sell the same par amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of three years or less.

The large-scale asset purchase program in  Alternative A would put downward pressure on market interest rates, in particular mortgage rates, and result in more MBS prepayments than in the baseline.

