Alternative B maintains the current monthly pace of purchases but indicates that the Committee is prepared to moderate the pace of purchases—potentially later this year—if it sees further evidence of improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving toward its 2 percent longer-run goal.

Alternative A also maintains the current pace of asset purchases but suggests that the Committee is not as likely to reduce the pace of its purchases in the near term.

Alternative C announces a modest reduction in the pace of asset purchases of per month for agency MBS and also for Treasury securities.  Alternatives B and C retain the forward guidance for the federal funds rate used in the Committee’s July statement.

Alternative A augments that forward guidance on several dimensions.

The further increase in mortgage rates observed since July  is also mentioned in all of the alternatives, but Alternative C suggests this development is not a source of much concern.  Alternatives A and B acknowledge that some labor market indicators have continued to improve; Alternative A, however, also notes the apparent slowing in job gains.  Alternative C presents a more upbeat characterization of the labor market, referring to “continuing” gains in payrolls.  Alternatives A and B note that inflation has been running “below” the Committee’s longer-term objective once changes in energy prices are excluded; Alternative C uses “somewhat below.

Alternative A  cautions, however, that “the tightening of financial conditions observed in recent months,  if sustained, could slow the pace of improvement in the economy and labor market,”  while Alternative B has optional language stating that the tightening of financial conditions is a source of concern.  Alternative C offers a more sanguine view of the risks to the outlook, indicating more confidence that labor market conditions will continue to improve over the medium term.

All three alternatives indicate that the Committee  anticipates that inflation will move back toward its 2 percent objective over the medium  term; Alternatives A and B repeat the July statement’s language about the risks to economic performance that could result from inflation running persistently below the Committee’s 2 percent objective, while Alternative C omits that language.

With respect to balance sheet policy, both Alternatives A and B indicate that, although labor market conditions have strengthened since the current asset purchase program began a year ago, the Committee has decided to continue the existing pace of its purchases, pending further evidence of economic improvement.  Alternative B states that if the Committee sees evidence of further progress toward its objectives, reductions in the pace of purchases would be appropriate.  Alternative A is more tentative about the near- term prospect of a reduction in the pace of purchases, stating that progress toward Committee objectives is “not yet sufficient to warrant an adjustment.

Optional language in  Alternative B provides continuity with earlier Committee communications by stating that reductions will likely occur “later this year.   Alternative C states that the Committee plans to reduce purchases further if the Committee sees further progress toward its goals.

In addition, one version of paragraph 4 in Alternative C indicates that the Committee expects that by the time its asset purchases end, the unemployment rate will be around 7 percent and expected to decline further, and inflation will be moving back toward its 2 percent longer-run goal.  Both versions of Alternative C note that, while the flow of purchases has been reduced, the Committee’s sizable and still-increasing holdings of securities will maintain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates.

Alternative A also adds a second condition for projected inflation—an inflation “floor”—whereby the Committee indicates that it does not anticipate raising its federal funds rate target if inflation between one and two years ahead were projected to be below 1¾ percent.  Alternative A also states that the Committee, in determining when and how much to reduce policy accommodation, will include the labor force participation rate and the growth of employment among the range of labor market indicators that it will consider.  Finally, Alternative A indicates that the Committee currently anticipates that the federal funds rate target consistent with achieving maximum employment and 2 percent inflation will rise only gradually for a significant period after the Committee begins reducing policy accommodation.

Policymakers may see Alternative B as appropriately indicating that a moderation in the pace of purchases is the next move, based on the language added to paragraph 4 and the removal of the July statement language that referred to the Committee’s options to “increase or reduce” the pace of purchases.

If, in addition, policymakers judge that the economy is evolving broadly as  anticipated, they may wish to include the optional language in Alternative B that refers to “later this year” as the likely time at which the moderation of the pace of purchases begins.

Such policymakers might also judge that the modifications that  Alternative B makes to the July statement, notably the indication that purchases are not on a preset course, leave the Committee well-positioned to increase the amount of policy accommodation if labor market conditions begin to weaken or if the economic outlook deteriorates.

At the same time, policymakers favoring Alternative C could point out that it conditions additional measured reductions on evidence of further progress toward the Committee’s goals.

However, other participants may prefer  statement language, such as that in paragraph C.4, that does not refer to the 7 percent  value for the unemployment rate, perhaps because they are concerned about putting too        much weight on the unemployment rate as the single indicator of labor market  conditions.1  In general, gauging the market reaction to Alternative C is complicated by the wide range of views among market participants about the likely action at this meeting as well as by the potential for the first reduction in purchases to have an important signaling effect.  A decision to adopt a statement like Alternative C would surprise some, but not most, market participants.

Thus, an announcement  of a reduction in the pace of purchases like that in Alternative C might not produce much market reaction.

They may see a  statement like Alternative A as more likely than Alternative B to provide the amount of downward pressure on longer-term interest rates needed to contain the tightening in financial conditions, perhaps because they see Alternative B’s language as leaning toward an imminent reduction in the pace of purchases.

Policymakers may  also see a statement like Alternative A as useful because of the language providing a floor to the inflation threshold in the forward guidance for the federal funds rate.

An announcement along the lines of that in Alternative A would surprise market participants; it could be perceived as a deferral of the Committee’s intention to dial back asset purchases and could be viewed as at odds with the widely held expectation that the start of tapering will be announced either at the September meeting or sometime later this year.

If, however, investors took a statement like Alternative A as indicating that the FOMC has become more pessimistic about the outlook for economic growth and employment than market participants had anticipated, or if they took the introduction of the inflation floor as signifying a heightened Committee concern that inflation might fall, equity prices might not rise or could even decline.

The directives for Alternatives A and B are unchanged; the directive for Alternative C includes changes to make it consistent with the corresponding postmeeting statement.

The directives for Alternatives A and B instruct the Desk to continue purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about $40 billion per month and to continue purchasing longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $45 billion per month.  The draft directive for Alternative C instructs the Desk to purchase agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about $35 billion per month, and to purchase longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $40 billion per month, beginning in October.

Alternative B continues purchases at the current monthly pace in the near term but then moderates the pace later this year; the pace of purchases would be reduced further through the first half of 2014, and purchases would end by mid-year.

Under these  assumptions, purchases total about $1.2 trillion over 2013 and the first half of 2014, as in  the July Tealbook Alternative B.5  As shown in the exhibit “Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet Items,” SOMA  securities holdings under the purchase program assumed for Alternative B peak at about 2.

As in the staff forecast in Tealbook Book A, we  assume that the first increase in the target federal funds rate is in the second quarter of  2015.6  Two quarters before the first increase in the target federal funds rate, all  reinvestments and rollovers are assumed to cease, and the SOMA portfolio begins to  contract.7  The size of the portfolio is normalized by mid-2021, as in the projection for  Alternative B in the July Tealbook.

5 The balance sheet scenario assumed for Alternative B is consistent with the state-contingent plan for securities purchases laid out by the Chairman in recent communications and discussed by the Committee at its June meeting, as well as with the current staff forecast presented in Tealbook Book A.

6 This liftoff date for the federal funds rate is one quarter earlier than that assumed in the balance   Alternative B in the July Tealbook.

This more accommodative policy stance than in Alternative B would be consistent with a projection of the macroeconomy that is a bit weaker than in the staff forecast or a desire on the part of the Committee to provide more accommodation.

The  first increase in the target federal funds rate occurs in the fourth quarter of 2015—two  quarters later than in Alternative B—when the unemployment threshold and inflation   Alternative A are projected to be crossed.

Alternative Projections for the Monetary Base Date Alternative B Alternative C Alternative A Alternative B Percent change, annual rate; not seasonally adjusted Monthly 2013: May 35.

The Tealbook projections for the scenario corresponding to Alternative B assume that the target federal funds rate begins to increase in the second quarter of 2015.

This date of liftoff is  consistent with the current staff economic forecast and the thresholds described in the July 2013  FOMC statement, and it is one quarter earlier than assumed in the balance sheet projections for  Alternative B in the July Tealbook.

In each case, the balance sheet projections assume no use of  short-term draining tools to achieve the projected path for the target federal funds rate.1  ASSETS  Treasury Securities, Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and Agency Debt  Securities   The assumptions under Alternative B are: o The Committee is assumed to continue expanding its holdings of agency MBS by $40 billion per month and of longer-term Treasury securities by $45 billion per month into the fall of 2013.

TERM PREMIUM EFFECTS5,6   Under Alternative B, the contemporaneous term premium effect on the yield of the ten- year Treasury note is about negative 121 basis points, slightly less negative than for  Alternative B in the July Tealbook.

The  effect is less negative than in Alternative B because there are fewer securities purchased than under Alternative B.

Treasury 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total capital 55 55 62 77 98 124 156 198    Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.    Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding. Alternative Projections for the 10-Year Treasury Term Premium Effect Basis Points Quarterly Averages Date Alternative B Alternative C Alternative A July Alternative B 2013: Q3 –121 –116 –134 –125 Q4 –117 –112 –131 –121 2014: Q1 –112 –107 –127 –116 Q2 –107 –102 –123 –111 Q3 –102 –97 –118 –106 Q4 –97 –93 –112 –100 2015: Q1 –92 –88 –107 –95 Q2 –87 –83 –102 –90 Q3 –83 –78 –96 –85 Q4 –78 –74 –91 –80 2016: Q4 –62 –59 –73 –63 2017: Q4 –49 –46 –58 –49 2018: Q4 –38 –36 –45 –39 2019: Q4 –30 –28 –35 –30 2020: Q4 –23 –22 –27 –24 2021: Q4 –18 –18 –21 –19 2022: Q4 –15 –14 –17 –16 2023: Q4 –11 –11 –13 –13 2024: Q4 –8 –8 –10 –9 2025: Q4 –6 –6 –7 –7 This page  is intentionally blank.

