Alternative B reduces monthly purchases of both MBS and Treasury securities by modest amounts, signals that further reductions are likely, and enhances the forward guidance for the federal funds rate by incorporating a qualitative description of the Committee’s likely policy approach after the 6½ percent unemployment threshold is reached.  Alternative C announces larger reductions in monthly purchases, also signals that further reductions are likely, and maintains October’s forward guidance.

Alternative A makes the stance of policy more accommodative than the other alternatives by augmenting the forward guidance along several dimensions while maintaining the pace of asset purchases and indicating that the Committee is not likely to reduce the pace of its purchases in the near term.

In summarizing recent economic developments, Alternatives B and C state that economic activity is expanding at a “moderate” pace and that labor market conditions have shown “further improvement,” while Alternative A characterizes the expansion as “modest” and cites “some” further improvement in labor market conditions.

All of the  alternatives say that fiscal policy is restraining economic growth, but Alternatives B and C add that the extent of restraint “may be” and “appears to be” diminishing, respectively.

Alternative B says that inflation has been running “below” the Committee’s longer-run objective; Alternative C uses “somewhat below” and Alternative A says “well below.

In characterizing the economic outlook, Alternatives A and B say the Committee expects that economic growth will pick up from its recent pace and the unemployment rate “will gradually decline” toward its mandate-consistent level; Alternative C uses “will continue to decline” and cites growing underlying strength in the broader economy.

With  respect to risks to the outlook, Alternative A says the Committee continues to see “modest downside risks,” Alternative B offers a choice of describing the risks as “having diminished” or as “roughly balanced,” and Alternative C uses “roughly balanced.

Alternatives B and C indicate that the Committee anticipates that inflation will move back toward its objective over the medium term; Alternative B adds that the Committee “will monitor inflation developments carefully.

Alternative A signals less confidence that inflation will return to 2 percent by saying that the Committee “will monitor inflation developments carefully for evidence that inflation is moving back toward its objective.

With respect to balance sheet policies, Alternatives B and C indicate that cumulative progress toward maximum employment and the improvement in the outlook for labor market conditions justify a downward adjustment in the pace of asset purchases, with Alternative B making a modest reduction (to $35 billion per month for agency MBS and to $40 billion per month for Treasury securities) and Alternative C making a more substantial reduction (to $30 billion per month for agency MBS and $30 billion per .

Alternative C also provides the Committee with another option for reducing the pace of asset purchases under which the Committee states the total amount of purchases in 2014 and gives a June 2014 end date for the purchase program.  Alternative A instead indicates that a cut in the pace of purchases is not imminent, saying that progress toward the Committee’s objectives is “not yet sufficient to warrant” such an adjustment.

Alternatives B and C also maintain the 6½ percent threshold for the unemployment rate, while Alternative A provides the option of lowering this threshold to either 6 or 5½ percent.  Alternative C retains the other elements of the forward guidance used in the October statement, saying that in determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative policy stance the Committee “will also consider other information” and that it will take a balanced approach when it begins to remove policy accommodation.  Alternative B adds language strengthening the forward guidance, saying that the Committee expects to keep the target federal funds rate low “well past the time” that the unemployment threshold is crossed.  Alternative A augments the forward guidance even more:  In addition to stating that the Committee will consider a “broad range of indicators” in determining how long to keep the target rate low, Alternative A says the Committee “expects to be patient” and anticipates keeping the federal funds rate “below its longer-run normal value for a considerable time.

However, mortgage rates  remain near historically-low levels and participants may view the changes in forward   Alternative B as likely to mitigate any increase in rates.

Moreover, though  Alternative B indicates that the pace of purchases is likely to be scaled back over time, it also states that purchases are not on a preset course and so the path of purchases could be adjusted if needed in response to changes in the economic outlook.

For either reason,  policymakers may see little reason to strengthen the forward guidance for the federal  funds rate as in Alternative B and judge that a more rapid reduction in the pace of purchases would be appropriate.

Or policymakers may be concerned that the stronger forward guidance language  in Alternatives A and B involve a greater commitment to maintain near-zero interest rates, which could lead to excessive risk-taking in financial markets, undermine financial stability, and ultimately put the achievement of the dual mandate at risk.

Some policymakers may also prefer the larger reduction in  the pace of purchases in Alternative C relative to Alternative B because of these concerns, or because they see other costs of additional purchases as outweighing the benefits.

Alternative C offers a choice between a continuation of the “flow-based” approach to asset purchases in which future reductions in the pace of purchases are conditioned on progress toward the Committee’s goals, as in paragraphs C.

Based on the Survey of Primary Dealers, a decision to adopt a statement like  Alternative C would surprise market participants, as most dealers expect the first cut in the pace of asset purchases to be both modest and to be accompanied by additional forward guidance for the federal funds rate.

Policymakers may see a statement like Alternative A as desirable in part because it does not cut the pace of asset purchases and it explicitly lowers the unemployment threshold.

Thus, the elements  of the statement language in Alternative A that suggest a somewhat later initial reduction in the pace of purchases might lead market participants to mark up their expected size of the purchase program.

If, however, investors took a  statement like Alternative A as indicating that the FOMC has become more pessimistic about the economic outlook than had been thought, equity prices might not rise or could even decline.

The directive for Alternative A is unchanged; the directives for Alternatives B and C include changes to make them consistent with the corresponding postmeeting statement.

The directive for Alternative A instructs the Desk to continue purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about $40 billion per month and to continue purchasing longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $45 billion per month.  The draft directive for Alternative B instructs the Desk to purchase agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about $35 billion per month, and to purchase longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $40 billion per month, beginning in January.  The draft directive for Alternative C instructs the Desk to purchase agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about $30 billion per month, and to purchase longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $30 billion per month, beginning in January.

Under Alternative B we assume that the pace of purchases is reduced multiple times, beginning in January, and the program is completed in September 2014.

trillion in Alternative B in the October Tealbook.

2  As shown in the exhibit “Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet Items,” SOMA  securities holdings under the purchase program assumed for Alternative B peak at about 1 Details of these assumptions, as well as projections for each major component of the balance sheet, can be found in the Appendix that follows this section.

2 The balance sheet scenario for Alternative B assumes that the first reduction in the pace of purchases comes in January, while this first reduction is a bit later in the staff forecast reported in Tealbook Book A.

We assume that the first increase in the  target federal funds rate is in the fourth quarter of 2015, two quarters later than in the   Alternative B of the October Tealbook.

The date for the first increase  in the federal funds rate represents the staff’s translation of the Committee’s indication in  Alternative B that it will maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate well past the time that the unemployment rate declines below 6½ percent, and is intended to be representative of all of the elements of forward guidance in that alternative.

The small difference in policy assumptions  could reflect the fact that policymakers supporting Alternative C have a more optimistic view of the economic outlook and so anticipate providing slightly less accommodation through asset purchases than in the staff forecast.

The projected increases in the monetary base under Alternative C are less than the 8 This later conclusion to the purchases would be consistent with progress toward the Committee’s objectives for the labor market and inflation occurring more gradually than in the staff forecast.

increases under Alternative B because the size of the purchase program is smaller and it ends sooner.

Alternative Projections for the Monetary Base Date Alternative B Alternative C Alternative A October Alternative B Percent change, annual rate; not seasonally adjusted Quarterly 2013: Q4 33.

The Tealbook projections for the scenario corresponding to Alternative B assume that the target federal funds rate begins to increase in the last quarter of 2015, well past the time that the unemployment rate declines below 6½ percent, and two quarters later than in the December staff forecast as well as in the balance sheet projections for Alternative B in the October Tealbook.

The projections for the scenario corresponding to Alternative C assume liftoff in the second quarter of 2015.

In each case, the balance sheet projections assume no use of  short-term draining tools to achieve the projected path for the target federal funds rate.1  ASSETS  Treasury Securities, Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and Agency Debt  Securities   The assumptions under Alternative B are: o In the scenario corresponding to Alternative B, the Committee is assumed to decrease the monthly pace of purchases to $40 billion of longer-term Treasury securities and $35 billion of agency MBS beginning in January 2014.

TERM PREMIUM EFFECTS5,6   Under Alternative B, the term premium effect on the yield of the ten-year Treasury  note in the fourth quarter of 2013 is negative 126 basis points, slightly more negative   Alternative B in the October Tealbook.

The effect is less negative than in Alternative B because there are fewer securities purchased and liftoff is earlier (and so balance sheet normalization starts than under Alternative B.

The effect is more negative than in Alternative B because more securities are purchased than under Alternative B.

Treasury 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total capital 55 55 61 76 96 122 154 195    Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.    Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding. Alternative Projections for the 10-Year Treasury Term Premium Effect Basis Points Quarterly Averages Date Alternative B Alternative C Alternative A October Alternative B 2013: Q4 –126 –120 –140 –119 2014: Q1 –122 –115 –136 –115 Q2 –117 –110 –132 –110 Q3 –112 –105 –127 –105 Q4 –107 –100 –121 –99 2015: Q1 –101 –95 –115 –94 Q2 –96 –90 –110 –89 Q3 –91 –85 –104 –84 Q4 –86 –80 –99 –80 2016: Q1 –82 –76 –93 –75 Q2 –77 –71 –88 –71 Q3 –73 –67 –84 –67 Q4 –69 –63 –79 –63 2017: Q4 –54 –50 –63 –49 2018: Q4 –42 –39 –49 –38 2019: Q4 –33 –30 –38 –30 2020: Q4 –25 –24 –30 –23 2021: Q4 –20 –19 –23 –18 2022: Q4 –16 –15 –18 –14 2023: Q4 –12 –12 –14 –11 2024: Q4 –9 –8 –10 –8 2025: Q4 –6 –6 –7 –6 This page  is intentionally blank.

