The proposed statements differ somewhat in their treatment of inflation,  with Alternatives A and B noting that inflation has moderated of late, while Alternative C says that firms continue to face cost pressures from high energy and import prices.

Alternative A states that downside risks to the economic outlook have increased and, with inflation expected to settle at or below mandate-consistent levels, it proposes to increase the amount of policy accommodation.  Alternative B differs from the June statement mainly in that the economic outlook has been downgraded and the Committee could decide to signal that additional accommodation is more likely.

With regard to the stance of policy, Alternatives B and C would make only minor changes relative to the June statement, while Alternative A would announce several steps to ease monetary conditions.   Under Alternatives B and C, the Committee would both maintain the existing target range for the federal funds rate and reiterate the “extended period” language.

In contrast, Alternative C retains the June language that the Committee will “act as needed” to best foster maximum employment and price stability.

The draft statement in Alternative B notes that incoming information indicates that economic growth so far this year has been slower than the Committee expected, while observing that the slow pace of recovery appears to reflect, in part, temporary factors.  Alternative B again states that investment in equipment and software is expanding, but it characterizes recent indicators as showing that overall labor market conditions remain weak and that household spending has flattened out.

While Alternative B points to the pickup in inflation earlier in the year, it also notes that inflation recently has moderated somewhat, and that longer-term inflation expectations remain stable.  Alternative B goes on to say that, as the effects on inflation of past energy and other commodity price increases dissipate further over coming quarters, inflation will likely settle at rates at or below mandate-consistent levels.

The draft statement under Alternative A supports a shift toward increased accommodation by indicating greater concern about recent economic growth and the economic outlook.

Further, Alternative A points to the flattening out in household spending and states that the temporary factors noted in the June statement appear to account for “only some” of the recent weakness.

Alternative A also observes that inflation has moderated recently, and that the Committee anticipates that the factors that boosted inflation earlier in the year will continue to dissipate.

Alternative C places less emphasis than Alternatives A and B on the weak economic data received since the June meeting.

Moreover, Alternative C points to the potential for persistent inflationary pressures.

A statement along the lines of Alternative B would be roughly in line with market expectations.

Accordingly, the release of  a statement like Alternative B could be seen as suggesting a somewhat less negative assessment of economic conditions than some market participants expect, causing them to reduce their estimates of the odds of additional accommodation.

For these reasons,  policymakers might choose the language in Alternative A that indicates that the range for the federal funds target rate is likely to be unchanged “at least through mid-2013.

Nelson, and D 2 Following the Committee’s usual practice, the draft directive for Alternative A sizes the purchases and sales in terms of the face value of the securities.

A LONG-RUN  PROJECTIONS OF  THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE   The staff has prepared two scenarios for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet that  correspond to the policy Alternatives A, B, and C; although the language in the   Alternatives B and C have the same balance sheet projection.

For the scenario that corresponds to Alternatives B and C, we assume that the Committee continues to reinvest the proceeds from principal repayments from Treasury securities and agency securities in Treasury securities until February 2013, about six months before the assumed first increase in the target federal funds rate.

The lower path for interest rates under Alternative A implies more MBS prepayments and therefore reduced MBS holdings over the forecast period.

Because the portfolio is made up of relatively longer-term securities under  Alternative A than in the baseline, the pace at which securities roll off is slower than under Alternatives B and C.

As a result, the normalization of the size of the balance  sheet is delayed until February 2018, one year and eight months later than in the scenario   Alternatives B and C.

In addition, the normalization of the composition  of the balance sheet will take longer under Alternative A than in the scenario corresponding to Alternatives B and C.

In the scenario corresponding to Alternatives B and C, the monetary base is projected to start contracting in the middle of 2012 and it will continue to contract through 2015, reflecting the decline in reserve balances.

Monthly  Quarterly  Annual - Q4 to Q4  Growth Rates for the Monetary Base  Date Alternatives B  and C  Alternative A Memo : June Tealbook Percent, annual rate DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY FORECASTS Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to expand at an annual rate of 5 percent in the third quarter, driven by rapid expansion in federal government debt and a modest rise in private nonfinancial debt.

The directive for  Alternatives B and C would instruct the Desk to continue the current policy of reinvesting principal payments on SOMA securities.  The Directive for Alternative A would instruct the Desk to take appropriate steps to sell and purchase Treasury holdings so as to increase the average maturity of the holdings of the SOMA portfolio, and direct reinvestments of principal payments to long-term securities.

The balance sheet projections  assume that no use of short-term draining tools is necessary to achieve the projected path for the  federal funds rate.1   ASSETS   Treasury Securities, Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and Agency Debt  Securities    The assumptions under Alternatives B and C are: o  Principal payments from Treasury securities continue to be reinvested until February 2013.

Moreover, we assume that the impact on longer-term   interest rates is realized immediately upon the announcement of Alternative A, implying  a lower path for interest rates in Alternative A relative to the scenario corresponding to Alternatives B and C.  The lower path for interest rates under Alternative A implies more MBS prepayments and therefore reduced MBS holdings over the forecast period.

Federal Reserve Balance Sheet  End-of-Year Projections -- Alternatives B This page  is intentionally blank.

