Accordingly, Alternative A would lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 0 to ⅛ percent and replace the “extended period” language with a more explicit statement that the Committee anticipates keeping the funds rate near zero “until resource utilization and underlying inflation have moved appreciably closer to levels consistent with its longer-term objectives.

In addition, Alternative A would keep the total face value of the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury instruments, agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) at its current level, but shift the composition of the portfolio by reinvesting principal payments from agency debt and MBS into Treasuries while continuing to roll over maturing Treasury debt.

Even if they  see the deterioration in the outlook and increase in downside risks as limited to the near  2 The changes in statement language offered in Alternatives A and B1 are among those discussed in “Potential Enhancements to FOMC Communication,” by Gauti Eggerston, Krishna Guha, Andrew Levin, Steve Meyer, and Simon Potter, August 4, 2010 term, policymakers may judge that the changes are large enough to warrant some policy response to help keep the recovery on track.

The staff anticipates that the cuts in the target range and the remuneration rates on  reserve balances specified under Alternative A would leave the effective federal funds rate trading in a range of 5 to 10 basis points—about 10 basis points below its recent with similar reductions in general collateral repo rates and Libor.

While a 10 basis point drop in short-term interest rates would not, by itself,  provide significant macroeconomic stimulus, the combination of rate cuts and language   Alternative A could do so.

In combination, the components of Alternative A seem likely to generate a meaningful reduction in medium- and longer-term nominal interest rates by reducing investors’ expectations of future short-term  rates.

If  investors thought that the Committee’s adoption of Alternative A would lead to a stronger recovery, equity prices probably would rise.

As noted earlier, the effect on market rates that would result from the change in  reinvestment policy under Alternatives A and B2 might well be smaller than the staff estimates.

In line with such views, the  statement under Alternative C would note the Committee’s belief that a sustainable economic recovery is under way and signal an approaching increase in rates by changing the Committee’s forward guidance to state that the funds rate is likely to remain at low levels for some time.

Thus, the statement for Alternative C would announce such a change in the Committee’s portfolio management policy.

An announcement along the lines of the statement under Alternative C would greatly surprise investors.

The changes to the statement envisioned under Alternative C would lead market participants to conclude that the Committee was likely to increase its target for the federal funds rate much sooner than had been anticipated and thus would shift the expected funds rate path up.

Under the scenario that corresponds to Alternatives A and B1, the Desk reinvests the principal payments from Treasury coupon instruments, agency MBS, and agency debt securities in Treasury coupon securities to prevent a decline in the System’s total holdings of longer-term instruments until the target federal funds rate increases in the fourth quarter of 2012.

The directive for  Alternatives A and B1 would instruct the Desk to maintain the SOMA’s total holdings of longer-term securities at roughly its current level by reinvesting repayments of principal from agency debt and MBS, and from Treasury coupon securities, in Treasury coupon issues, effective September 1.  The directive for Alternative C would instruct the Desk to stop reinvesting the proceeds of maturing Treasury securities, effective September 1.

Under Alternatives A and B1, in addition to reinvesting Treasury securities as they mature, the Committee reinvests the proceeds received from  maturing agency debt and maturing and prepaying agency MBS in Treasury coupon securities to prevent a drop in the System’s total holdings of longer-term instruments.

