Alternative B maintains the current monthly pace of purchases, the current statement language about the Committee’s criteria for adjusting the pace of purchases, and the current threshold-based forward guidance for the federal funds rate, but adds new language that provides guidance about the medium-term outlook for the federal funds rate.  Alternative A also maintains the current pace of asset purchases, but suggests that the Committee is not as likely to reduce the pace of its purchases in the near term and augments the forward guidance for the federal funds rate on several dimensions discussed further below.  Alternative C announces a reduction of each in monthly purchases of agency MBS and Treasury securities and retains the forward guidance for the federal funds rate used in the Committee’s September statement.

Alternatives A and B note that the effects of the temporary shutdown of the federal government have made the evolution of economic conditions somewhat more difficult to assess, and offer optional language pointing to delays in releases of key data.

Alternatives A and B refer to a slower recovery in the housing sector in response to higher mortgage rates.  Both Alternatives A and B acknowledge that labor market indicators have shown “some” further improvement but also observe, as in the September statement, that the unemployment rate “remains elevated.   Alternative C presents a more sanguine characterization of the labor market by noting that the unemployment rate, though still elevated, has continued to decline.

Alternatives A and B note that inflation has been running “below” the Committee’s longer-run objective once changes in energy prices are excluded; Alternative C uses “somewhat below.

In contrast, Alternative C indicates that the Committee has become more confident that labor market conditions will continue to improve over the medium term.

All three alternatives indicate that the Committee  anticipates that inflation will move back toward its 2 percent objective over the medium  term; Alternatives A and B repeat the September statement’s language about the risks to economic performance that could result from inflation running persistently below the Committee’s 2 percent objective, while Alternative C omits that language.

With respect to balance sheet policy, both Alternatives A and B state that, although labor market conditions have improved since the current asset purchase program began a year ago, the Committee has decided to continue purchases at the existing pace pending further evidence of sustained improvement in economic activity and labor market conditions.  As in September, Alternative B indicates that when the Committee sees evidence of further progress toward its objectives, reductions in the pace of purchases will become appropriate, and specifies that the Committee will be looking for such evidence “at its coming meetings.   Alternative A is more tentative about the near- term prospect of a reduction in the pace of purchases, saying that progress toward the Committee’s objectives is “not yet sufficient to warrant” an adjustment and dropping the reference to “coming meetings.

Alternative C, on the other hand, indicates that the  improvement in the labor market justifies immediate “modest downward adjustments” in  the Committee’s asset purchases, to $30 billion per month for agency MBS and  35 billion per month for Treasury securities; Alternative C also says that the Committee plans to reduce the pace of purchases “again” if incoming information continues to indicate further progress toward its goals.

In addition, one version of paragraph 4 in Alternative C indicates that the Committee expects to reduce the pace of future asset purchases either in proportion to gains in nonfarm payrolls or in proportion to reductions in the unemployment rate.

Alternatives A, B, and C all maintain the 0 to ¼ percent target range for the  federal funds rate, the 6½ percent threshold for the unemployment rate, and the  2½ percent “ceiling” threshold for projected inflation; Alternative A also offers an option to lower the unemployment threshold to 6 percent.  In addition, Alternative A adds a second condition for projected inflation—an inflation “floor”—whereby the Committee indicates that it does not anticipate raising its federal funds rate target if inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be below either 1½ or 2 percent.

Finally, Alternatives A and B indicate, with slightly different words, that the Committee anticipates that economic headwinds will abate only gradually, so that the federal funds rate will likely have to be kept “below its longer-run normal value for a considerable time” in order to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability.

The language in the new sixth paragraph at the end of  Alternative B notes the Committee’s expectation that economic headwinds will abate only gradually, concluding that the federal funds rate will likely have to be kept “below its longer-run normal value for a considerable time” in order to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability.

A decision to adopt a statement like Alternative C would surprise most market participants.

They may see a statement like  Alternative A as more likely than Alternative B to provide the amount of downward pressure on longer-term interest rates needed to counter the tightening in financial conditions, perhaps because they see Alternative B’s language as leaning toward a near- term reduction in the pace of purchases.

These  policymakers may see Alternative A as providing such stimulus through communicating both an open-ended approach to asset purchases and strengthening forward guidance regarding the future path of the federal funds rate.

Policymakers may see a statement like Alternative A as desirable in part because of the additional language in paragraph 5 that enhances the forward guidance about the federal funds rate.

Thus the elements of the statement  language in Alternative A that suggest a somewhat later initial reduction in the pace of purchases than communicated in June might not surprise market participants greatly.

If,  however, investors took a statement like Alternative A as indicating that the FOMC has become more pessimistic about the economic outlook than had been thought, equity prices might not rise or could even decline.

The directives for Alternatives A and B are unchanged; the directive for Alternative C includes changes to make it consistent with the corresponding postmeeting statement.

The directives for Alternatives A and B instruct the Desk to continue purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about $40 billion per month and to continue purchasing longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $45 billion per month.  The draft directive for Alternative C instructs the Desk to purchase agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about $30 billion per month, and to purchase longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $35 billion per month, beginning in November.

Alternative B continues purchases at the current monthly pace at this meeting, but then assumes that the Committee moderates the pace at coming meetings, ending the program by mid-2014.   Alternative C has a reduction in the pace of purchases immediately and additional measured reductions at later meetings, with purchases ending in March 2014.  Alternative A maintains the current pace of purchases through early 2014, and then gradually reduces the pace of purchases, bringing the program to a close in December 2014.

Under these assumptions, purchases total about $1.3 trillion over 2013 and the first half  of 2014, compared with $1.2 trillion in the September Tealbook Alternative B.4  As shown in the exhibit “Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet Items,” SOMA  securities holdings under the purchase program assumed for Alternative B peak at about 2.

4 The balance sheet scenario assumed for Alternative B is consistent with the state-contingent plan for securities purchases laid out by the Chairman in recent communications and discussed by the Committee at its June meeting, as well as with the current staff forecast presented in Tealbook Book A.

Under the Alternative C scenario, the monetary base increases through the third quarter of 2014 because of the purchase program and then contracts, on net, until the size of the portfolio is normalized.

Alternative B Alternative C Alternative A September Alternative B Quarterly 2013: Q4 47.

The Tealbook projections for the scenario corresponding to Alternative B assume that the target federal funds rate begins to increase in the second quarter of 2015.

This date of liftoff is  consistent with the current staff economic forecast and the thresholds described in the September  2013 FOMC statement, and is unchanged from that assumed in the balance sheet projections for  Alternative B in the September Tealbook.

The projections for the scenario corresponding to  Alternative C assume a liftoff date in the fourth quarter of 2014, two quarters earlier than that in Alternative B.

In each case, the balance sheet projections assume  no use of short-term draining tools to achieve the projected path for the target federal funds rate.1  ASSETS  Treasury Securities, Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and Agency Debt  Securities   The assumptions under Alternative B are: o The Committee is assumed to continue expanding its holdings of agency MBS by $40 billion per month and of longer-term Treasury securities by 45 billion per month at this meeting.

TERM PREMIUM EFFECTS5,6   Under Alternative B, the term premium effect on the yield of the ten-year Treasury  note in the fourth quarter of 2013 is about negative 120 basis points, slightly more   Alternative B in the September Tealbook.

The effect is less negative than in Alternative B because there are fewer securities purchased and liftoff is earlier than under Alternative B.

The effect is more negative than in Alternative B because more securities are purchased and liftoff is later than under Alternative B.

