Alternatives A and B reaffirm the intended increase in securities holdings as announced in November.

Alternative A would provide more explicit forward guidance concerning the likely duration of the period over which the Committee expects to maintain exceptionally low levels of the funds rate.

The statement issued under Alternative B would update the Committee’s assessment of the current economic situation, characterizing the information received over the intermeeting period as suggesting that “the economic recovery is on a somewhat firmer footing.

Alternative B recognizes the recent increases in the prices of oil and other commodities while reporting that longer-run inflation expectations have remained stable and that measures of underlying inflation “have been subdued.

Consistent with the more optimistic assessment of the economic recovery and the  stability of inflation expectations, Alternative B states that the recent increases in commodity prices are temporarily boosting headline inflation, but that the Committee expects only “limited pass-through to underlying inflation” and “continues to anticipate a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability.

Compared with Alternative B, the statement for Alternative C presents a more upbeat view of current and prospective economic activity, stating that the economic recovery “is strengthening.

However, Alternative C would indicate a heightened concern about inflation by stating that the Committee will employ its policy tools “to ensure” (rather than “to help ensure,” as in recent statements) that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with its mandate.  To achieve the Committee’s objectives, Alternative C would call for a gradual reduction in the pace of securities purchases to limit the increase in its holdings “to a total 450 billion by the end of the second quarter.

The Committee’s assessment of economic conditions under Alternative A would indicate a greater concern about the slow progress toward its objectives and would indicate that “downside risks to the economic outlook remain significant.

Alternative A reports that longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable and characterizes measures of underlying inflation as having “trended downward.

Tapering  of  Purchases   The  statement  under  Alternative  B  again  indicates  that  the  Committee  will regularly  review  the  pace  and  overall  size  of  the  asset  purchase  program.

As a result, the adoption of a statement along the lines of Alternative B would likely result in little change in bond yields, equity prices, or the foreign exchange value of the dollar.

Even if members continue to anticipate that the economy is likely to  gradually return to higher levels of resource utilization in the context of price stability  without further monetary stimulus, they may view a statement along the lines of  Alternative A as providing reassurance to businesses and households that the Committee is committed to support the recovery, particularly in light of the recent unsettling economic news.

Alternatively, policymakers may continue to view the progress toward their  longer-run objectives as disappointingly slow and judge that Alternative A appropriately recognizes the likely need for more policy stimulus before long.

LONG-RUN  PROJECTIONS OF  THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE   The staff has prepared two scenarios for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet that  correspond to the policy Alternatives A, B, and C (though the language in the statements  differs, Alternatives A and B have the same  balance sheet projection each scenario are based on assumptions about various components of the balance sheet.

For the scenario that corresponds to Alternatives A and B, we assume that the FOMC completes the intended expansion of its holdings of longer-term securities of $600 billion by the end of the second quarter of 2011.

The timing of the other changes in the balance sheet is the same as in  Alternatives A and B.

However,  because the funds rate liftoff occurs earlier in this projection, total assets are lower than in  the January Tealbook from September 2012 through the first quarter of 2016.8  Further  out in the projection, total assets under Alternatives A and B exceed the corresponding levels in the January Tealbook.

The  Directives for Alternatives A and B would instruct the Desk to continue carrying out the increase in the SOMA’s securities holdings of $600 billion by the end of June 2011 through purchases of longer-term Treasury securities while also continuing the current policy of reinvesting principal payments on SOMA securities.

The directive for  Alternative C is for an increase in the SOMA’s holdings totaling of June 2011 while continuing the current portfolio policy of reinvesting principal payments.

ASSETS   Treasury Securities, Agency MBS, and Agency Debt Securities    The assumptions under Alternatives A and B are o Purchases of $600 billion of longer-term  Treasury securities between November 2010 and June 2011.

All other assumptions are the same   Alternatives A and B.

