Alternative A contains a new paragraph that offers more explicit definitions of mandate-consistent longer-run rates of inflation and unemployment than the Committee has heretofore included in its statement.  Alternative A also replaces the qualitative portion of the forward guidance that the FOMC included in the policy paragraph of its August statement—the declaration that “low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013”—with numerical thresholds for inflation and the unemployment rate.  These features of Alternative A reflect the illustrative language in the recent memo on clarifying forward guidance.

These features of Alternative A reflect the  illustrative language in the recent memo on clarifying forward guidance.1  Given the  staff’s baseline forecast, neither of the threshold values specified in Alternative A would be met before 2015, suggesting that the Committee could extend the projected period of exceptionally low rates to “at least through 2014.   Alternatives B and C retain the qualitative forward guidance language from the August statement.

Alternative A includes a large-scale asset purchase program modeled on the one that the Committee implemented from late-2010 to mid-2011.

Alternative B includes two variants of a maturity extension program.

Under the second, the Committee would  announce that it is initiating purchases of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of                                                    3 The asset purchase programs in Alternatives A and B are analyzed in “Possible Approaches to Providing Monetary Accommodation: Reinvestment Maturity Extension Program, SOMA Portfolio Maturity Extension Program, and Long-Maturity LSAP,” also sent to the Committee on September 12.

Alternative  A would expand the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the supply of reserve deposits,  while Alternative B would keep the size of the balance sheet and the level of reserve deposits roughly unchanged.  Alternative B raises the possibility of reducing the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances from 25 to 10 basis points in order to align those rates with current and projected levels of overnight market rates.

This step   Alternative A as well.

To the contrary, Alternatives A and B note that household spending has increased at only a modest pace in recent months despite a recovery in auto sales as supply-chain disruptions eased.

The draft statements also differ in their treatment of inflation:  Alternative C  notes the pickup in inflation earlier this year as well as its more recent moderation;  Alternatives A and B focus on the moderation.

Turning to the outlook, the drafts of  Alternatives A and B indicate that the Committee continues to expect some pickup in the pace of recovery over coming quarters, but highlight downside risks to the economic outlook, including strains in global financial markets.  The draft of Alternative C notes the presence of downside risks but emphasizes the projection of some pickup in growth.

THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B                                                    4 As is the Committee’s usual practice, the draft directive for Alternative B expresses purchases and sales in terms of the face value of securities.

The smaller maturity extension  program of Alternative B is estimated to have nearly the same effects as the larger asset purchase program of Alternative A because the former is structured to buy more securities at the longer end of the term structure and thus results in a more persistent reduction in the average maturity of the publicly held debt.

Staff analysis and academic research suggests that more forceful forward  guidance such as that included in Alternative A could also reduce longer-term rates and provide economic stimulus.

If so, they might anticipate that a statement along the lines of  Alternative A would quickly raise longer-run inflation expectations, or that the inflation threshold in Alternative A would be triggered in fairly short order.

A statement along the lines of Alternative B would be broadly in line with market expectations.

Accordingly,  an announcement along the lines of Alternative B likely would have only a modest further effect on asset prices—bond yields might decline a bit, the foreign exchange value of the dollar slip, and equity prices edge higher—unless the Desk’s announcement of the details of the maturity exchange program indicated that the Committee would remove appreciably more or appreciably less duration from the public’s portfolio than investors expected.

As noted in the discussion of Alternative B, staff analysis of various asset  purchase programs suggests that the program in Alternative A might be expected to ease financial conditions enough to reduce the unemployment rate by ¼ to ½ percentage point at the end of 2013, and to increase PCE inflation by about ¼ percentage point over the medium run.

A statement like that in Alternative C would surprise market participants, who appear to expect that the Committee will either act to provide more stimulus or indicate that it is preparing to take such action soon unless the recovery strengthens.

LONG-RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE  The staff has prepared three scenarios for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet that  correspond to the policy alternatives presented above:  A baseline scenario corresponding   Alternatives A and C.

The  higher path for SOMA under Alternative A postpones the normalization of the size of the balance sheet relative to the baseline.

Likewise, sales  of agency securities under Alternative C commence at the same time as in the baseline, and these sales also last for five years.

However, because the portfolio is made up of  relatively shorter-term Treasury securities under Alternative C than in the baseline, the pace at which securities roll off the portfolio is a bit faster.

Subsequently, the path for reserve  balances under Alternative A falls to under Alternative B and fifteen months later than under Alternative C.

Growth Rates for the Monetary Base  Date Alternative B Alternative A Alternative C Memo : August Tealbook Percent, annual rate Monthly Aug-10 -2.

The  directive for Alternative A would instruct the Desk to purchase longer-term Treasury securities to increase the total face value of domestic securities holdings to approximately 3. The Directive for Alternative B would instruct the Desk to take appropriate steps to purchase $400 billion of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 to 30 years and to sell an equal amount of existing Treasury holdings with remaining maturities of 3 years or less so as to increase the average maturity of the SOMA portfolio while leaving the total face value of domestic securities in the SOMA about unchanged.

The  Directives for Alternatives A and B also would instruct the Desk to continue the current practice of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues at auction, but would instruct the Desk to reinvest principal payments from agency MBS in longer-term Treasury securities. The directive for Alternative C would instruct the Desk to keep the 2.

The balance sheet  projections assume that no use of short-term draining tools is necessary to achieve the projected  path for the federal funds rate.1  ASSETS  Treasury Securities, Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and Agency Debt  Securities  	 The assumptions under Alternative B are: o	 Beginning in October 2011, the FOMC is assumed to sell $400 billion in par value of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less and to purchase the same par amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years or more.

The lower paths for interest rates under the scenarios corresponding to Alternatives A and B implies more MBS prepayments and therefore reduced MBS holdings over the forecast period relative to Alternative C.

The lower paths for interest rates also implies that  purchases of Treasury securities in Alternatives A and B will be made at prices that include a premium above their face value that exceeds the premium under Alternative C.

