Alternative B offers a choice between an explicit statement of the conditions for unemployment and inflation under which the Committee anticipates maintaining the current target range and a simpler statement that economic conditions are likely to warrant the current target range at least through 2014.  Alternative A uses explicit conditional language like that offered in Alternative B, linking the retention of the current target range to economic conditions.  Alternative C begins to remove policy accommodation, in part by shortening the period over which rates are anticipated to remain exceptionally low to “for an extended period.

Alternative A presents the Committee with a choice between two versions of an asset purchase program:  one is discrete in nature (buying $500 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by the end of January 2013), the other is a more flexible approach to asset purchases (announcing the purchase of MBS at a rate of $40 billion per month, with adjustments as needed .  Alternative B makes no adjustment to the balance sheet at this meeting, while Alternative C scales back the maturity extension program (MEP), cutting it in half and completing it by the end of February.

Alternatives A and B say that the economy has been expanding “moderately” even though global economic growth has slowed.  By contrast, Alternative C states that the economic recovery “has strengthened somewhat” and makes no reference to global growth.  Alternatives A and B acknowledge that indicators of labor market conditions point to further improvement, but note that the unemployment rate remains elevated.

Alternatives A and B state that “inflation has been subdued in recent months,” whereas Alternative C states that inflation “has moderated somewhat” from the first half of last year.

Regarding the economic outlook, Alternative B indicates that the Committee expects economic growth over coming quarters to be modest, with a result that the unemployment rate declines only slowly.  Alternative A points to modest economic growth over coming quarters “absent further policy action,” and characterizes the expected decline in the unemployment rate as “only very” gradual.

In  terms of inflation, Alternative A provides the option of either characterizing the Committee’s expectation for inflation as running “below” or “at or below” levels that are consistent with the Committee’s mandate; Alternative B states that inflation is likely to run “at or below” such levels.  Alternative C notes that the Committee anticipates that inflation will “run at levels” consistent with its dual mandate.  Alternative C states that the Committee will continue to pay close attention to inflation, while Alternatives A drops this reference, and Alternative B leaves its inclusion as an option.

Alternative A states that the Committee “will employ its tools as needed,” in order to suggest that the Committee is open to additional policy action.  Alternative B subsumes the discussion of future policy action into the discussion of balance sheet policies, but suggests that the Committee could make changes to those  policies to strengthen the recovery.  Alternative C is neutral, noting that the Committee “will assess the economic outlook” and “is prepared” to use its tools to promote its objectives.

Because the Committee would state under Alternative B that it anticipates inflation running at or below its target rate, members may wish to remove the statement that the Committee will pay “close attention” to inflation and inflation expectations.

Alternative B provides two variants of the forward guidance.

If the economic expansion were to unexpectedly gather  steam and inflationary pressures were to mount, such that inflation was projected to pickup  notably or inflation expectations showed signs of becoming unmoored, the statement implies that  1 Because the innovation of Alternative B would be the modification to the forward guidance, and no additional balance sheet policy actions would be taken at this meeting, the ordering of paragraphs 3 and 4 has been reversed relative to the December statement.

of Alternative B provides a simpler formulation, under which the Committee would push back its indication of the possible time of lift-off without providing specific information on the economic conditions that it sees as consistent with an unchanged target rate.

Thus, a  statement like that in Alternative B would likely push out expectations for the date of the first rise in the funds rate and lead to some easing of financial conditions.

Average Absolute Responses of Eurodollar Futures Rates  to Macroeconomic News (in basis points)  Pre "mid‐2013" language  Futures Contract Sep‐12 Dec‐12 Mar‐13 Jun‐13  Average Response 6.39 8.39 8.02 9.37  Post "mid‐2013" language  Futures Contract Mar‐13 Jun‐13 Sep‐13 Dec‐13  Average Response 2.31 2.59 3.02 4.54  Post/Pre Ratio of  Average Responses 0.36 0.31 0.38 0.48  Experience with the introduction of the forward guidance in August of last year suggests  that the shift in the expected lift‐off date to the end of 2014 under paragraph 3’ of  Alternative B could have an appreciable effect on policy expectations and longer For example, if the revised forward guidance resulted in an expected federal funds rate path that remained at the middle of the current target range through the end of 2014, the result might be viewed as a policy shock of about ‐45 basis points at the end of 2014 based on the policy rate path as of January 18, 2011 (shown by the black line in the chart of OIS curves .

To provide additional accommodation, Alternative A would both adjust the forward guidance, as in the more explicit version of Alternative B, and announce a new MBS purchase program.

The more  aggressive forward guidance in Alternative A would provide additional monetary policy accommodation on top of the new LSAP program.

A statement along the lines of that in Alternative A would surprise financial market participants.

Alternative C would greatly surprise markets.

As a result, a  statement along the lines of Alternative C would generate a substantial revision to the anticipated path for the federal funds rate and for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet policies, and interest rates along the yield curve would rise noticeably.

The scenario for Alternative A reflects a billion agency MBS purchase program included in paragraph 3 of the draft statement for that alternative, but is consistent with the open-ended purchase program in paragraph 3’ if purchases last, and are expected to last, for one year.

The additional purchases of agency MBS under Alternative A postpone the normalization of the size of the balance sheet until February 2018, five months later than under Alternative B.

The size of the balance sheet normalizes in the same month under Alternative B as it did in the December Tealbook baseline.

On the liability side of the balance sheet, the forecasted path for reserve balances for  Alternative B is roughly unchanged from the previous Tealbook’s baseline.

The monetary base under Alternative A expands along with the rise in reserve balances that comes from the additional asset purchases.

9 The prepayment paths for agency MBS holdings and the premiums calculated under Alternative C are based on the interest rate path used in Alternative B.

Annual - Q4 to Q4  Monthly  Growth Rates for the Monetary Base  Date Alternative B Alternative A Percent, annual rate Alternative C Memo : December Tealbook Quarterly DEBT,  BANK  CREDIT,  AND  MONEY FORECASTS The staff projects that domestic nonfinancial sector debt will increase at an annual rate of 4¼ percent in 2012, reflecting continued rapid expansion in federal government debt and a modest rise in private nonfinancial debt.

In addition, the directives for Alternatives A and B would instruct the Desk to take appropriate steps to complete by the end of June 2012 the $400 billion maturity extension program that was announced last September.

The Tealbook projections for the scenarios corresponding to Alternatives A and B assume that the target federal funds rate begins to increase in October 2014, consistent with the monetary policy path in the Tealbook extension derived from the outcome-based rule, while the projection for the scenario corresponding to Alternative C assumes the target rate lifts off in January 2013.

The balance sheet projections assume  that no use of short-term draining tools is  necessary to achieve the projected path for the federal funds rate.1   ASSETS   Treasury Securities, Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and Agency Debt  Securities     The assumptions under Alternative B are: o  Over the nine months beginning in October 2011, the FOMC is assumed to purchase $400 billion in par value of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of six years or more and sell the same par amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of three years or less.

Reserve balances will increase by the same amount   The large-scale asset purchase program in  Alternative A would put downward pressure on market interest rates, in particular mortgage rates, and result in more MBS 2 Projected prepayments of agency MBS reflect interest rates as of January 18, 2012.

