Under both Alternatives A and B, the Committee would continue its policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings, but under Alternative C, the Committee would announce that it will discontinue the reinvestment policy in July as part of “a gradual reduction in the current extraordinary degree of policy accommodation.

Alternative B states that the Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and that it is prepared to adjust those holdings “as appropriate.

In  contrast, Alternative A indicates that the Committee is prepared to expand securities holdings “if needed.   In addition, Alternative A states that economic conditions are likely to warrant maintenance of the reinvestment policy at least through mid-2012.

Alternative B retains the “extended period” language for the funds rate, while Alternative A states that economic conditions will likely warrant exceptionally low levels for the funds rate at least through the end of 2012.  Alternative C would indicate that the Committee anticipates that exceptionally low funds rates will be warranted “for some time,” thus signaling that the Committee anticipates raising its target for the federal funds rate sooner than markets currently expect.

The statement language in Alternative B acknowledges recent weak data on economic activity but reiterates that the Committee continues  to expect progress toward more satisfactory rates of unemployment and inflation.  Alternative B states that incoming information indicates that the recovery is continuing “somewhat more slowly” than the Committee had expected.

Alternative B indicates that the Committee expects the pace of the recovery to pick up and unemployment to resume its gradual decline toward mandate-consistent rates.

In  referring to the recent pickup in inflation, Alternative B states that this increase mainly reflects higher prices for some commodities and imported goods, as well as the recent supply chain disruptions, and notes that inflation expectations have been stable.

Alternative B goes on to say that, as the effects on inflation of past energy and other commodity price increases dissipate, inflation will likely subside to rates at or below mandate-consistent levels.

The draft statement under Alternative A supports a shift toward increased accommodation by indicating greater concern about the economic outlook and somewhat less concern about prospects for inflation.

With regard to inflation, Alternative A states that the pass-through of commodity prices to the prices of non-energy consumer goods and services has been relatively limited.

Omitted from Alternative A is Alternative B’s indication that the Committee will “pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations.

Alternative C supports the initiation of the removal of policy accommodation by emphasizing the potential for a buildup of inflation pressures.  Alternative C notes that the pick-up in inflation has occurred as firms have faced cost pressures from increased commodity prices and as import prices have risen.

These participants might therefore   Alternative B at this meeting.

A statement along the lines of Alternative B would be unlikely to surprise market participants.

Accordingly, although there might be some   initial volatility in response to the fairly extensive changes in the statement language, the  release of a statement like Alternative B would likely result in little lasting change in bond yields, equity prices, or the foreign exchange value of the dollar.

These policymakers may view the modifications to the  statement language in Alternative A as a prudent reaction to recent economic developments.

Members may see a statement   along the lines of Alternative A as likely to bolster confidence and so strengthen the recovery, even if no further easing step is ultimately required.

LONG-RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE     The staff has prepared two scenarios for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet that  correspond to the policy Alternatives A, B, and C; although the language in the   Alternatives A and B have the same balance sheet projection.

For the scenario that corresponds to Alternatives A and B, we assume that the FOMC completes the announced $600 billion expansion of its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011.

Under Alternative C, the FOMC is assumed to cease reinvesting principal  payments on securities held in the SOMA portfolio in July 2011, about eight months   Alternatives A and B.

Monthly  Quarterly  Annual - Q4 to Q4  Growth Rates for the Monetary Base  Date Alternatives A  and B  Alternative C Memo : April Tealbook Percent, annual rate DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY FORECASTS Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to increase at an annual rate of 3½ percent in the second quarter of this year, reflecting a rapid expansion in federal government debt and a tepid rise in private nonfinancial debt.

The directives for  Alternatives A and B would instruct the Desk to complete purchases of longer-term Treasury securities to implement the $600 billion increase in the SOMA’s securities holdings by the end of June 2011 while also continuing the current policy of reinvesting principal payments on SOMA securities.

The directive for Alternative C likewise calls for the completion of the previously announced purchase program, but then instructs the Desk to cease all reinvestment of principal payments from agency and Treasury securities from July 2011 onward.

The balance sheet  projections assume that no use of short-term draining tools is necessary to achieve the projected  path for the federal funds rate.1   ASSETS   Treasury Securities, Agency MBS, and Agency Debt Securities    The assumptions under Alternatives A and B are o Purchases of $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities are completed in June 2011.

 Under Alternative C, purchases of $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities are   Alternatives A and B.

Sales of agency securities commence in November 2012,   Alternatives A and B.

Federal Reserve Balance Sheet End-of-Year Projections -- Alternatives A Billions of dollars May 31, 2011 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Total assets 2,791 2,286 1,590 1,587 1,758 1,952 Selected assets Liquidity programs for financial firms 0 0 0 0 0 0 Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0 Central bank liquidity swaps 0 0 0 0 0 0 Lending through other credit facilities 14 4 0 0 0 0 Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 14 4 0 0 0 0 Support for specific institutions 64 36 26 18 9 4 Credit extended to AIG 0 0 0 0 0 0 Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC 64 36 26 18 9 4 Securities held outright 2,567 2,102 1,439 1,459 1,646 1,850 U.

