Alternative B maintains the current stance of monetary policy.  In addition, Alternative B offers two possible ways to emphasize that the Committee’s decisions regarding asset purchases are distinct from its management of the future path of the federal funds rate.  Alternative A gives options for increasing policy accommodation by lowering the unemployment rate threshold for maintaining the current target range for the federal funds rate and by providing additional guidance about the Committee’s state-contingent intentions for the federal funds rate after a threshold is crossed.  Alternative A also includes a brief summary of a state-contingent plan for moderating and subsequently ending asset purchases that is consistent with the discussion of the Committee’s intentions that the Chairman presented in the June postmeeting press conference and in his testimony in connection with the July Monetary Policy Report.

Alternative C reduces the pace of asset purchases immediately; it also includes the state- contingent plan for bringing them to a close.

In summarizing recent economic developments, Alternatives A and B note that economic activity has been expanding at a modest pace, while Alternative C retains the “moderate pace” language of the June statement.

As in  June, Alternative B indicates that labor market conditions have shown “further improvement in recent months, on balance.

But both Alternatives A and B continue to describe the unemployment rate as elevated.

In assessing the improvement in the labor  market, Alternative C emphasizes the “appreciable” employment.  As in the June FOMC statement, Alternatives B and C indicate that “partly reflecting transitory influences, inflation has been running below the Committee’s longer- run objective,” but that longer-term inflation expectations “have remained stable.

Alternative A notes that inflation has been running below the Committee’s goal “even though” longer-run inflation expectations have been stable.

Alternative B offers a choice of repeating the June statement language indicating that the Committee anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely will run “at or below” its 2 percent objective, or of stating an expectation that “with appropriate policy accommodation, inflation will move back toward its 2 percent objective over the medium term” and that the Committee “will pay close attention to inflation developments.   Alternative C indicates that the Committee expects inflation over the medium term to run at 2 percent.  In contrast, Alternative A observes that “the persistence of very low inflation could pose risks to economic performance.

Turning to  risks to the real-side outlook, Alternatives A and B repeat the June language expressing the Committee’s judgment that the downside risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market have diminished since the fall, with Alternative A also cautioning that “a substantial tightening of financial conditions would pose a risk to the economic outlook.

Alternative C offers a more sanguine view of the risks to the outlook, not only stating that downside risks have diminished since the fall, but also suggesting more confidence that labor market conditions will continue to improve over the medium run.

With respect to balance sheet policy, Alternatives A and B maintain the asset purchase program at its current pace.  In contrast, Alternative C immediately reduces monthly purchases of longer-term Treasury securities and of agency MBS.

Alternatives A and C include new language that emphasizes that the Committee’s decisions regarding asset purchases “are not on a preset course.   Alternative A then states more specifically the Committee’s expectation that it anticipates “moderating the pace of its securities purchases as economic conditions improve, but continuing purchases until the unemployment rate is about 7 percent, economic growth is sufficient to support continuing solid job gains, and inflation is moving back toward its 2 percent longer-run goal.   Alternative C uses similar language to describe expectations for “further reducing” and then eventually stopping the Committee’s securities purchases.

All keep the current threshold for projected inflation; Alternatives B and C would also retain the 6½ percent threshold for the unemployment rate.

To reinforce the  separation of the Committee’s balance sheet policy and its forward guidance for the  federal funds rate, both Alternatives B and C state more directly that the Committee “continues to anticipate” (rather than “currently anticipates”) that the federal funds rate will remain exceptionally low at least until one of the thresholds is crossed.

One version  of paragraph 5 of Alternative B would state that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate “for the foreseeable future.

Alternative A adds accommodation by lowering the unemployment threshold to either 6 or 5½ percent and by providing additional guidance about the Committee’s state-contingent plans for the federal funds rate after a threshold is crossed.  In particular, paragraph 5 in Alternative A notes that “increases in the federal funds rate, once they begin, are likely to be gradual until the economy is nearing maximum employment” so long as inflation remains near 2 percent and inflation expectations remain well anchored.  Alternative A also bolsters the forward guidance by converting a sentence in paragraph 5—from one that could be interpreted as encompassing reasons the Committee might raise the federal funds rate before a threshold has been crossed—into a sentence that explicitly addresses the considerations that will enter into the Committee’s decision to raise its federal funds rate target “after a threshold has been crossed.

Altogether, this evidence suggests that a  statement along the lines of Alternative B would largely be in line with market participants’ expectations and thus would be unlikely to cause sizable changes in interest rates, equity prices, or the foreign exchange value of the dollar.

For all of the reasons discussed above, policymakers might prefer a statement like  Alternative C that immediately reduces the pace of securities purchases, indicates that the Committee will likely make further reductions in the pace of its purchases as economic conditions improve, and lays out a state-contingent plan—similar to the one outlined by the Chairman in recent policy communications—under which purchases end once specific economic conditions are fulfilled.

A decision to adopt a statement like Alternative C would come as a surprise to market participants, particularly in light of the Chairman’s recent remarks about the Committee’s plans for asset purchases, and likely would be seen as an indication that the Committee will end asset purchases sooner and acquire an appreciably smaller total stock of securities than market participants currently anticipate.

Alternative A provides more accommodation than Alternative B by reducing the forward guidance threshold for the unemployment rate and by providing additional guidance about the path of the federal funds rate after it rises from its effective lower bound.

An announcement along the lines of Alternative A would surprise market participants, though some market commentary has noted the possibility that the Committee might lower the unemployment rate threshold to provide more policy accommodation.

If, however,  investors took a statement like Alternative A to indicate that the FOMC has become more pessimistic about the outlook for economic growth and employment than market participants had anticipated, equity prices might not rise or could even decline.

The directives for Alternatives A and B are unchanged; the draft for Alternative C includes some changes to make the directive for that alternative consistent with the corresponding post-meeting statement.

The draft directives for Alternatives A and B instruct the Desk to continue purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about $40 billion per month and to continue purchasing longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about 45 billion per month.  The draft directive for Alternative C instructs the Desk to purchase agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about [$35 | $30] billion per month, and to purchase longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about [$40 | $30] billion per month, beginning in August.

Alternative B continues purchases at the current monthly pace in the near term, but then moderates the pace later this year; the pace of purchases would be reduced in measured steps through the first half of 2014, ending around mid-year.

Alternative C decreases the pace of purchases immediately and ends purchases in December 2013.

“Considerations Regarding the Composition of Reductions in the Pace of Purchases” for  a discussion of the potential effects of different Treasury and MBS pace reductions.)   Under these assumptions, purchases total about $1.2 trillion over 2013 and the first half  of 2014, up from $900 billion assumed in the June Tealbook Alternative B.4  As shown in the exhibit “Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet Items,” SOMA  securities holdings under the purchase program assumed in Alternative B peak at about 2.

4 The balance sheet scenario assumed for Alternative B is consistent with the state-contingent plan for securities purchases laid out by the Chairman in recent communications and discussed by the Committee at its June meeting, as well as with the current staff forecast presented in Tealbook Book A.

5 This liftoff date for the federal funds rate is one quarter later than that assumed in the balance   Alternative B in the June Tealbook.

7 The normalization assumptions in the June Tealbook Alternative B projection were in line with the exit strategy outlined in the minutes of the June 2011 FOMC meeting, which incorporated MBS sales over three to five years.

The larger size of the LSAP program in the current Alternative B projection pushes out normalization another three quarters.

The trough in remittances is  20 billion higher than the projected trough in Alternative B in the June Tealbook, which included MBS sales and, hence, recorded realized capital losses.

Alternative Projections for the Monetary Base Date Alternative B Alternative A Alternative C June Alternative B Percent change, annual rate; not seasonally adjusted Monthly 2012: Dec 13.

The Tealbook projections for the scenario corresponding to Alternative B assume that the target federal funds rate begins to increase in August 2015.

The projections for the  scenario corresponding to Alternative C assume the target federal funds rate lifts off in early 2015.

In each case, the balance sheet projections assume no use of short-term draining tools to  achieve the projected path for the target federal funds rate.1  ASSETS  Treasury Securities, Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and Agency Debt  Securities   The assumptions under Alternative B are: o The Committee is assumed to continue expanding its holdings of agency MBS by $40 billion per month and of longer-term Treasury securities by $45 billion per month into the fall of 2013.

The contemporaneous term premium effect for Alternative B is roughly 20 basis points 4 The annual growth rate of capital affects the date of normalization of the size of the balance sheet, the size of the SOMA portfolio after normalization, and the level of annual remittances to the Treasury.

The  effect is less negative than in Alternative B because there are fewer securities purchased in 2013 and the liftoff date is earlier, so the balance sheet starts contracting sooner than under Alternative B.

Treasury Total capital 55 55 62 78 99 125 158 200    Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.    Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding. Alternative Projections for the 10-Year Treasury Term Premium Effect Basis Points Quarterly Averages Date Alternative B Alternative A Alternative C June Alternative B 2013: Q2 –102 Q3 –125 –139 –109 –100 Q4 –121 –135 –104 –94 2014: Q1 –116 –131 –99 –89 Q2 –111 –126 –94 –83 Q3 –106 –121 –89 –78 Q4 –100 –115 –84 –72 2015: Q1 –95 –110 –80 –67 Q2 –90 –104 –75 –62 Q3 –85 –99 –71 –57 Q4 –80 –93 –67 –52 2016: Q4 –63 –74 –52 –36 2017: Q4 –49 –58 –40 –24 2018: Q4 –39 –46 –32 –17 2019: Q4 –30 –36 –25 –14 2020: Q4 –24 –28 –20 –13 2021: Q4 –19 –22 –17 –12 2022: Q4 –16 –17 –14 –10 2023: Q4 –13 –14 –11 –8 2024: Q4 –9 –10 –8 –6 2025: Q4 –7 –7 –6 –4 This page is intentionally blank.

