The statement issued under Alternative B would note that information received since the last FOMC meeting “confirms” that the pace of recovery has slowed in recent months.

Alternative B would not introduce additional policy accommodation at this time, and it would maintain the Committee’s existing reinvestment policy.

The statement under Alternative C would say that the economic recovery “is proceeding,” and that the Committee continues to anticipate a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability.

Consistent with this assessment, Alternative B continues to indicate that the pace of economic recovery is likely to be modest in the near term, but notes that measures of underlying inflation have trended lower in recent quarters, “to levels somewhat below those the Committee judges most consistent, over the longer run, with its mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability.   Alternative B ends by stating that the Committee “is prepared to provide additional accommodation as needed to foster a stronger economic recovery and to help return inflation, over time, to levels consistent with its mandate.

Market participants have indicated a strong desire for greater clarity  about the Committee’s threshold for undertaking additional policy action, and a statement   Alternative B would help in this regard.

Even though the statement language points to “additional  accommodation” without specifically mentioning LSAPs, the announcement of  Alternative B nonetheless would likely lead investors to price in higher odds that additional LSAPs will be implemented by the Committee, perhaps as soon as at the November meeting.

Moreover, the indication employed in the statement for Alternative B that inflation was expected to rise eventually to levels the Committee considers consistent with its mandate would not be used in this case.

In addition, Alternative C would change the statement language to begin positioning the Committee for removal of policy accommodation.

The announcement of the statement under Alternative C would come as a complete surprise to market participants.

Therefore, the announcement of  Alternative C would lead investors to greatly reassess their trajectory for the path of monetary policy, especially in the near term.

The  directive for Alternatives B and C would instruct the Desk to maintain the SOMA’s total holdings of longer-term securities at approximately its current level by continuing to reinvest repayments of principal from agency debt and MBS in longer-term Treasury securities.

