Alternative B reaffirms the intended increase in securities holdings and the pace of purchases that the Committee first announced in November.

Alternative A provides more explicit forward guidance concerning the period over which the Committee expects the funds rate to remain at its effective lower bound.  Alternatives B and C retain the familiar “extended period” language.  Alternative C includes as an option new language stating that the Committee will use its tools to help ensure that inflation, over time, “is at levels of 2 percent or a bit less, which the Committee judges consistent with its mandate.

Alternative D would signal that the period of exceptionally low funds rates is likely to come to an end in the near future and that the reinvestment of principal payments may be brought to a close before long.

The statement issued under Alternative B would again characterize the information received over the intermeeting period as confirming that the economic recovery “is continuing.

Alternative B observes that although commodity prices have risen, measures of underlying inflation are “somewhat low” relative to levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate and “have been trending downward.

The assessment of economic conditions and the outlook under Alternative A is similar to that under Alternative B.  However, Alternative A retains the weaker characterization of household spending and business investment in equipment and software included in the December statement; it also describes measures of underlying inflation as “low” and unemployment as “elevated.   Alternative A not only states that progress toward the Committee’s objectives “remains disappointingly slow,” it adds that “there are still significant downside risks to the economic outlook.

Alternative C notes that the recovery “is continuing” and that there are “some indications” that it “is strengthening.   In particular, Alternative C describes household spending as having “picked up” and indicates that business investment (including is rising.  In contrast to Alternatives A and B, Alternative C does not say that household spending remains constrained and that business investment in nonresidential structures is weak.

The final paragraph of the draft  statement in Alternative C offers a way the Committee could choose to communicate explicitly the level of inflation that it judges consistent, over time, with its dual mandate.

The statement issued under Alternative D states that the economic recovery “is continuing” but does not include the qualifier, found in the other alternatives, that the rate of growth has been insufficient to bring about a significant improvement in labor market conditions.

Under alternative D the Committee would maintain the target for the federal funds rate at its current level, but state that it anticipates that the rate will stay at “low levels” for “some time” rather than at “exceptionally low levels” for “an extended period” as in the previous statement.

A statement along the lines of Alternative B may be appealing to policymakers because it could reinforce investor confidence that the economic recovery is proceeding and that employment and inflation are evolving in a manner consistent with a gradual return to levels more consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate.

Thus the  adoption of a statement along the lines of Alternative B would likely result in little change in bond yields, equity prices, or the foreign exchange value of the dollar.

A statement along the lines of Alternative C would consequently surprise investors.

The announcement of Alternative D would completely surprise market participants.

Total assets in Alternative B are projected to be just a touch larger than shown in the December Tealbook, reflecting, in part, a small upward revision to projected MBS holdings that is only partly offset by a reduction in projected holdings of Treasury securities.

Annual - Q4 to Q4  Growth Rates for the Monetary Base  Percent, annual rate  Monthly  Alternative D Date Alternative B Alternative A Alternative C DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY FORECASTS Domestic nonfinancial debt is projected to expand at an annual rate of about 2¾ percent in the first quarter of this year, driven by a rapid expansion in federal government debt and a modest rise in private nonfinancial debt.

The  directive for Alternative B would instruct the Desk to continue carrying out the increase in the SOMA’s securities holdings of $600 billion by the end of June 2011 through purchases of longer-term Treasury securities while also continuing the current policy of reinvesting principal payments on SOMA securities.

The directive for Alternative A  would increase the SOMA’s securities holdings by $800 billion by the end of September  2011 through the purchase of longer-term Treasury securities, while the corresponding  increase under the Alternative C directive is a total of 2011. The directives for both Alternatives A and C continue the current portfolio policy of reinvesting principal payments. The directive for Alternative D would instruct the Desk to maintain the SOMA’s total holdings of securities at approximately the current level by continuing to reinvest payments of principal from agency debt and MBS in longer-term Treasury securities.

ASSETS   Treasury Securities, Agency MBS, and Agency Debt Securities    The assumptions under Alternative B are o Purchases of $600 billion of longer-term  Treasury securities between November 2010 and June 2011, at an average pace of about $75 billion per month (about .

