Apart from updating the characterization of the incoming data, the statement  under Alternative B would be unchanged from the one released at the conclusion of the April meeting.

The statements would also note that underlying inflation has trended  lower and that longer-term inflation expectations have been stable; Alternatives A and B would mention the recent decline in energy and other commodity prices.

In addition, Alternative A indicates that the near-term outlook for activity has weakened and that the outlook is for “quite” subdued below levels consistent with the dual mandate.

The statement proposed under Alternative B would probably result in little change in bond yields, equity prices, or the foreign exchange value of the dollar.

If so, they may prefer to combine the language about the economic situation  and guidance about the target federal funds rate of Alternative B with an announcement—as in Alternative C—that the Committee would begin to redeem 2 See “SOMA Treasury Redemption and Reinvestment Policy,” Michelle Ezer, Joshua Frost, Frank M.

The additional monetary stimulus provided under Alternative A would come in large part through a reduction in short- and intermediate-term interest rates as market participants marked down their outlook for the federal funds rate path.

Participants may favor the combination of language and policy actions in  Alternative A as a way to put downward pressure on interest rates to counter the tightening in financial conditions that occurred over the intermeeting period.

The statement under Alternative C would suggest an approaching increase in rates by changing “will maintain” to “decided to maintain,” thus indicating that the Committee’s commitment to the current target range did not extend to 3 Another feature of the structure proposed for paragraph C-1 is that it treats output and inflation in a parallel way in that there is no discussion of the causal factors behind the outlook for either variable.

That  paragraph then concludes with a characterization of the outlook for both economic  activity and inflation.3 An announcement along the lines of the statement under Alternative C would surprise investors.

The baseline scenario corresponds to Alternative B in this Tealbook.

Because under Alternative A agency MBS are held at the current level until the third quarter of 2012, the path of total assets associated with this scenario is higher over that time period relative to the baseline.

After sales commence, the paths for total assets  under both Alternative A and the baseline converge in June 2015, after which point they follow the same slight upward trajectory in line with growth in Federal Reserve notes in circulation and capital.  Alternative C assumes that Treasury securities are not rolled over when they mature, resulting in a lower path of assets than under the baseline.

The total assets path  corresponding to Alternative C eventually converges with the baseline path in February 2015.

Balance Sheet Projections Summary   Alternative A Baseline Alternative C MBS Securities Total held June 2010   $1,117 billion $1,117 billion $1,117 billion Total held Dec.

In Alternatives A and C, the 2.

Not seasonally adjusted Growth Rates for the Monetary Base  Date Baseline Alternative A Alternative C Percent, annual rate Monthly DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY FORECASTS Growth in domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to pick up to a 5¾ percent annual rate in the current quarter, with government borrowing continuing at a brisk pace and private-sector debt about unchanged.

The directive for Alternative A would instruct the Desk to purchase mortgage- backed securities to hold the level of the SOMA’s holdings of such issues approximately constant.  The directive for Alternative C would instruct the Desk to stop reinvesting the proceeds of maturing Treasury securities, effective on August 3, 2010.

