Under either Alternative A or B, the Committee would state that it will complete, by the end of the current quarter, the intended $600 billion increase in securities holdings that it first announced in November.

The draft statement for  Alternative B also notes that the Committee will review the size and composition of its securities holdings and that it is prepared to adjust those holdings as needed.

In contrast,  Alternative A indicates that the Committee is prepared to expand its purchases and extend them beyond the current quarter if necessary.

Moreover, Alternative C signals that the Committee is likely to end the reinvestment of principal payments from its securities holdings in the near future.

Alternative A would provide more explicit forward guidance by stating that the Committee now expects that economic conditions will warrant exceptionally low levels of the funds rate at least through mid-2012.

The draft statement for Alternative B updates the assessment of current economic conditions by noting that information received over the intermeeting period “indicates that the economic recovery is proceeding at a moderate pace and overall labor market conditions are improving gradually.   The statement for Alternative B recognizes that rising prices of oil and other commodities are boosting inflation, but it also notes that “measures of underlying inflation are still subdued.   Alternative B offers the Committee a choice of stating that longer-term inflation expectations “have remained stable” or that they “have remained generally stable.   Alternative B reiterates the observations that the unemployment rate is elevated and that underlying inflation is somewhat low, relative to mandate-consistent levels.

With the intended expansion of the  securities portfolio announced in November nearing completion, Alternative B would drop language indicating that the Committee will regularly review “the pace of its securities purchases and the overall size of the asset purchase program.

Compared with Alternative B, the draft statement for Alternative C presents a more upbeat view of current and prospective economic conditions, stating that incoming information “indicates that the economic recovery is on a firm footing.

Moreover,  Alternative C notes that the unemployment rate and underlying inflation “have moved somewhat closer” to mandate-consistent levels.

The statement for Alternative C would indicate that the Committee will maintain its reinvestment policy “for now” and that it “will regularly review its reinvestment policy and the level of its securities holdings.

Taken as a whole, Alternative C would indicate that the first steps toward removing policy accommodation and normalizing the balance sheet are likely to come soon and that further steps could follow in short order.

The Committee’s assessment of economic conditions under Alternative A would note that the recovery is proceeding at a moderate pace, but would highlight that growth recently has been slower than anticipated and point to higher energy prices as a possible cause.  The draft statement for Alternative A also indicates that overall conditions in the labor market “are improving only gradually.   Alternative A acknowledges the pickup in inflation in recent months, but emphasizes that longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable and that measures of underlying inflation are still subdued.

While  indicating that the Committee continues to anticipate a gradual return to higher levels of  resource utilization in a context of price stability, the statement for Alternative A notes an increase in downside risks to the outlook for growth.

Alternative A also contains more explicit forward guidance for the funds rate than the other alternatives, noting that the Committee anticipates that economic conditions “are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate at least through mid- 2012.

Accordingly, they might choose to issue a statement along the lines of  Alternative B to convey their judgment that the economy is likely to recover at an acceptable pace and that inflation and employment are likely to converge toward mandate-consistent levels over time, and to signal that they do not expect to begin removing policy accommodation in the near term.

Accordingly, a statement along the lines of Alternative B would likely result in little change in bond yields, equity prices, or the foreign exchange value of the dollar.

Even if they continue to  see a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability  as the most likely outcome, policymakers may be inclined to adopt a statement along the  lines of Alternative A if they see substantial downside risks to growth and, with short- term rates at their effective lower bound, would want to resume asset purchases promptly if growth does not pick up.

Alternatively, policymakers may expect progress toward their longer-run  objectives to be disappointingly slow, even under their modal forecasts, and judge that  Alternative A appropriately recognizes the likely need for more policy stimulus before long.

LONG-RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE  The staff has prepared two scenarios for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet that  correspond to the policy Alternatives A, B, and C (though the language in the statements  differs, Alternatives A and B have the same balance sheet projection each scenario are based on assumptions about various components of the balance sheet.

For the scenario that corresponds to Alternatives A and B, we assume that the FOMC completes the intended expansion of its holdings of longer-term securities of $600 billion by the end of the second quarter of 2011.

Additionally, all principal paydowns of securities are allowed to roll off the portfolio  beginning in July 2011, as opposed to December 2011, the start date assumed in  Alternatives A and B.

Sales of agency securities have the same time frame and pace as in  Alternatives A and B.

Compared with the March Tealbook baseline projection, total assets in  Alternatives A and B are roughly at the same level until December 2011.

After expanding in 2011, on net, the monetary base is projected to contract  through 2015 in Alternatives A and B, reflecting the decline in Federal Reserve assets and the associated downward trend in reserve balances.  Alternative C has the monetary base expand slightly in 2015 as the balance sheet begins to expand.

The Directives for  Alternatives A and B would instruct the Desk to continue purchasing longer-term Treasury securities to implement the intended $600 billion increase in the SOMA’s securities holdings by the end of June 2011 while also continuing the current policy of reinvesting principal payments on SOMA securities.  The directive for Alternative C calls for an increase in the SOMA’s holdings totaling $450 billion, and for continuing the current policy of reinvesting principal payments.

The balance sheet projections  assume that no use of short-term draining tools is necessary to achieve the projected path for the  federal funds rate.1  ASSETS  Treasury Securities, Agency MBS, and Agency Debt Securities   The assumptions under Alternatives A and B are o Purchases of $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities between November 2010 and June 2011.

Federal Reserve Balance Sheet End-of-Year Projections -- Alternatives A Billions of dollars Mar 31, 2011 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Total assets 2,633 2,463 1,725 1,579 1,752 1,952 Selected assets Liquidity programs for financial firms 0 0 0 0 0 0 Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0 Central bank liquidity swaps 0 0 0 0 0 0 Lending through other credit facilities 19 7 0 0 0 0 Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 19 7 0 0 0 0 Support for specific institutions 64 38 29 21 9 5 Credit extended to AIG 0 0 0 0 0 0 Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC 64 38 29 21 9 5 Securities held outright 2,410 2,280 1,579 1,456 1,649 1,857 U.

