Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MCNEY MARKET AND RESERVE RELATIO SHIPS
Recent developments
(1) Interest rates generally rose markedly during the past
few weeks, reflecting the very tight conditions in the market for day-
to-day finance, sizable corporate and municipal bond offerings on top
of the Treasury refunding, and the dimming in near-term peace hopes.
Since the last meeting of the Committee, yields on municipal bonds
have jumped by around 25 basis points, while yields on corporate bonds
and U.S. Government coupon issues have risen by 10 - 20 basis points.
Short-term market rates, apart from Treasury bills, have adjusted up
by as much as 50 basis points. In the first three weeks of May, Treasury
bill rates rose from their recent lows at the time of the last Committee
meeting, but in the last few days bill rates have dropped back. The
latest quote on the 3-month bill was around 6 per cent bid, down 12
basis points from its high during the month, but still a few basis
points above the April 29 level. The recent decline reflects a scarce
market supply of short-bills in part growing out of the heavy foreign
official purchases related to recent speculative flows into the German
(2) The very tight conditions in the money market have been
expressed in a sharp further rise of the Federal funds rate in the
past three statement weeks to trading levels frequently in an 8 - 9 per
cent range, with an average effective rate over the past three weeks
close to 8-1/2 per cent. Dealer finance rates have risen commensurately
May 23, 1969.
FINANCIAL MARKET RELATIONSHIPS IN PERSPECTIVE
Money rk IndicatorsBond Yields Flow of Reserves Bank Credit and Money S.A.
Free Borrowings deral 3-month U.S. Corporate
Period Reserves rrowings Federal -month U.S.Municipal Nonborrowed Total Bank Money Time
(In millions of Funds Treasury Government Reserves Reserves Credit Supply Deposits(In millBons of Issues (Aaa)
dollars for weeks
R a t e (20 yr.) (Aaa) (In millons Proxy 3/
ending in) 2/ of dollars) (In billions of dollars)
Year 1968
First Half 1968
Second Half 1968
Recent variation
in growth
7/3/68 - 12/18/68
12/18/68 - 5/21/69
- 210
- 201
- 218
- 203
- 694
Averages
5.36
5.29
5.42
+ 5.6
+ 1.1
+ 9.9
+ 9.9
- 7.0
I/ Average of -cial number ,f days in period p - Preliminary.
1/ Includes issues cairln,' -year and 10-vear call protection, * - issues carry a 10-year call protection.
3/ Time deposits adju, ed a, all commercial banks.
4/ Base is change for month preceding specified period or in case of -eekly periods, the first week shown.
Annual rates of increase 4/
+ 7.1 + 8.6 + 6.5
+ 4.2 + 4.1 + 6.7
+ 9.8 +12.8 + 6.1
+11.8 +14.1 + 2.3
- 0.8 - 2.3 + 4.8
+11.3
+ 5.1
+17.1
+18.1
- 4.7
S.A. - Seasonally adjusted.
' "
(Mmit thl im r -nfc vnr hoes air a 1 1.1 bl ... 1.1.. ......... . C -I--. |-- £ .. ... •
to an 8-1/2 - 9-1/2 per cent range. In each case, rates have ranged
previous FOMC meeting. These taut conditions in money centers have
reflected market churning, including constricted Euro-dollar avail-
abilities connected with mark speculation; financing demands arising
out of the Treasury refunding; and Desk action to maintain pressure on
short-term markets in an environment in which the 3-month bill rate was
otherwise tending to move toward or below the low end of recent ranges.
Money market conditions were exacerbated as major banks, in the face of
large and unpredicted fund flows, managed money positions rather
conservatively and accumulated large reserve surpluses in a couple of
weeks around mid-May.
(3) The bank credit proxy is showing somewhat less weakness
in May than anticipated earlier, mainly because of stronger interbank
deposits, and is now projected to change little on average for the
month. The money supply is also expected to change little on average
from April to May, close to earlier projections, with an increase in
currency offsetting a small decline on average in private demand
deposits. Total time and savings deposit behavior has also been about
as anticipated. These deposits are now projected to decline in May at
around a 2 per cent annual rate, with outstanding CD's dropping $400 -
$500 million and with only a sluggish recovery in consumer-type time
and savings deposits following sizable net outflows in the first half
of April.
(4) Net borrowed reserves at all member banks have averaged
$1.1 billion in the last four statement weeks, up $300 million from
the preceding four weeks. Member bank borrowings have shown a similar
rise on average to $1.3 billion, with demands on the discount window
increasing at both reserve city and country banks. Banks have turned
increasingly to the discount window as they have
encountered adverse fund flows and constrictions in the availability
of day-to-day financing from other sources.
(5) The following table summarizes changes in major reserve
aggregates and deposits for several recent periods:
July '68- Jan. '69- April-
Dec. '68 Mar. '69 May '6 9p
Total reserves 9.8 -1.3 4.5
Nonborrowed reserves 9.9 -5.0 -5.5
Bank credit, as indicated by:
Proxy plus Euro-dollars
Total loans and investments
(as of last Wednesday of month)
Money supply
Time and savings deposits
Savings accounts at
thrift institutions
I/ April 1969.
Prospective developments
(6) The relationships among Treasury bill rates, marginal
reserve measures, and day-to-day money rates will be subject to widely
variable influencesin coming weeks. For example, potentially heavy
tax period borrowing around mid-June will be shortly followed by
Treasury cash debt repayment of $1 billion in maturing June 15 bonds
not exchanged in the recent refinancing and an estimated $4 billion
of June tax bills that may not be turned in for taxes. Meanwhile, the
recent ebbing of tensions affecting foreign exchange and Euro-dollar
markets may lead to an improved availability of Euro-dollars to U.S.
banks during the next few weeks that could possibly moderate pressures
in day-to-day money markets. On the other hand, mid-year window dressing
by banks abroad may tend to withdraw some funds from the Euro-dollar
market later in June.
(7) Assuming no change in monetary policy, and recognizing
the probability of large and varying money market flows apart from
System operations, money market conditions may encompass a Federal funds
rate continuing to average around 8-1/2 per cent, member bank borrowing
in a $1 to $1-1/2 billion range, and net borrowed reserves generally a
little over $1 billion. The 3-month Treasury bill rate could fluctuate
widely, but may generally continue to be in a 5.90 - 6.20 per cent
range. An increase in the bank prime loan rate would enhance the
likelihood of the bill rate moving toward or above the upper end of
this range.
(8) The estimated $9.3 billion of corporate income tax
payments due for payment in June--some three-fourths larger than
payments in March and in April--together with increased Federal agency
debt financing are expected to exert heavy general pressure on commercial
banks and money and securities markets during the first part of June.
These pressures are likely to be reflected in a large further run-off
of large-denomination CD's at banks--running to perhaps $1 billion or
a little more for the full month of June out of an estimated $4-1/2 -
$5 billion of maturities. Such a CD attrition, however, would be no
worse than May, and probably somewhat better, after adjusting for
seasonal factors. Nevertheless, with commercial bank liquidity already
greatly reduced by the cumulative effects of continued monetary restraint,
banks' resources are likely to be brought under severe pressure,
particularly if the need to finance tax payments leads to another
large bulge in loans. As a result, in addition to continuing to
borrow abroad, major banks are likely to continue to press to expand
the new domestic financial arrangements that have been developed
recently to augment their flows of funds. In particular, bank holding
company sales of commercial paper and other similar transactions should
grow further and could become a significant source of upward interest
rate pressure in short-term markets.
(9) The large Treasury cash debt repayment noted earlier
represents a potential offset to these various June short-term market
pressures. Any reflows of foreign funds into Euro-dollars could have
a similar effect. In terms of the technical condition of the bill
market, the existing short supply of bills provides some short-run
leeway for dealers to absorb bills during the tax period, although
their willingness may be limited by the tightness in the market for
dealer financing.
(10) Given the short-term market conditions noted in
paragraphs (6) and (7), the change in the bank credit proxy in June
is expected to be in a -1 to +3 per cent, annual rate, range--with
Euro-dollar borrowings possibly adding another percentage point or
two on average. There is little basis for judging the likely increase
in domestic nondeposit sources of funds to banks, through holding
company affiliates or otherwise. Nor is it clear what proportion of
funds raised through these devices should be considered to be "bank
credit" in light of the similarity of various of the instruments to
conventianal commercial or finance company paper. However that may be,
it might be noted that each $250 million of such instruments issued
during the month, on average, would be the equivilent of about 1-
percentage point annual rate of increase in the bank credit proxy.
(11) Total demand deposits are expected to be an enlarged
source of funds to banks in June, and time and savings deposits are
also likely to be stronger on average than in May. A sharp rise in the
average level of private demand deposits is anticipated partly in
consequence of a decline in the average level of U.S. Government
deposits as Treasury debt is repaid. In addition, however, strong
loan demand, enhanced by tax payment needs, will probably lead to
further private deposit expansion. With currency outstanding also
continuing to rise, the money supply is expected to expand in a
an experience similar to April, when large tax payments also caused
credit demand and money to rise temporarily. Time deposits are likely
to rise in a 2 - 5 per cent, annual rate, range, as some recovery in
consumer-type time deposits continues, at least until the mid-year
interest-crediting period.
(12) Despite the projected rise in bank credit and money
for June, long-term interest rates are still likely to move up
further, particularly if concern about a credit crunch should spread.
Banks will be very limited in their ability to buy municipal securities,
and they, as well as insurance companies, now appear to be cutting
back on real estate loans. But so long as prospects for a cooling in
economic activity remain and investors and borrowers look toward a
tapering of interest rate pressures later in the year, a further
upward movement in long-term rates could be of limited proportions.
Char 2
MEMBER BANK DEPOSITS AND LIABILITIES TO OVERSEAS BRANCHES
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
TOTAL MEMBER BANK DEPOSITS [CREDIT PROXY)
SEAS ADJ WEEKLY AVERAGES OF DAILY FIGURES
Explanation of Projections in Table 5
repayments of previous loans, banks' investment preferences and willingness to supply loans,
banks' desires and abilities to obtain time and savings deposits, and the Government's financing
needs. The projections thus encompass normal seasonal developments, temporary bursts of
loans demand and expected associated repayments not currently reflected by the seasonals, and
whatever cyclical and growth demands for money and credit are expected in the projection period.
Assumed Treasury financing operations include: $-3.6 billion, June 16; $-4.2 billion, June 23.
