Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 12, 1969.
MONEY MARKET AND RESERVE RELATIONSHIPS
Recent developments
(1) With few exceptions, interest rates throughout short-
and long-term credit markets have risen further since the last meeting
of the Committee. Reflecting a rise in dealer bill positions, a sustained
high cost of dealer financing, and expectations that tax-date and year-
end pressures may be larger-than-usual this year, the 3-month
Treasury bill rate moved well above the 7-1/2 per cent top of the range
projected in the last Blue Book. It reached a peak of 7.91 per cent on
December 10, about 40 basis points above its level two meetings ago.
(2) In the previous inter-meeting period, the upsurge in
the 3-month bill rate had been accompanied by even sharper increases in
yields on other bill maturities and by sizable advances in other short-
term credit market rates as well. Since the last meeting, however, the
bringing it more in line with other short-term rates. For example, the
per cent from its already advanced level at the time of the last meeting.
Most recently there was some improvement in the bill market, and the
on December 12. Long-term interest rates have moved higher on balance,
FINANCIAL MARKET RELATIONSHIPS IN PERSPECTIVE
Monthly averages and, where available, weekly averages of daily figures)
oly avraers an, w ere avai a ue, wee r averages o a y u
Money Market Indicators Bond Yields Flow of Reserves Bank Credit and Money, S.A.
Free Borrowings Federal 3-month U.S. Corporate Nonborrowed Total Bank Money Time
Perod Reserve Funds Treasury Government New M ipaa Reserves Reserves Credit Supply Deposits
(In millions of TrasryIssues (Aaa) p,
dollars for weeks Rate Bill (20 yr.) (Aaa) (In millions Proxy 3
ending in) 2/ of dollars
)
(In billions of dollars
)
Year 1968
Second Half 1968
First Half 1969
Recent variation
in growth
7/3/68 - 12/18/68
12/18/68 - 12/10/69
- 210
- 218
- 779
- 203
- 839
Annual rates of increase 4/
+ 6.0 + 7.9 + 9.0 + 7.2
+10.2 +10.7 +13.4 + 7.0
- 3.7 + 0.7 - 3.5 + 4.3
+11.0 +12.9
- 3.7 - 1.2
from System membership. Percentage annual rates are adjusted to eliminate this break in series.
+14.8 + 5.9
- 4.1 + 1.9
+11.5
+17.3
- 4.0
+18.6
- 5.6
S.A. - Seasonally adjusted.
December 12, 1969.
/>*-*-1- 1-- -.- _. lil T r c
although in the corporate bond sector a recent rally has pushed rates
down from the record levels reached in the first week of December.
(3) During the past two statement weeks, the weekly average
effective rate on Federal funds was between 8-3/4 and 9 per cent, or about
the same as in November. Net borrowed reserves averaged $1 billion and
member bank borrowings $1.2 billion, also little changed from November.
Dealer loan rates increased somewhat in early December, however, as
dealer bill positions and financing demands rose and the basic reserve
deficit of major reporting banks in New York began to deepen by somewhat
more than seasonal proportions.
(4) Along with the general rise in interest rates since the
last meeting of the Committee, the money supply has been weaker than
previously projected, as indicated by figures for private demand deposits
in the last statement week of November and in the first two weeks of
December. Money supply growth in November is now estimated at about a
previous Blue Book. And the December projection, as will be noted in the
section on prospective developments, has also been revised in a weaker
(5) Total time and savings deposits in November showed a slight
decline, on average, about as projected, and total member bank deposits rose
at around an 11 per cent annual rate--also about as expected--due to the very
large increase in U.S. Government deposits. Supporting deposit growth, total
reserves rose at about a 9 per cent annual rate and nonborrowed reserves
at a 5 per cent rate, as member bank borrowings rose seasonally adjusted from
October to November. Nondeposit sources of funds in November added about
(6) The following table summarizes annual rates of change
in major deposit, reserve, and credit aggregates for 1968 and to date
in 1969:
Year Jan. '69- July '69-
1968 June '69 Sept. '69 Oct.-Nov. '69
Member bank deposits and
related sources of funds
Proxy plus Euro-dollars and
other nondeposit sources n.a. n.a. -4.3 3.L
Commercial bank credit
(month end)
L&I plus loans sold
outright to affiliates
and foreign branches n.a. n.a. 0.8 6.3
Prospective developments
(7) For the second paragraph of the current economic policy
directive, the Committee may wish to consider the following wording
(Alternative A):
"To implement this policy, System open market
operations until the next meeting of the Committee
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining the
prevailing firm conditions in THE money [DEL: and-short
term-credit markets; provided, however, that opera-
tions shall be modified if bank credit appears to be
deviating significantly from current projections or
if UNUSUAL LIQUIDITY pressures SHOULD DEVELOP." arise
(8) The specification of prevailing firm conditions in the
money market as they pertain to the Federal funds rate and marginal reserve
measures could be the same as in the previous Blue Book--a Federal funds
rate in an 8-1/2 - 9-1/2 per cent range, member bank borrowings $1 -
$1-1/2 billion, and net borrowed reserves $900 million - $1.2 billion.
Some allowance may have to be made within the period, however, to
accommodate a seasonal tendency for banks to hold higher excess reserves
in connection with year-end churning.
(9) The prevailing 3-month Treasury bill rate, as noted
earlier, has moved well above previous specifications. Over the next
four weeks, given the money market conditions noted, the bill rate may
fluctuate in a 7-1/2 - 8 per cent range. A number of factors might exert
upward pressure on the 3-month bill rate. Corporate tax payments are of
record proportions for mid-December and both corporate and bank liquidity
are strained; dealer bill positions are on the high side going into the
tax period; and if prevailing net borrowed reserves were to be maintained,
the System might have to absorb about $800 million of reserves in the
statement week ending December 24 largely in consequence of a seasonal
bulge in float. In addition, the market is likely to be anticipating
large outflows of savings from banks and thrift institutions over year-
end (with some of the funds going into intermediate- and longer-term bonds);
as a result Federal agencies and thrift institutions may have to sell
sizable amounts of Treasury bills and other short-term assets into the
market. Thus, there is a possibility that unusual liquidity pressures
could develop in the next few weeks.
(10) It is possible, on the other hand, that the bill market
has already been discounting some of these pressures. For this and other
reasons the bill rate could move back to or even below the lower end of
the range specified above during the latter part of the interval before
the January 13 meeting, although such a change cannot be predicted with
certainty. In the first half of January seasonal pressures abate, and
in late December and early January, the System is likely to be a net
supplier of reserves. In addition, Board staff projections suggest that
the Treasury may not need to raise new cash in January, as it typically
has done in past years. Because of the possibility of a bill rate
decline, the reference to "other short-term credit markets" in the
proposed directive language has been deleted on the assumption the
Committee would wish to avoid any implication that the Manager should
resist a tendency for the bill rate to recede from its current high
prevailing level.
(11) Total time and savings deposits are projected to rise
in a 3 - 6 per cent, annual rate, range in December. In part, this
rise reflects continued net inflows of foreign official time deposits,
which are assumed to continue rising at about $100 million a week.
In addition, time deposits other than large CD's appeared to become
less weak in the last week of November and thus far in December--with
outstandings showing moderate net increases after rough seasonal adjust-
ment. Finally, the steady attrition of large CD's of domestic holders
has reduced their relative weight in total time and saving deposits and
brought amounts maturing in December to the point where the actual
decline in December is unlikely to reach usual seasonal proportions.
A crude adjustment for the inappropriateness of established seasonal
factors on total time and saving deposits, given current low levels
of outstanding CD's, suggests that growth in time and savings deposits
in December might be overstated by one to two percentage points, implying
compensating adjustments throughout other months of the year. In
January, total time and savings deposits are projected to decline
rate
at a 2 - 5 per cent/partly because the seasonal rebuilding of domestic CD's
achieved in past Januaries cannot occur in the current environment of
very high market interest rates. The staff has assumed that net out-
flows of domestic time deposits other than large CD's following the end-
of-year interest-crediting will be larger than after September but not
quite as large as following the mid-year interest-crediting period, given
the outflow of interest-sensitive money that has already occurred.
(12) The money supply in December is projected to decline
in a 3 - 6 per cent, annual rate, range and little net growth is
expected in January. At current high interest rates, demand for cash
balances appears to be reduced, and the slower growth currently estimated
and in near-term prospect for GNP is consistent with a moderation in
transactions demand for money. On the other hand, year-end window
dressing by domestic non-financial corporations seeking to conform
to Commerce regulations on direct foreign investment might lead to a
temporary inflow of funds and a bulge in year-end demand deposits
similar to the one that occurred last year. Such a development would
tend temporarily to strengthen money supply performance at year-end
and in early January, as also might shifts of savingsfrom institutions
to the market. U.S. Government demand deposits seem likely to decline
moderately on average in December and to recover to about the same
degree in January, assuming that savings outflows from S&L's in January
are not so severe as to force the FHLB to make use of its direct
borrowing line at the Treasury.
(13) Total member bank deposits in December are projected
to show little net change, on average, but then to decline in a 1-4
per cent range in January. Commercial paper issued by bank-related
affiliates is expected to continue growing at about the recent $100
million per week rate, assuming no change in the current pending
status of the Board's proposed regulation. Euro-dollar takings are
likely to decline somewhat between now and year-end, if past seasonal
patterns are followed. However, business loan demands are likely to
be relatively strong this month--in view of the tax payments and
continued inventory accumulation--and banks may bid somewhat more
aggressively for Euro-dollar funds, perhaps reducing the extent of
the seasonal decline in the last half of December. All in all, in
December nondeposit sources may add about a percentage point to the
change in total member bank deposits, followed by a somewhat larger
addition in January, although the increase could be mainly the result
of a seasonal recovery in Euro-dollars.
(14) Given the continued constraints on banks, changes in
long-term interest rates are most likely to reflect expectational
factors and changes in credit market demands. A temporary seasonal
abatement in demands will develop between now and year-end, and heavy
buying of bonds by retail customers could well push interest rates
down, but the January calendar of corporate and municipal issues
appears unusually large. The magnitude and persistence of any declines
in long-term interest rates would appear to depend on the volume of
fund transfers out of equities, short-term market instruments, and
thrift institutions, as well as on the willingness of institutional
investors with regular inflows of funds to bid actively to lock-up high
yields. Such buying will depend in part on expectational forceswhich
would be strongly affected by economic news.
(15) If current projections for December are realized, the
annual rates of increase for key aggregates in the fourth quarter would
be as follows (using the midpoint of the December projections):
Annual Rates
(in percentage points)
Total reserves 2.0
Nonborrowed reserves -2.0
Money supply 0.0
Time and savings deposits 0.0
Total member bank deposits 0.5
Total member bank deposits
plus nondeposit sources 2.0
Policy alternative
(16) If the Committee should decide to move toward slightly
less firm money market conditions, it might wish to consider the follow-
ing second paragraph for the directive (Alternative B):
'To implement this policy, System open market
operations until the next meeting of the Committee
shall be conducted with a view to [DEL: maintaining-the
prevailing-ACHIEVING SLIGHTLY LESS firm conditions
in THE money and-short-term-credit markets;] provided,
however, that operations shall be modified if bank
credit appears to be deviating significantly from
current projections or if UNUSUAL LIQUIDITY pressures
SHOULD DEVELOP [DEL: aruse in connection with-possible
bank regulatory changes.]
(17) The slightly less firm money market conditions might
involve Federal funds most frequently around 8-1/2 per cent, member bank
borrowings around $1 billion or a little less, and net borrowed reserves
fluctuating around $800 million. With some change in market expectations
developing under these conditions, the 3-month bill rate might move
rather rapidly down into a 7 - 7-1/2 per cent range, and some downward
adjustment in long-term interest might be expected as well.
(18) Monetary aggregates probably would be affected only in
a minor way over the near-term by the change in market conditions
specified above, unless there is a sharp shift in market expectations.
Any significant upward impact on the aggregates probably would require
a more extended easing of money market conditions than the one specified,
especially when ceiling rates on deposits are so far below the market
and bank investment policies have become so cautious.
Explanation of Projections in Table 6
