Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) November 21, 1969
MONEY MARKET AND RESERVE RELATIONSHIPS
Recent developments
(1) Interest rates in short- and long-term markets have risen
sharply since the last meeting of the Committee. In bond markets,
yields on new corporate issues have shown the largest rise and have moved
well above early October highs. Outstanding Federal agency issues rose
about 75 - 90 basis points, and some Treasury bills with longer maturities
have risen about as much. The 3-month Treasury bill is up about 40
basis points to a new high of 7.38 per cent at the close of business on
November 21. Other short-term rates have also risen sharply.
(2) Federal funds have most frequently been traded at 9-1/4
per cent since the last meeting of the Committee, and the effective rate
on most days was in a narrow range between 9 and 9-1/2 per cent. Over
the previous policy period the weekly average effective rate on Federal
funds had varied between 8-3/4 and 9-5/8 per cent. Dealer loan rates
at New York City banks, which had declined somewhat after mid-October,
tended to increase during the course of the last three weeks and were
quoted most frequently at 9-1/2 to 10 per cent toward the end of this
period, as dealer financing needs were enlarged in the aftermath of the
late October auction of Treasury tax bills and recent bill sales by
foreign accounts related to unwinding of speculation on the German mark.
FINANCIAL MARKET RELATIONSHIPS IN PERSPECTIVE
(Monthly averages and where available, weekly averages of daily figures)
Money Market Indicators Bond Yields Flow of Reserves. Bank Credit and Money, S.A.Free Crporate iFree Borrowings Federal 3-month U.S. Corporate Nonorrowd Toal Bank Money TimePeriod Reserves New Municipal Nonborrowed Total Bank Money Timemillons os Tr ury overnment Iues M pal Reserves Reserves Credit Supply Deposit'
(In millions of RtIssues (Aaa)
dollars for week R B (Aaa) (In millions
ending in) - 2/ of dollars) (In billions of dollars)
Year 1968
Second Half 1968
First Half 1969
Recent variation
in growth
7/3/68 - 12/18/68
12/18/68 - 11/19/69
- 210
- 218
- 779
- 203
- 849
+ 6.0
+10.2
- 3.7
+11.0
- 3.4
** - Reflects $400 million reduction in member bank deposits resulting from withdrawal of a large country bank
from System membership. Percentage annual rates are adjusted to eliminate this break in series.
Annual rates of increase 4/
+ 7.9 + 9.0 + 7.2
+10.7 +13.4 + 7.0
+ 0.7 - 3.5 + 4.3
+12.9
- 1.8
+14.8 + 5.9
- 4.J + 3.2
+11.5
+17.3
- 4.0
+18.6
- 6.2
S.A. - Seasonally adjusted.
November 21, 1969.
Net borrowed reserves of all member banks fluctuated in a $900 million
to $1 billion range over the last three statement weeks, while the weekly
averages of member bank borrowing were between $1 and $1.3 billion.
(3) With respect to deposits, data for the latter part of
October now indicate a weaker deposit performance for that month than was
estimated at the time of the last Committee meeting. Total member bank
deposits declined at a 9.2 per cent annual rate, a little over a percent-
age point weaker than earlier estimated, while the money supply rose at
only about a 1/2 per cent annual rate, about 2 percentage points below
earlier estimates. As to nondeposit sources, Euro-dollars in October
were weaker than expected, but commercial paper issued by bank affiliates
rose rapidly in the course of the month. On balance, the proxy adjusted
to include all nondeposit sources of funds declined at a 7-1/2 per cent
annual rate in October, compared with the 6-1/2 per cent decline estimated
at the last meeting.
(4) Thus far in November, on the other hand, both time and
demand deposits are showing more strength than expected earlier, while
the net issuance of bank-related commercial paper appears to have
moderated somewhat since the proposed Board regulation was issued on
October 29. Time deposits are being influenced by continued net inflows
of foreign official time deposits in larger dimensions than earlier
allowed for. And, insofar as can be gauged from currently available
data, private demand deposits seem to be rising moderately at the same
time as U.S. Government deposits are showing a sharp rise; in the past,
so marked an increase in Government deposits has frequently been
associated with at least some decline in private demand deposits. It
is possible that the recent bulge of security market issues has required
somewhat more bank financing than is typical, because poor market
receptions have left the issues in dealer hands for longer than usual
even after syndicate price restrictions have been broken. The return of
funds from Germany in the wake of the mark revaluation may also have re-
sulted in a temporary bulge in cash balances.
(5) The following table summarizes annual rates of change in
major deposit and reserve aggregates for 1968 as a whole and thus far
in 1969.
Total reserves
Nonborrowed reserves
Bank credit, as indicated by:
Total member bank deposits
(bank credit proxy)
Proxy plus Euro-dollars
Proxy plus Euro-dollars and
other nondeposit sources
Total loans and investments
of all commercial banks
(as of last Wednesday of
month)
Money supply
Time and savings deposits
Savings accounts at non-bank
thrift institutions
Year
1968
n. a.
Jan. '69-
June '69
July '69-
Sept. '69
- 9.3
- 4.8
- 0.5
Oct. '69
- 9.2
- 7.5
Prospective developments
(6) For the second paragraph of the current economic policy
directive, the Committee might wish to continue the language currently
in force which reads as follows (alternative A):
"To implement this policy, System open market operations until
the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to main-
taining the prevailing firm conditions in money and short-term credit
markets; provided, however, that operations shall be modified if bank
credit appears to be deviating significantly from current projections."
(7) Prevailing firm conditions in the money and short-term
credit markets might continue to be taken to encompass a Federal funds
rate of about 8-1/2 - 9-1/2 per cent, member bank borrowings $1 - $1-1/2
billion,and net borrowed reserves of $900 million - $1.2 billion. The
than earlier--perhaps between 7 and 7-1/2 per cent. Seasonal pressures,
including the forthcoming mid-December tax period, and the relatively
high level of dealer bill positions before the current $2-1/2 billion
Treasury tax bill financing, may tend to sustain the bill rate at an
advanced level. In addition, uncertainty as to the implications for the
over-all tightness of the banking system of the Board's proposed regulation
affecting bank-related commercial paper may be exerting some upward bill
rate pressures. These factors would work to maintain the Federal funds
rate in the upper part of the range noted above, although in the latter
part of November and early December a seasonal shift in reserves toward
money center banks may temporarily take some edge off pressures in the
market for day-to-day money.
(8) Total member bank deposits in November are expected to
rise in a 9 - 12 per cent, annual rate, range, with total and non-
borrowed reserves rising in a roughly similar order of magnitude.
This range for the increase in member bank deposits is 4 percentage
points higher than projected at the last Committee meeting. But of that
difference 1-1/2 percentage points is attributable to the fact that the
most recent Treasury tax bill financing was $500 million larger than
earlier assumed and came in late November rather than early December. In
addition, another percentage point results from the lower than previously
estimated level of total member bank deposits in October. Even after
adjusting for these factors, deposit growth in November is projected to
be somewhat stronger than earlier. Given relatively strong loan demands,
partly to meet large mid-December corporate tax payments and partly to
finance underwriting of a continued sizeable flow of security issues,
total member bank deposits in December are projected to rise in a 0 - 3
per cent, annual rate range. If so, average member bank deposit growth
from September through December will have been slightly positive--perhaps
by a percentage point or two--compared with the 9-1/2 per cent rate of
decline experienced in the third quarter.
(9) With respect to nondeposit sources of funds, we expect
the recent slower growth in outstanding commercial paper of bank affiliates
(which has averaged about $100 million per week during the first two state-
ment weeks of November) to continue. However, some demand for nondeposit
funds is likely to continue to be diverted to the Euro-dollar market,
exerting upward rate pressures there. Euro-dollar borrowings of U.S.
banks have risen about $500 million from the average outstanding in the
last statement week of October to the most recent statement week, and
have increased somewhat further in recent days. Taking account of Euro-
dollar and all other non-deposit sources of funds combined we would
expect additions of about 3 percentage points to the November estimate,
and of possibly 1 percentage point to the projected December change.
Recently, there have been market reports of some increase in the issuance
of "ineligible" bankers' acceptances.
(10) The money supply in November is now projected to rise in
a 4 - 7 per cent, annual rate, range, as both currency and demand deposits
have shown more strength than earlier expected. Some weakness in the money
supply is anticipated in December, with possibly a small decline on average
at an annual rate, as private demand deposits are absorbed in the process
of distributing the recently offered Treasury tax bills to ultimate
holders. Over the fourth quarter as a whole money supply may grow in a
(11) Projections of time and savings deposits have been
particularly difficult because of uncertainties in forecasting the
behavior pattern of the BIS and other foreign official institutions that
have been placing funds in the domestic CD market. Moreover, the sharp
decline in the level of outstanding CD's has reduced maturities and hence
the potential runoff; in December only about $3 billion are estimated to
mature. Even with consumer-type time deposits remaining weak, total time
and savings deposits might show little net change on balance in the
November-December period, assuming foreign inflows continue and recognizing
the difficulties of interpreting seasonal CD movements after a long
period of attrition.
(12) The current advanced level of yields in capital markets--
with some interest being shown by investors in Aa-rated utility bonds
recently offered around the 8-7/8 per cent level and with a recent agency
issue selling relatively well--suggests the posibility that long-term
interest rates might backtrack a little in the period ahead. Such an
abatement of pressures would be encouraged if the stringency in the Treasury
bill market were to moderate, as may be possible since dealers appear to
be discounting seasonal and other pressures well in advance. However,
since dealer financing costs are so high and underwriting positions
undesirably large, it would take only a modest amount of new additions
to the calendar of forthcoming bond issues to push long-term interest
rates up even higher.
(13) If the Committee should decide to move toward slightly
less firm money market conditions, it might wish to consider the following
second paragraph for the directive (alternative B):
"To implement this policy, System open market operations until
the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to
achieving slightly less firm conditions in money and short-term credit
markets; provided, however, that operations shall be modified if bank
credit appears to be deviating significantly from current projections."
(14) The slightly less firm money market conditions might
involve Federal funds more frequently around 8-1/2 per cent, member bank
borrowings around $1 billion or a little less, and net borrowed reserves
fluctuating around $800 million. The 3-month bill rate under these
conditions might move down into 6-7/8 - 7-1/8 per cent range, and upward
pressure on long-term interest rates might well abate. Rates could even
decline significantly, particularly in long-term markets, if investor
expectations were affected by indications of even a modest relaxation of
policy. The monetary aggregates would be affected only in a minor way
over the near-term by the change in market conditions specified above,
unless there is a sharp shift in market expectations. But a significant
upward impact on the aggregates probably would appear to require a more
extended easing of money market conditions, especially when ceiling
rates on deposits are so far below the market and bank investment
policies have become so cautious in securities markets.
Explanation of Projections in Table 6
whatever cyclical and growth demands for money and credit are expected in the projection period.
Assumed Treasury financing operations include: $2.4 billion, November 26; $-0.7 billion, December 15;
$-1.1 billion, December 22; and $100 million addition to weekly bill auctions over the remainder
of the year.
