Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) July 11, 1969.
MONEY MARKET AND RESERVE RELATIONSHIPS
Recent Developments
(1) Short-term market interest rates rose further on balance
in the latter part of June and early July, as the squeeze on bank
liquidity continued, as sizable Government and corporate demands on
short-term credit markets loomed, and as final Congressional action on
the surtax extension was delayed. Long-term corporate and municipal yields
edged temporarily lower in the latter half of June as some investor interest
in corporates developed and as the volume of tax-exempt issues slackened.
But the yield declines in the corporate market were erased in large part
in early July, reflecting the large corporate issue calendar in coming
weeks. In general upward rate pressure was more pronounced in short-term
than in long-term markets, possibly indicating some abatement in expecta-
tions of further sizable future interest rate increases. In this connection
it might be noted that stock prices have dropped considerably further in
recent days. And a vigorous rally developed in U.S. Government bond
markets just before the week-end.
(2) With dealers reluctant to maintain more than minimal
positions, Treasury bill rates fluctuated widely in response to seasonal
bill demands and to prospects for increased supplies of bills and Agency
issues. The Treasury auctioned $3-1/2 billion of tax bills on July 9
and 11. And the Federal Home Loan Bank Board announced that on July 15
it would offer $900 million of new issues to raise $500 million of new
cash. The 3-month Treasury bill rate fluctuated in a range of 6.07
to 7.04 per cent since the last Committee meeting, and was most recently
bid at around 6.90 per cent, 40 basis points above its level at the time
of the meeting. With respect to private short-term interest rates, yields
on 4 - 6 month commercial paper rose by about 25 basis points over the
period to 8-3/4 per cent, or a cost of 8-7/8 per cent to the issuer.
(3) Although the wide range of variation in day-to-day money
rates in recent weeks makes generalization difficult, it would appear
that conditions were little changed from those prevailing in late May
and the first three weeks of June. Federal funds traded mostly in an
range of fluctuation similar to that of the weeks just preceding. And
for all member banks, average borrowings from the Federal Reserve were
$1.3 billion, also little changed from the preceding few weeks. Net
borrowed reserves fluctuated in a $1 --$1.2 billion range.
(4) Total member bank deposits declined at about a 13 per
cent annual rate on average in June. Private demand deposits, and the
money supply, were weaker than expected earlier, in part reflecting
the absence of any growth in business loans over the month. Total time
and savings deposits are estimated to have declined on average at a
CD's. But banks did increase their Euro-dollar borrowings sharply over
the month, and the bank credit proxy adjusted to include such borrowings
declined on average at a 3.2 per cent annual rate, in line with staff
expectations. Weekly reports on other nondeposit sources of funds
indicate a rise of about $925 million from the last Wednesday of May
to the last Wednesday of June. In the absence of such data for the earlier
weeks in May, it obviously is impossible to calculate the rise in terms
equivalent to the proxy series. However, it probably would not be
unreasonable to guess that the average June level exceeded an average
May level by an amount equivalent to about 3 - 4 percentage points in
the proxy series.
(5) The following table summarizes the changes in major deposit
and reserve aggregates for the last half of 1968 and the first two
quarters of 1969.
Total reserves
Nonborrowed reserves
Bank credit, as indicated by:
Proxy plus Euro-dollars
Total loans and investments
(as of last Wednesday of month)
Money supply
Time and savings deposits
Savings accounts at
thrift institutions
July '68-
Dec. '68
Jan. '69-
Mar. '69
Apr. -
June '69
Prospective Developments
(6) Maintenance of prevailing money market conditions would
appear to encompass a Federal funds rate averaging around 8-3/4 -- 9 per
cent, member bank borrowings in a $1 -- $1-1/2 billion range, and net
borrowed reserves of around $1 billion or a little more. The 3-month
bill rate is likely to continue to gyrate--but in a higher 6-3/4 -- 7-1/2
per cent range. The cost of carrying bills may tend to maintain the rate
generally above 7 per cent, given slack seasonal demands and a rising
supply of bills and competing instruments. Expectations, as they in-
fluence dealer willingness to take positions, will be an important
factor affecting bill rate movements, with current very low positions
providing scope for dealers to accumulate bills. Long-term rates, too,
will be strongly influenced by expectations; while near-term demands on
the capital market appear relatively strong, their upward impact on
interest rates could be moderated, and perhaps reversed, by a bearish
stock market and economic outlook or by hopeful peace developments.
(7) On balance, the System will probably absorb reserves
during the last half of July and provide reserves in the first half of
August. The reserve projections do not include allowance for any reserves
that may be required if the regulation eliminating from cash items amounts
generated by Euro-dollar transactions is implemented. Presumably, these
reserves would be supplied through additional open market operations
unless the intention in issuing the regulation were to tighten domestic
monetary conditions further. But individual bank adjustments might still
result in some temporary money market churning.
(8) With the 3-month bill rate so high, there is little
prospect for any let-up in CD attrition over the next few eeks. It is
now expected that outstanding CD's in July will decline by about
$1-1/2 -- $1-3/4 billion, which, after allowing for seasonals, would
be a larger run-off than in June. With respect to other time and
savings deposits, banks (as well as thrift institutions) apparently
experienced substantial net outflows around the interest-crediting period.
And while these outflows should abate after the first several days of
July, at current market yield levels no sizable inflow of other time
and savings deposits is expected through mid-August. Thus, total time
and savings deposits in July are expected to decline more rapidly then
in June--in a 12 - 15 per cent, annual rate, range.
(9) The money supply in July may rise in a 3 - 6 per cent,
annual rate, range. U.S. Government deposits are projected to decline
sharply, but private demand deposits are not expected to show a
commensurate rise, as corporations and others quickly economize on cash
balances, given the tight position of banks and of corporations themselves.
(10) With banks stiffening loan terms and lending standards,
and also unable to provide any significant support to securities markets,
outstanding bank credit is expected to drop, on average, in July. Total
reserves and member bank deposits are likely to decline sharply--in a
accommodate some domestic customers banks will probably rely on the
Euro-dollar market, even given the marginal reserve requirement proposal,
and other nondeposit sources. Assuming some further growth in Euro-
dollars from current advanced levels, the bank credit proxy adjusted to
include Euro-dollars is expected to decline in a 5 - 8 per cent, annual
rate, range. There is little reason to believe that nondeposit sources
of funds will rise less rapidly than in June, given the continuing
pressure on bank deposits; on the other hand, the incoming data are
not suggestive of an accelerating trend.
(11) In August, total member bank deposits may decline only
slightly further. Pressure may be eased by a little pick-up in consumer-
type time deposits and by a noticeably smaller amount of maturing CD's.
Credit demands on banks in August may also be affected by dealer and bank
support of the Treasury mid-August refunding. This refunding will be
announced in late July, and will involve at least $3.2 billion of
publicly-held issues. In addition, the Treasury is expected to raise
$1-1/2 billion of new cash in late August.
Chart 1
MEMBER BANK RESERVES
mONTHLY AVERAGES Of DAILY FIGUPES
IREQUIRED RESERVES
-T -
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS NOT SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
MEMBER SANK BORROWINGS - 00
S D M J S D MJ
MARGINAL RESERVE MEASURES
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on period averages of daily figures)
Member Banks Borrowings
Period Free Excess Re s e r v e C i ty
reserves reserves Total Major banks th Country
FINANCIAL MARKET RELATIONSHIPS IN PERSPECTIVE
(Mnthl av r f s and whe r l 1 .Il1r ilr^ l -,i ro , c f H , 1 ,
c Monty Market Indicators Bond Yields Flow of Reserves Bank Credit and Money, S A
Free Borrowings Federal 3-month U S. Corporte honborrowcd Totl Bank Monty TimePeriod Reserves I New M unicipalMoney l medIn millions of Funds Treasury Govcrnment I Mes Mu pal Reserves Reserves Credit Supply Deposits(In millions of Issues ((ia) I P
dollars for weeks Rate B20 (Aaa) (In millions ro
__ _ ending In) 2/ of dollars) (In billions of dollars)
Year 1968
Se-ond Half 1968
First Half 1969
Rerent variation
in growth
Average of total number of days in period
Includes issues carrying 5-year and 10-year call
Time deposits adjusted at all commercial banks.
Base is change for month preceding specified per
Annual rates of increase 4/
+ 5.6 + 7 1 + 8.6 + 6.5
+ 9 9 + 9.8 +12.8 + 6.1
- 5.3 - 0 8 - 4.4 + 2.4
+ 9.9 +11.8
- 7.1 - 4.9
p - Preliminary
protection, * - issues carry a 10-year call protection.
period or in case of weekly periods, the first week shown.
+14.1
- 6.0
+11.3
+17.1
-50
+ 3 4 +18.1
+ 2,1 - 6.4
S A - Seasonally adjusted.
** - Reflects $400 million reduction in member bank deposits resulting from withdrawal of a large country bank from System membership. Percentage
annual rates are adjusted to eliminate this break in series.
July 11, 1969.
I r s)
Explanation of Projections in Table 6
