Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) June 20, 1969.
MONEY MARKET AND RESERVE RELATIONSHIPS
Recent developments
(1) Short-term and most long-term interest rates moved
markedly higher after the last meeting of the Committee, as bank
liquidity was further eroded, the prime loan rate at major banks was
raised to 8-1/2 per cent, and short-term markets adjusted to expected
tax date loan demands. The bill market was also affected by German
official sales of Treasury bills reflecting in large part diversion of
funds out of marks into the Euro-dollar market. Treasury bill rates
are now generally 40-70 basis points higher than at the time of the
last Committee meeting. The 3-month bill rate was most recently
quoted a little over 6.50 per cent, as compared with a pre-tax date
peak of 6.81 per cent and 6.14 per cent at the time of the last meeting.
In contrast to the bill market, yields on long-term U.S. Government
securities are currently slightly below their end-of-May levels, despite
a fairly sharp upward movement at the time of the prime rate hike.
Yields in other bond markets, however, have advanced by 20 - 30 basis
(2) Interest rates in the market for day-to-day money
tightened in the first two statement weeks of June, and moderated
from these advanced levels in the subsequent week. Trading in Federal
funds frequently occurred at rates of 9-1/2 per cent or higher in the
FINANCIAL MARKET RELATIONSHIPS IN PERSPECTIVE
June 4
11
18
(Monthly averages and where available, weekly averages of daily figures)
Money Market Indicators
FreeFree Borrowings
Reserves
(In millions of
dollars for weeks
ending in)
- 374
- 386
- 192
- 240
- 146
- 192
- 255
- 327
- 491
- 580
- 635
- 844
Federal
Funds
Rate
Bond Yields Flo or Reeres sakCrdtan onv5..... Make Indicators Bn Yields - ..
U.S.
Government
(20 yr.)
I I I
New Municipal
Issues (Aaa)
(Aaa)
2/
r 6.61
6.79
r 7.37
r 7.17
__ _ _ _ _ .1_ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ 1 *.
Year 1968
First Half 1968
Second Half 1968
Recent variation
in growth
7/3/68 - 12/18/68
12/18/68 - 6/18/69
- 203 516
- 757 1,016
Aver;
5.58 5.36
I Ii ________________ a' , ,
Nonborrowed Total
Reserves Reserves
(In millions
of dollars)
Bank
Credit
+ 0.4
+ 1.5
+ 2.1
+ 5.0
+ 2.0
+ 3.0
+ 2.7
+ 3.1
- 1.5**
- 0.3
- 2.5
+ 1.3
- 0.6
+ 0.3
+ 1.9
- 1.4
-0.6
- 1.4
+ 0.1
- 0.9
+ 5.6
+ 1.1
+ 9.9
+ 9.9
- 6.9
a 10-year call protection.
Money Time
Supply Deposits
billions of dollars)
+ 1.8
+ 1.3
+ 2.0
+ 0.9
- 0.8
+ 0.7
+ 1.7
+ 1.2
+ 0.6
+ 0.1
+ 0.2
+ 1.7
- 0.4
+ 0.6
+ 1.1
+ 1.8
- .1
-0.9
+ 0.7
+ 0.6
Annual rates of increase 4/
+ 7.1 + 8.6 + 6.5
+ 4.2 + 4.1 + 6.7
+ 9.8 +12.8 + 6.1
+11.8 +14.1 + 2.3
- 2.6 - 4.2 + 3.6
June 20, 1969
+ 0.5
+ 0.6
+ 2.2
+ 3.4
+ 2.8
+ 2.9
+ 2.4
+ 2.4
- 1.8
- 1.5
- 0.1
- 0.1
- 0.4
+ 0.2
- 0.5
+11.3
+ 5.1
+17.1
+18.1
- 5.1
S.A. * Seasonally auJustu.Sreliminary.
.. i _of dollars)I -
- c c------ -- -- - -c-1
Flow of Reserves- Rank Credit and Monev- S -A
first two statement weeks, with the average rate for the period a
little above 9-1/8 per cent. Loan demand on banks burgeoned in the
weeks immediately prior to the tax date, partly in anticipation of the
prime loan rate increase, and major banks financed their needs partly
in the Federal funds market. Banks also were financing their needs
to a surprisingly large extent through the Euro-dollar market. In
the tax payment week itself, the Federal funds rate dropped to 8-1/2
per cent, on average, as borrowings from banks on the tax date proved
to be weaker than many banks had prepared for and as the build-up in
Euro-dollars continued. Over the three statement weeks ending June 18
the increase in Euro-dollar borrowings amounted to over $3 billion.
During this same period banks' use of the discount window averaged
$1.4 billion, little changed from May, with a somewhat larger share
of the borrowings subject to administrative pressure. Net borrowed
reserves averaged $1.1 billion, also about unchanged from the month
(3) While Euro-dollar borrowings have been increasing, total
member bank deposits have declined steadily since mid-May, both absolutely
and relative to projections. The sharp decrease in member bank deposits
reflects an increased rate of decline in total time and savings deposits,
as the performance of CD's and other time and savings deposits weakened
at the higher interest rate levels that developed. Private demand
deposits have also shown less strength than earlier anticipated, even
though U.S. Government deposits have fallen off more than we expected.-
In general, the weaker than projected private deposit performance may
have reflected increased bank efforts to sell securities or restrict
loans as their reserve base contracted. While direct evidence is
lacking, it is also possible that the weakness in private deposits
reflects at least in part outflows of funds from the U.S. to the Euro-
dollar market.
(4) The following table provides comparative rates of change
for major reserve and deposit aggregates for recent periods.
July '68- Jan. '69- April -
Dec. '68 Mar. '69 May '69
Total reserves 9.8 -1.3 4.9
Nnnhnrrowed r~aeserv 9.9 -5.0 -3.9
Bank credit, as indicated by:
Proxy plus Euro-dollars
Total loans and investments
(as of last Wednesday of month)
Money supply
Time and savings deposits
Savings accounts at
thrift institutions
generated a large increase in cash items in process of collection. This
has led to some understatement of the June money supply growth. Any
subsequent curtailment of the contribution of overnight Euro-dollars
to cash items later would lead to an overstatement of money supply
Prospective developments
(5) Now that the June tax period has been weathered, two
other tests for financial markets appear imminent. One would be in
connection with possible withdrawals of Euro-dollar supplies partly
as a result of window dressing operations by foreign banks and perhaps
U.S. corporations, in a period of large deposit shifts among banks and
of increased reserve needs to meet lagged requirements from seasonal
deposit expansion around mid-June. The other, and probably more
important one, related to consequences of the mid-year interest-crediting
period at banks and nonbank savings institutions. Withdrawals of domestic
savings from these institutions, should they develop in size, would tend
to focus pressure on mortgage and municipal markets, and on short-term
credit markets generally to the extent that thrift instititions and
Federal Home Loan Banks draw on liquid assets to support mortgage
commitments. Nonetheless, pressures on the market for day-to-day money
may not be quite as great as in early June because business and finance
company loan demands on banks should be more moderate, reflecting the
passage of peak corporate financing pressures and possibly also the cutback
of new bank loan commitment activity that has probably occurred over
recent weeks.
(6) Given the shifting locus of market pressures, a generally
unchanged set of money market conditions over the next three weeks may
include a Federal funds rate fluctuating around 8-1/2 per cent, member
bank borrowings in a $1 - $1-1/2 billion range, and net borrowed
reserves averaging a little over $1 billion, as specified in the
previous Blue Book. The 3-month bill rate may fluctuate widely, perhaps
in a range as wide as, or wider than, 6-1/4 - 6-3/4 per cent.
(7) Downward bill rate pressures may be strongest in the
last week of June and the first few days of July, when funds received
from cash redemptions of June tax bills are reinvested and as the
System supplies reserves to accommodate the mid-June seasonal increase
in deposits and the July 4 holiday currency outflow. But at prevailing
financing costs, dealers are not likely to alter their aversion to
holding sizable Treasury bill positions. As a result, bill rates
could begin to move upward once the reinvestment demand from tax bill
redemptions and System buying passes and as marketing of bills from other
sources increases as July goes on. It would appear that savings and loan
associations and Federal Home Loan Banks may have to liquidate a sizable
amount--perhaps around $1 billion--of short-term assets in adjusting
to expected sizable net savings outflows in early July. Moreover, the
Treasury is likely to announce a tax bill offering of $3 - $4 billion
around mid-July for payment later in the month.
(8) Assuming the bill rate averages around 6-1/2 per cent,
or a little below, CD attrition in June should come to around $1-3/4
billion, and could amount to an additional $1-1/4 billion in July.
The run-off in the latter month should be smaller relative to June
because of the somewhat lower estimated volume of CD maturities. After
allowing for the normal seasonal decline in June and rebuilding in
July, however, attrition in the two months would not be materially
(9) Time deposits other than CD's have recovered sluggishly
from their April declines. Experience thus far in June is considerably
weaker than in March, the month just prior to the previous interest-
crediting period. And another net decline in these deposits is ex-
pected after mid-year--probably greater than in April given the advanced
level of market interest rates. Thus, total time and savings deposits,
assuming no change in Regulation Q ceilings, may decline at about a 3 - 5
per cent annual rage in June, and the drop-off in July is likely to be
even sharper--perhaps at a 7 - 10 per cent annual rate.
(10) The June money supply increase may be in a 4 - 6 per
cent annual rate range, which would be below the projection in the last
blue book. However, we are currently projecting a sizable money supply
expansion on average from June to July--in a 7 - 10 per cent range--as
U.S. Government deposits drop sharply despite the expected bill financing
late in the month. The increase in private demand deposits in the two
months together is estimated at only about one-half of the almost
$4 billion decline expected in U.S. Government deposits. Moreover,
much of the expected increase in money supply reflects short-run shifts
out of Government deposits and would appear to be transitory, in view
of the attractiveness of market securities at current interest rate
(11) Given the expected weakness in both time and Government
and private demand deposits together, total member bank deposits are
projected to drop by an 11 -13 per cent, annual rate, in June and by a
further 8 - 11 per cent in July. Under these conditions, banks are
likely to demand additional Euro-dollars, although not as aggressively as
in June if loan demands on banks moderate. The sharp run-up of Euro-
dollars held by banks in June adds 8 - 10 percentage points to the
proxy. In July, about 5 - 7 percentage points may be added, assuming
growth of around $1 billion, or less, in the course of July. On balance,
we are projecting declines in the proxy adjusted for Euro-dollars at
annual rates of 2 - 4 per cent in June and 3 - 5 per cent in July.
(12) An estimated $3 billion of new-type financing arrange-
ments by banks or their affiliates were outstanding as of June 11,
according to preliminary reports. These financing arrangements
outstanding rose by $770 million from their May 28 level, but it is not
clear what proportion of these funds should be considered "bank credit"
in light of the similarity of various of the instruments to conventional
commercial or finance company paper. A continued increase in such in-
struments in July, assuming their regulatory status is unchanged, may
limit the extent to which banks are forced to liquidate assets or ration
loans. But resort to these devices would still be a source of upward
interest rate pressures, making it more difficult for other short-term
borrowers to raise funds. For instance, the 4 - 6 month commercial paper
rate rose from 7-5/8 per cent at the end of May to 8-3/8 per cent most
recently, and the spread of this rate above the 6-month bill widened
from 115 to 165 basis points.
(13) With bank deposits and reserves declining sharply in June
and July, upward interest pressures in both long- and short-term markets
are likely to continue. A substantial moderation in over-all credit
demands or more of a shift away from inflationary expectations--perhaps
accompanied by further stock market declines--could reverse these
tendencies, particularly in longer-term markets.
Chart 1
MEMBER BANK RESERVES
MONTHLY AVERAGES OF DAILY FIGURES
I I I I I I I
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTIED
TOTAL RESERVES
27.0
#4I REQUIRED RESERVES
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS, NOT SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
S D M J S D M
Table 3
AGGREGATE RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
Seasonally Adjusted
(Based on monthly averages of daily figures)
Reserve Aggregates
Total Nonborrowed Required
resreserv reserves reserves
millions of dollars)
Member Bank Deposits
Supported by Required Reserves
Total T
member bank de
deposits deposits
denosits
Private
demand
deposits 1/
I n b i
SMoney Supply
U.S. Gov't.
demand
deposits
Total Currency
2/
of do
Commercial Credit
__ bank time Proxy
Private deposits (Incl. Euro
demand adjusted dollar
deposits 3 4/ borrowings
process of collection and Federal Reserve float; and (2) foreign demand balances at Federal Reserve Banks.
Monthly:
1968--Jan.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
May p
I 
Money Supply
L 
Private
I deposits
AGGREGATE RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
Seasonally Adjusted
(Based on weekly averages of daily figures)
Reserve Aggregates Member Bank Deposits ICommercial Credit
_Supported by Required Reserves Money Supply bank time Proxy
Peri o d  Total Nonborrowed RequTotal Time Private U.S. Gov't. Private deposits (Incl. Eurc
reserves reserve reer member bank d si demand demand Total Currency demand adjusted dollar
Sreserves reserves reserves deposideposits 3 f borrowingsts
res reserves reserves deposits deposits 1/ deposits 2/ deposits 3, 4/ borrowings
Weekly:
1969--Jan. 1
Apr. 2
9
June 4
11
18
millions ot
I n b
o f d
o 1 lars
process of collection and Federal Reserve float; and (2) foreign demand balances at Federal Reserve Banks.
4/ Excludes interbank and U.S. Government time deposits.
p - Preliminary.
Explanation of Projections in Table 6
money in the period ahead, including the effects of such elements as the public's loan demand,
repayments of previous loans, banks' investment preferences and willingness to supply loans,
banks' desires and abilities to obtain time and savings deposits, and the Government's financing
needs. The projections thus encompass normal seasonal developments, temporary bursts of
loans demand and expected associated repayments not currently reflected by the seasonals, and
whatever cyclical and growth demands for money and credit are expected in the projection period.
Assumed Treasury financing operations include: $-4.1 billion, June 23; $4.0 billion, July 23.
