Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) October 3, 1969.
MONEY MARKET AND RESERVE RELATIONSHIPS
Recent developments
(1) Since the last meeting of the Committee, long-term credit
markets, other than the market for State and local Government securities,
have experienced further upward yield pressure. Yield advances--which
ranged from 30 to 60 basis points on Government notes and bonds and
amounted to about 30 basis points for high-grade new corporate issues--
reflected a large volume of recent and forthcoming new corporate issues,
heavy current and prospective borrowing in the Federal agency market,
and a degree of market indigestion in the aftermath of the recent Treasury
refunding. In recent days the corporate bond and Treasury coupon markets
have tended to stabilize, with the latter market influenced by about $130
million of purchases by the System and $45 million by the Treasury. Yields
on municipal bonds have declined on balance since the last meeting, reflecting
cut-backs in offerings necessitated by interest rate ceilingsas well as
expectations of market participants that the Senate will weaken the House
tax-reform bill as it affects interest earnings on tax-exempt securities.
Most recently, this market has weakened somewhat as sizable new offerings
have been added to the forward calendar.
(2) Yields in the Treasury bill market fluctuated in a relatively
narrow range over the past month. Large purchases of Treasury bills by
foreign accounts were an important factor keeping yields from rising in a
period of overall credit market pressure. The System also purchased some
FINANCIAL MARKET RELATIONSHIPS IN PERSPECTIVE
Money Market Indicators Bond Yields Flow of Reserves Bank Credit and Money. S.A.
rPeriod ee Borrowings Federal 3-month U.S. Corporate Nonborrowed Total Bank Money Time
(Ind R em ions of Funds Treasury Government w Municipal Reserves Reserves Credit Supply Deposits
(In millions of . Issues (Aaa) 3/
dollars for weeks Re (Aaa) (In millions
ending in) 2/ of dollars) (In bllions of dollars)
sar 1968
-econd Half 1968
First Half 1969
Recent variation
in growth
7/3/68 - 12/18/68
12/18/68 - 10/1/69
- 210 548
- 218 529
- 779 1,034
- 203 516
- 833 1,090
+ 6.4
+11.0
- 3.7
+11.0
- 4.4
Annual rates of increase 4/
+ 7.9 + 9.0 + 7.2
+10.9 +13.4 + 7.0
+ 0.7 - 3.5 + 4.3
+12.9
- 1.4
I I II
** - Reflects $400 million reduction in member bank deposits resulting from withdrawal of a large country bank
from System membership. Percentage annual rates are adjusted to eliminate this break in series.
+11.5
+17.3
- 4.0
+18.6
- 6.7
+14.8 + 5.9
- 5.8 + 1.8
S.A. - Seasonally adjusted.
October 3, 1969.
(Mothl r es.,rTOO d«, >.hea om l,1« kl f...,,, dF l~l fi ) r~
bills for its own account in the market. In early October, short-term bill
yields were little changed from their levels around the time of the last
Committee meeting, but most recently the 3-month bill declined to about
(3) The effective rate on Federal funds has averaged about 9-1/8
per cent since the last Committee meeting--somewhat higher than in the
preceding inter-meeting period--with the weekly average rate fluctuating
between 8-1/2 and 9-5/8 per cent. In the statement week ending September
pre-tax date borrowing from the Federal Reserve proved to be larger than
expected and net borrowed reserves temporarily dropped to $400 million.
Thereafter, net borrowed reserves moved back into a $900 million -$1.2
billion range, and the Federal funds rate also moved up, with tax period
pressures and dealer financing demands associated with the large Treasury
refunding adding to money market pressures. Dealer loan rates at New
York City banks were quoted most frequently between 9-1/2 and 10-1/4 per
cent. Average member bank borrowing in the three statement weeks ending
October 1 ranged from $1.0 to $1.4 billion.
(4) There was a small net expansion in total member bank
deposits in September that reflected a further increase in U.S. Government
balances and a reduced rate of outflow of time deposits. The bank credit
proxy, unadjusted for Euro-dollar borrowings, increased at an annual rate
of 2.5 per cent, in line with the 2 - 5 per cent range projected in the
last Blue Book. Private demand deposits showed little net change on
average during the month rather than declining somewhat as had been projected.
Time deposits contracted at a 2 per cent annual rate, in line with projections
as flows of consumer-type deposits improved somewhat and CD attrition
(5) Funds obtained by banks from nondeposit sources declined
on average during September. Euro-dollar borrowings from foreign branches
added nearly one-half a percentage point to the adjusted bank credit proxy.
Loan RP's continued their August decline, and all nondeposit sources
together (other than borrowings from foreign branches) declined by a
magnitude equivalent to about 1 percentage point in the credit proxy.
In sum, the proxy plus Euro-dollars and other nondeposit sources rose
at an annual rate of about 3 per cent.
(6) The following table summarizes annual rates of change in
major deposit and reserve aggregates for the latter half of 1968 and thus
far in 1969.
Total reserves
Nonborrowed reserves
Bank credit, as indicated by:
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy)
Proxy plus Euro-dollars
Proxy plus Euro-dollars and
other nondeposit sources
Total loans and investments
(as of last Wednesday of month)
Money supply
Time and savings deposits
Savings accounts
July '68-
Dec. '68
n. a.
Jan. '69-
June '69
n. a.
July '68-
Sept. '69
Prospective developments
(7) Maintenance of prevailing money market conditions night be
considered to include a weekly average Federal funds rate fluctuating
between 8-1/2 and 9-1/2 per cent, member bank borrowings in a $1 - $1-1/2
billion range, and net borrowed reserves in a $900 million to $1.2
billion range. Given these conditions, however, it seems likely that
the 3-month bill rate would fluctuate in a somewhat higher range than
recently--perhaps between 6.90 and 7.40 per cent. While announcement of
the Treasury tax bill financing for payment on October 14 has had little
immediate impact on bill rates, further upward rate pressures may develop
from a yet to be announced further Treasury bill financing later this
month, from additional agency financings, and from potential reversal
of large recent German bill purchases in the market. Dealers have worked
their bill positions down to relatively low levels in anticipation of
these developments, however, and the System will be a net supplier of
reserves during the next three weeks, partly to accommodate the $400
million increase in required reserves resulting from imposition of
marginal reserve requirements on Euro-dollars. To the extent German
bill offerings do develop, therefore, the Desk may be in a position to
acquire a sizable part of this supply directly.
(8) If the 3-month bill rate should rise to or above the
upper end of the projected range, the market might become apprehensive
that monetary policy had firmed further, with consequent problems for
distributing the large volume of prospective Agency issues and for
clearing out the remaining overhang from the recent Treasury refunding.
Such upward interest rate pressures would likely spread throughout the
capital market, although expectations of lower interest rates could
emerge as an offsetting factor if the weight of forthcoming business
news were clearly on the bearish side. Should the bill rate climb enough
to bring unfavorable market repercussions, it may be necessary to move
toward the lower end of the recent range of fluctuation of the Federal
funds rate and marginal reserve measures in order to maintain unchanged
overall conditions in money and short-term credit markets.
(9) With the 3-month bill likely to remain at relatively high
levels over the next few weeks,time and savings deposit flows at banks
are most likely to remain adverse. On average, however, the extent of
the further decline from September to October may be relatively small--
per cent
perhaps in a 0 to -3/range. Outflows of consumer-type time deposits
should resume following the quarterly interest-crediting period, and
attrition in CD's will continue. The CD decline may be noticeably less
than in recent months, however, both because of the smaller volume of
monthly maturities and because there is likely to be some further shifting
of official foreign deposits from London branches of U.S. banks to
head offices, of the sort that began to develop in late September.
(10) The money supply is likely to show a decline on average
in October perhaps in a 2 - 5 per cent annual rate range. This would
reflect mainly the abrupt drop in demand deposits in the last half of
September which is expected to be only partially recovered during October.
(11) Total member bank deposits are likely to resume their
decline in October, perhaps dropping in a 5 - 8 per cent annual rate
range. This would imply further weakness, of course, in reserve
aggregates. With deposits contracting further, banks may be somewhat
more active than in recent weeks in the Euro-dollar market--although
the total of Euro-dollar borrowings may not rise appreciably because of
offsetting shifts in foreign official accounts. Banks may also become
more active in the commercial paper market. Possible constrained availa-
bility of funds to the commercial paper market--reflecting in part
strains on corporate liquidity--could tend to limit such borrowing,
however, and outstanding loan RP's will continue to run-off. Altogether,
Euro-dollar borrowings and other nondeposit sources of funds are not
likely to add appreciably to funds available to banks (probably by an
amount equivalent to no more than 1 percentage point in the proxy).
Policy alternative
(12) If the Committee should decide to move toward somewhat
less firm money market conditions, it might consider a Federal funds
rate averaging around 8-1/4 to 8-1/2 per cent, member bank borrowings
around $1 billion, and net borrowed reserves of around $800 million.
Over the short-run, such a move would seem unlikely to lead to sharp
reductions in interest rates or to much change in monetary aggregates
(as compared with a situation of no change in money market conditions).
Interest rate declines would, of course, tend to be larger if market
expectations were at the same time being affected by bearish business
news. But banks would not be in any position to bid effectively for
domestic CD's and thus would find it difficult to fuel downward pressures
on longer-term interest rates by rebuilding their own portfolios and
financing speculators. However, it is likely that banks would find
the market for commercial paper a somewhat more attractive source of
funds at the margin as short-term interest rate pressures abated. Also
other types of investors, such as pension and mutual funds--where fund
flows have been less restricted, might step-up their commitment of funds
to long-term markets.
(13) The money market conditions outlined in the preceding
paragraph might be accompanied by a 3-month bill rate moving down over
the next three weeks into a 6.70 - 7.10 per cent range. The total of
member bank deposits and nondeposit sources in these circumstances might
decline in a 3 - 6 per cent range in October. This decline would be
only a little smaller than that projected under a policy of no change,
but the effects of an easing in policy on bank credit developments in
November could be expected to be significantly larger. Money supply
might turn out to be somewhat less weak than otherwise, particularly
as time goes on, as less restrictive bank credit availability reduced
the pressure on cash balances of businesses and consumers.
MARGINAL RESERVE MEASURES
(Dollar amounts in Billions, based on period averages of daily figures)
Member Banks Borrowings
Period Free E\cess R e s e r v e C i t v
reserves reser\es Total Major banks Ot Country
8 N.Y. Outside N.Y.,
Monthly (reserves weeks
ending in):
Oct. 1 p -1.108 2-0 1.-:S 27 2~- 5-0
p - FrLD!IAR-.
Explanation of Projections in Table 6
