Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) The money supply is now estimated to have increased at a
cent pace indicated at the time of the last Committee meeting. Since
around mid-July, the weekly money supply figures have been generally
smaller than earlier anticipated, though the shortfall has lessened in
August and in the week ending August 12, the preliminary estimate for the
money supply moved slightly above its indicated path. For the most part
the shortfalls in money supply reflected weakness in private demand deposits
subject to reserves at both city and country banks, but currency and
estimated demand deposits at nonmember banks also fell short./ Apparently,
the surge in demand balances around mid-year was a very temporary phenomenon,
perhaps resulting from market churning associated with shifts of funds out
of market instruments thought to be of less than prime quality.
(2) Growth in the adjusted bank credit proxy in July was at
a slightly more rapid pace than had been expected earlier. This greater
strength was due primarily to a faster-than-projected rise in time deposits,
which grew at a 35 per cent annual rate on average in July. Large CD's
rose by around $5.0 billion over the month following the suspension of a
August 14, 1970.
portion of the Regulation Q ceilings, although more recent data indicate
a considerably more moderate rate of CD expansion. Other time and savings
deposits also advanced strongly in July, possibly reflecting a preference
by savers for highly liquid instruments in view of economic and financial
uncertainties. Net inflows of funds to nonbank savings institutions were
also exceptionally strong after allowance for seasonal factors.
Recent Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Adjusted Credit Proxy Money Supply
Indicated at Actual Indicated at Actual
Last Meeting Results Last Meeting Results
Week ending
July 15
August 5
Z Annual Rates of Change
% Annual Rates of Change
July over June
e/ Partly estimated.
(3) The Treasury's mid-August financing was generally
successful raising $1.9 billion in new cash, according to preliminary
figures. Despite the success of the financing and the initial premiums
on the new issues, the Government securities market remains hesitant
in the face of enlarged dealer positions arising from the Treasury's two
tax bill auctions in July and takings of about $1.4 billion in coupon
issues in the mid-August operation. Thus, yields on Treasury notes and
bonds have edged up and are about 7--10 basis points over mid-July
levels. Treasury bill rates have also moved somewhat higher, and the
per cent at the time of the last meeting.
(4) Yields on new high-grade corporate issues have fluctuated
since mid-July, and on balance are a shade higher than at the time of the
last FOMC meeting, reflecting a recent build-up in the corporate calendar.
On the other hand, yields on municipal securities have dropped. Private
short-term rates have also declined since mid-July; and these markets
have calmed considerably, although the market remains very quality-
conscious and marginal issuers of commercial paper are still being pressed
to seek alternative sources of credit. Major finance companies are now
having relatively little difficulty in meeting maturities, although some
are finding it hard to add to outstandings. Nevertheless, as reported in
the Greenbook, total outstanding commercial and finance paper continued to
decline in July, a month in which seasonal factors would imply a sizable
(5) In response to the System's discount window assistance
to banks extending additional credit to commercial paper issuers, member
bank borrowings rose sharply in July reaching a record $1.7 billion on
average in the week of July 15. Over the past three statement weeks,
however, member bank borrowings have been in a $1--$1.2 billion range,
at a time when pressures on the commercial paper market have been abat-
ing. Net borrowed reserves fluctuated in a $1.1--$1.4 billion range in
the latter part of July, but in the first two statement weeks of August
dropped below $1.0 billion; in June, before the commercial paper problem
developed, net borrowed reserves had averaged $735 million.
(6) Since the last Committee meeting, the Federal funds rate
has averaged a little below 7 per cent, as compared with the 7-1/4--
Federal funds rate reflected increased ability of banks to accommodate
reserve needs at the discount window. In addition, however, the drop in
the funds rate, and also dealer financing rates, reflected the Desk's
response to shortfalls in money supply growth.
(7) The following table summarizes seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change in major aggregates for selected periods:
First Half Latest
Past Year of 1970 Month
(July over (June over (July
July) December) over June)
Total reserves 0.2 - 0.2 5.3
Nonborrowed reserves -0.1 1.9 -16.7
Money supply 2.5 4.0 4.1
Time and savings deposits 4.7 7.1 35.2
Savings accounts at nonbank
thrift institutions 4.1 4.5 11.6
Member bank deposits and
related sources of funds
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy) 2.8 3.3 22.7
Proxy plus Euro-dollars 1.8 1.9 18.6
Proxy plus Euro-dollars
and other nondeposit
sources 3.3 3.5 18.1
Commercial bank credit
(Month end)
Total loans and investments
of all commercial banks 3.3 1.9 16.6
L&I plus loans sold
outright to affiliates
and foreign branches 4.6 3.9 16.6
Non-bank commercial paper 12.81/ 14.0 -63. 91/
Prospective developments
(8) If the Committee wishes to continue with a policy that
encompasses financial flows and credit conditions consistent with a 5 per
cent trend rate of growth for the money supply, the following language for
the second paragraph of the directive may be considered (alternative A):
To implement this policy, [DEL: while taking account of persisting
market uncertainties; liquidity strains; and the forthcoming Treasury
financing;] the Committee seeks to promote moderate growth in money
and bank credit over the months ahead, WHILE TAKING ACCOUNT OF
PERSISTING LIQUIDITY PROBLEMS AND allowing [DEL: for a possible] BANK
CREDIT GROWTH TO REFLECT A continued shift of credit flows from market
to banking channels. System open market operations until the next
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining
bank reserves and money market conditions consistent with that objective;
[DEL: provided, however, that operations shall be modified as needed to
counter excessive pressures in financial markets should they develop.]
(9) The table below shows growth paths for the monetary
aggregates that would be consistent with such a policy.
June (actual)
July (actual)
Monetary Aggregates--Monthly and Quarterly
(Daily averages, seasonally adjusted)
Money Supply Adjusted Credit Proxy Total Reserves
Annual
Levels Annual Rate Levels Annual Rate Levels Rate of
-$ bills.) of change ($ bills.) of change ($ bills) Change
a quarterly-average over quarterly-average
per cent inthe third quarter and 4.5 per
(10) The growth rate specified above might not be attainable under
prevailing money market conditions, particularly with respect to the money
supply. Although the relationship between money market conditions and
monetary aggregates has been unusually uncertain recently, our projections
indicate that the money supply might grow at no more than a 4 per cent annual
rate over the third quarter and into the fourth if current money market
conditions are generally maintained. Achievement of a 5 per cent money
supply growth might require a Federal funds rate generally around 6-1/2--
$800-$900 million, and net borrowed reserves were in a $700-$800 million
range. Such a set of money market conditions might be accompanied by some
decline of interest rates in short-term credit markets in consequence of
greater provision of nonborrowed reserves by the System. The 3-month bill
rate would probably decline in a 6-1/8--6-1/2 per cent range. It is
possible, also, that if the Federal funds rate had to be consiztently around
could be generated which could increase bank and other investor demands for
debt obligations. This might lead to interest rate declines on a broader
front, although the extent of decline may be limited by the size of
security offerings in prospect.
(11) Time deposit growth is likely to slow over the months
ahead even if the easier money market conditions noted above prove necessary.
It seems unlikely that the very rapid rate of growth of consumer-type time
deposits in July will continue, assuming that economic prospects begin to
improve. With respect to large negotiable CD's, the recent more moderate
pace of expansion is likely to continue. Further short-term market rate
declines would tend to make CD's relatively more attractive to investors,
but, with loan demands quite moderate, banks would be unlikely to be as
aggressive in the CD market as in July. This same consideration is
likely to limit bank interest in nondeposit sources of funds.
(12) A weekly path for monetary aggregates consistent with
the monthly figures is shown below:
Monetary Aggregates--Weekly
(Daily averages, seasonally adjusted)
August 12/
Sept. 2
Money Supply
Credit Proxy
Adjusted
e/ Partly estimated.
Total
Reserves
(13) Should the Committee wish to seek a somewhat more rapid
pace of growth for the money supply and an associated easing of credit
conditions between now and year-end, it may wish to consider the
following language for the second paragraph of the directive (alterna-
tive B):
To implement this policy, [DEL: while taking account of persisting
market-uncertainties; liquidity strains; and the forthcoming
Treasury financing the Committee seeks to promote SOMEWHAT GREATER
moderate growth in money and bank credit] over the months ahead,
WHILE TAKING ACCOUNT OF PERSISTING LIQUIDITY PROBLEMS AND allowing
for-a-possible BANK CREDIT GROWTH TO REFLECT A continued shift
of credit flows from market to banking channels. System open
market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall
be conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves and money
market conditions consistent with that objective provided;[DEL:however,
that operations shall be modified as needed to counter excessive
pressures in financial markets should they develop.]
(14) A monthly and quarterly path for the monetary aggregates,
including a move up to a 6 per cent annual rate of growth for money
supply in the fourth quarter, is shown below:
Monetary Aggregates--Monthly and Quarterly
(Daily averages, seasonally adjusted, $ billions)
June (actual)
July (actual)
Money Supply
Levels Annual Rate
($ bills.) of Change
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Levels Annual Tate
($ bills.) of Change
Total Reserves
Levels Annual Rate
($ bills.) of Change
(15) Weekly figures for the period between now and the next
meeting consistent with the above path, are detailed in the following
Monetary Aggregates - Weekly
(Daily average, seasonally adjusted, $ billion)
Credit Proxy
Week Money Supply Adjusted Total Reserves
August 12e/ 206.4 320.6 28.6
e/ partly estimated
(16) Encouragement of the more rapid growth in the money
supply indicated above would entail a more generous provision of non-
borrowed reserves by the System. As a result, net borrowed reserves
would likely move into a $500-$700 million range, member bank borrow-
ings drop to $650-$800 million, and the Federal funds rate might generally
be in a 6--6-1/2 per cent range. A relatively sharp drop in Treasury
bill rates, as well as other short-term rates, probably would accompany
such an easing in the money market, particularly if the Federal funds
the
rate moves down close to/discount rate and engenders expectations of a
discount rate reduction. It is not improbable that the 3-month Treasury
bill rate would drop below 6 per cent under those circumstances. How-
ever, Treasury net cash needs--at $6-$7 billion--are fairly large over
the balance of the year and would serve to restrain interest rate
(17) In the easier monetary environment envisaged, banks
would be likely to reduce offering rates on large CD's. Nevertheless,
with market rates reduced, total time deposits would be expected to grow
somewhat more rapidly than under alternative A. As a result of lower
domestic interest rates and strong inflows of funds, banks would probably
reduce Euro-dollar borrowings further, although whether individual banks
will permit such borrowings to fall below their reserve-free base is not
at all clear. Banks would also reduce their reliance on commercial paper
as a source of funds.
(18) The behavior of long-term interest rates would depend in
large part on expectational reactions in the market to the over-all easing
of monetary and credit conditions. It does not appear likely that a
gradual upward adjustment in the rate of money supply increase would
rekindle longer-run inflationary expectations, assuming the very modest
growth path of real GNP shown in the greenbook and assuming fiscal policy
does not become markedly more stimulative. Rather, the enhanced credit
availability accompanying the money growth could be accompanied by declining
bond yields over the short-run partly as corporate borrowers turn to bank
lines of credit in anticipation of lower long-term borrowing costs later
in the year. On balance, one might expect greater growth in money supply
in the second half of this year to be consistent with declining long-term
interest rates in corporate, municipal, and mortgage markets, although a
pick-up in the volume of security offerings in the latter two markets would
tend to act as a brake on the extent of rate decline.
