Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) June 19, 1970
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent Developments
(1) The near-crisis conditions which had developed in securities
markets around the time of the last Committee meeting have been significantly
alleviated over the intervening weeks. But uncertainties still persist
regarding the general liquidity of some financial and non-financial sectors
of the economy and the added borrowing pressures which such financial
strains might generate. As a result, securities markets remain quite
sensitive to even relatively modest shifts in supply-demand prospects and
market expectations.
(2) Stock price indexes recovered nearly one-third of the steep
April-May decline in the week following the last Committee meeting but
have since fluctuated below that recovery level. Bond markets also
strengthened appreciably around the end of May. In June, however, an
increased volume of offerings has pushed yields on new corporate bonds to
new highs and other bond yields have retraced a sizable part of their late
May declines. At these yields investor interest has been good, and new
offerings have been generally well received. Reports persist, however, that
businesses rated as less than high-quality are finding it difficult to
finance in capital markets and are turning to banks for funds.
(3) In short-term markets commercial paper rates have remained
high, and there has reportedly been an upgrading in investor standards
regarding the quality of credits. Rates on other short-term market instru-
ments have edged lower, particularly Treasury bills, with the yield on the
below the level at the time of the last meeting.
(4) Desk purchases of Treasury coupon issues totaling about
$300 million--occurring just before and shortly after the May 26 meeting--
contributed to the general improvement of market psychology early in the
inter-meeting period, Changes in the average level of the Federal funds
rate were influenced by shifting--largely seasonal--reserve pressures on
major money market banks over the period. In the three statement weeks
ending June 3 these banks ran relatively shallow basic reserve deficits on
average. Partly for this reason the average effective rate on Federal funds
ranged between 7-5/8 and 7-7/8 per cent, even though net borrowed reserves
were averaging close to $1 billion. In the two following statement weeks,
as dividend and tax date pressures tended to deepen basic reserve deficits
at the major money market banks, the effective rate on Federal funds was
around 8 per cent on most days, even though sizable reserve supplying opera-
tions by the Desk contributed to a sharp reduction of net borrowed reserves.
In the statement week ending June 17, when net borrowed reserves eased sharply
to $418 million, the Federal funds rate finally dropped well below 8 per cent
near the end of the period. Average member bank borrowings also varied
significantly over the period, ranging from a high of $1.2 billion in the
statement week ending June 3 to $650 million in the week just ended.
(5) Growth in the monetary aggregates has diverged to some extent
from the staff projections that were presented to the Committee as background
information at the last meeting. The adjusted credit proxy initially grew
more rapidly than projected, although most recently it has moved back about
to the projected level. The money supply, on the other hand, fell sub-
stantially short of estimates and projections in the latter half of May,
and since then has recovered only part of this difference.
RECENT PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Adjusted Credit Proxy Money Supply
Projected at Actual Projected at Actual
Last Meeting 1 /  Results Last Meetingi  Results
Month Levels Levels
Weeks Ending
Annual Rates of Change Annual Rates of Change
May - 1.5 - 0.4 9.5 4.1
June 8.5 8.0E£ /  1.0 - 1. r/
e/ Estimated.
r/ Projected.
7 Projections were based on an assumption of no change in money market
(6) The slower-than-projected growth in the money supply
reflected in part a higher-than-estimated level of U.S. Government
deposits in late May and early June. However, deviations from the
projections also developed from other temporary factors in the last
two weeks of May. For the week of May 20, when the money supply increased
sharply, data available at the time of the last meeting had overstated
the increase by $1.3 billion. Similarly, in the following week a
decline of $600 million was projected at the time of the meeting, but
the actual decline turned out to be $1.3 billion. The mid-May bulge
reflected retroactive Federal supplements to consumer income and
temporary deposits resulting from attrition in the May Treasury refund-
ing, the short-range impacts of which were difficult to assess in advance.
(7) The initial movement of the adjusted credit proxy above
the projected path was due chiefly to larger-than-estimated expansion
in nondeposit sources of funds and time deposits. In the course of May,
all non-deposit sources increased by around $900 million. For early
June, data indicate considerable slackening in the increase of bank-
related commercial paper, but Euro-dollar borrowings in this period
have picked up. Time deposits are now estimated to have risen at a
to that rate in June as well. Almost all of this growth has been in
consumer-type time deposits at country banks. At banks outside New York
City there still are indications of some net increase in outstanding CD's
despite the fact that investment yields on Treasury bills are now about
shown moderate net run-offs in recent weeks, with attrition of foreign
deposits in New York City offset in part by slight increases in CD's
issued in other leading cities.
(8) The following table summarizes seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change in major reserve, deposit, and credit aggregates for
selected periods:
Past Year
(May over
Total Reserves
Nonborrowed Reserves
Money Supply
Time and savings deposits
Savings accounts at nonbank
thrift institutions
Member bank deposits and
related sources of funds
Total member bank deposits
(bank credit proxy)
Proxy plus Euro-dollars
Proxy plus Euro-dollars
and other nondeposit
sources
Commercial bank credit
(month end)
Total loans and investments
of all commercial banks
L&I plus loans sold
outright to affiliates
and foreign branches
May over
December
May
over
p--Preliminary,
n.a.--Not available.
June
over
December
(Proj.)
n. a.
n. a.
June
over
May
(Proj.)
n. a.
Prospective Developments
(9) Conditions in money and securities markets over the weeks ahead
remain highly uncertain. Interest rates in long markets are exceptionally
high, but the effects that this could have over time on lender and borrower
attitudes are not yet apparent. The emphasis on high quality credits by
investors, if it continues, may also bring changes in the pattern of fund
flows, particularly with reference to the commercial paper market. The
Treasury probably will raise $4.5--$5.0 billion in new cash during July,
mainly through tax anticipation bills. Substantial fund flows will occur
around the mid-year interest and dividend crediting period at banks and
other savings institutions, with the net outcome in doubt. Finally, the
underlying economic situation remains uncertain, with most of the recently
available data pointing toward increased weakness.
(10) In this situation, the Committee may wish to consider three
alternative policy courses for the interval until its next meeting on July 21,
at which time "even keel" considerations are likely to become a factor
constraining operations. First, it may wish to continue the current
directive for another interval, emphasizing the objective of moderating
financial market pressures, with secondary attention to the monetary
aggregates. Second, it may wish to reestablish as its primary objective
the achievement of moderate growth in the monetary aggregates, along the
lines visualized at the May 5 and earlier meetings, with a proviso addressed
to countering any excessive pressures that may develop. Or the Committee,
in recognition of the somewhat weaker economic news and the prospect that
economic recovery over the next year may be more sluggish than was antici-
pated earlier, may wish to move policy toward the achievement of a moderately
faster rate of growth in money and bank credit than has prevailed in the
year to date, with a proviso similar to that of the preceding alternative.
Specificationsfor these three alternatives are discussed below.
Alternative A
(11) If the Committee desires to continue for the time being
primary emphasis on financial market conditions over monetary aggregates,
it may wish to consider renewal of the directive language adopted at the
last meeting, with the following minor changes:
"To implement this policy, in view of PERSISTING [DEL: current]
market uncertainties and liquidity strains, open market
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall
CONTINUE TO be conducted with a view to moderating pressures
on financial markets, while, to the extent compatible there-
with, maintaining bank reserves and money market conditions
consistent with the Committee's longer-run objective of
moderate growth in money and bank credit."
If this directive is adopted, the phrase "moderating pressures on financial
markets' might be interpreted to mean (1) that the Desk should act to ease
recently prevailing money market conditions if the behavior of securities
markets generally should again begin to deteriorate; (2) that if there is
no further deterioriation, the Desk should (a) exercise considerable caution
in taking any firming actions in response to unduly rapid growth in
the monetary aggregates. Since such actions might
themselves set off a deteriotation of security market conditions; and
(b) avoid easing unless the aggregates begin to fall short of the Committee's
longer-run obejctive of moderate growth. It would seem that the intended
meaning of "moderate growth" would have to be specified; one possibility
is the set of projections shown in paragraph (14) below.
(12) Recently prevailing money market conditions may be taken
to include a Federal funds rate generally in the 7-5/8--8 per cent range,
net borrowed reserves averaging $650-$900 million; and average member
bank borrowings in an $800 million to $1.0 billion range. Given the fact
that bill rates are subject to fairly wide seasonal fluctuations at this
time of year, a relatively wide 6.50-7.00 per cent range for the 3-month
bill rate might be consistent with the preceding specifications.
(13) The bill rate is likely to move somewhat lower within
this range in the very near term, given the current depleted level of
dealer bill positions, and expected seasonal demands. Bill buying is
anticipated from investors rechanneling some part of the proceeds of
the $3.3 billion of maturing June tax bills not turned in for taxes,
from banks seeking bills for end-of-June window-dressing purposes, and
from the System's need to supply substantial reserves over the July 4
holiday. In July, however, the Treasury is expected to raise $4.5 to
$5.0 billion of new money in the bill market--through continued additions
to the weekly bill auctions and probably two offerings of tax bills,
one of which could come very early in the month. This additional supply
of bills would very likely press bill rates higher, possibly toward the
upper end of the range specified above or even beyond. If the rate
should rise to say 6.90 per cent or above, this directive would com-
template that the Desk would move to resist the increase.
(14) Given staff expectations of a modest increase in economic
activity during the third quarter, maintenance of the money market condi-
tions and 3-month Treasury bill rates in the ranges outlined above would
be expected to produce the following monthly patterns of growth in the
monetary aggregates:-/
Projected Growth of Monetary Aggregates
Assuming Maintenance of Recently Prevailing Money
Market Conditions
(Daily averages, seasonally adjusted)
Adjusted Credit Proxy Money Supply Total Rese
Levels (in Annual Kate Levels (in Annual Rate Levels(in
billions) of Change billions) of Change billions)
rves
Annual
Rate of
Months Change
Quarters
2nd Qtr. 7.0 4.5-' 2.5
3rd Qtr. 6.5 5.0 3.0
(15) As shown in the table, the 5 per cent third quarter growth
rate in the money stock projected under the above assumptions involves a
relatively high growth rate in July and progressively smaller increases in
August and September. The projected July growth rate makes allowance
for heavy net payments by the Treasury to the public during the month, together
with temporary increases in demand balances arising from disintermediation at
depositary-type institutions during the imminent mid-year reinvestment period.
While the net switching out of accounts at such institutions is expected to be
substantially below a year ago, the volume of deposit churning involved is,
nevertheless, likely to be relatively large. The very low rate of money
supply growth in September is attributable to an expected sharp rise in
Government deposits created by tax inflows, as well as to assumed reduc-
tions in bank holdings of new Treasury debt to be acquired in the
projected end-of-August cash financing. These two types of effects
also help to account for the estimated drop in the money supply during June.
(16) Time deposits--not shown in the table--are projected to
grow at about a 9-1/2 per cent rate on average over the third quarter.
With investment yields on Treasury bills and other short-term market
instruments continuing at levels that make large negotiable CD's non-
competitive, no net growth in these instruments is projected, although
it is expected that enough new CD's can be issued outside New York City
to offset continuing run-offs at the major banks. Growth in consumer-
type time and savings deposits is likely to slow appreciably in July,
during the mid-year reinvestment period. Thereafter, growth of such
accounts should pick up appreciably as in other recent quarters,
returning total time deposit expansion to about a 10-1/2 per cent
annual rate in September. The pattern of growth in the credit proxy is
strongly influenced by the projected path of time deposit expansion and
assumes a steady growth in nondeposit sources of funds at $100 million
a week. If commercial paper issuers should move back into banks in
volume, growth in the proxy, of course, could be larger,with bank financing
presumably coming from non-deposit sources (or perhaps from increased
borrowing at the discount window).
Alternative B
(17) If the Committee wishes to return to its earlier emphasis
on moderate growth in the monetary aggregates as the primary operating
target for open market policy, it may wish to adopt a directive with
the following language:
"To implement this policy, [DEL: in view of current market
uncertainties and liquidity strains,] THE COMMITTEE SEEKS TO
PROMOTE MODERATE GROWTH IN MONEY AND BANK CREDIT OVER THE
MONTHS AHEAD. SYSTEM open market operations until the next
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to
[DEL: moderating pressures on financial markets while to the
extent compatible therewith;] maintaining bank reserves and
money market conditions consistent with the-[DEL: Committee's
longer run] THAT objective [DEL: of moderate growth in money and
bank credit;] PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT OPERATIONS SHALL BE
MODIFIED AS NEEDED TO COUNTER EXCESSIVE PRESSURES IN FINANCIAL
MARKETS, SHOULD THEY DEVELOP."
"Moderate growth" in the money supply was defined as a 4 per cent annual
rate at the Committee's May 5 meeting when this form of the directive was
last adopted. This rate of change also approximates that now estimated
for the first half of the year. The following table delineates a set
of target paths for the monetary aggregates that would be consistent
with a continuation of this 4 per cent growth rate over the third quarter.
Monthly
Target Paths for the Monetary Aggregates
Assuming the Money Supply Grows at a 4 per Cent
Annual Rate Over the Third Quarter
(Daily average levels seasonally adjusted)
Adjusted Credit Proxy Money Supply T
Annual Rate Annual Rate
Level of Change Level of Change Leve
(in billions) (in billions) (in bil
otal Reserves
Annual Rate
(18) For the money supply to grow at the targeted 4 per cent annual
rate in the third quarter, money market conditions would have to be somewhat
firmer than those currently prevailing as described in paragraph (12) above.
These firmer conditions might include a Federal funds rate generally in a
million, and member bank borrowings averaging around $1 billion. In these
circumstances, the 3-month Treasury bill rate could also be expected to
range somewhat higher than under Alternative A, perhaps between 6.60 and
June
July
August
Septemb
(19) Growth in the adjusted credit proxy consistent with 4 per
cent money growth and the money market conditions specified above is pro-
jected at an annual rate averaging 5-1/2 per cent during the third
quarter. The monthly pattern is much the same as shown in paragraph
a little weaker and expansion
14, but with time deposit growth relatively/in nondeposit sources of
funds somewhat stronger than implied in that alternative. In parti-
cular, we would expect that CD sales would be appreciably more difficult
in the tighter short-term markets contemplated in this variant, and
that some net attrition in such balances outstanding could be anticipated.
(20) In the period from now until the next meeting, a target
path for the monetary aggregates that might be expected to emerge from
the money market and bill rate conditions specified in paragraph (18)
would be the following. The table also shows the projected weekly
path associated with Alternative A.
Weekly Path for Monetary Aggregates
(Daily average levels, seasonally adjusted in billions of dollars)
Adjusted Credit Proxy Money Supply Tctal Reserves
l/ 2/
Week ending Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A
Alternative C
(21) If the Committee believes that the somewhat weaker
economic projection calls for a moderately more stimulative monetary
policy, defined in terms of expansion rates for money, it may wish
to consider the following alternative language:
"To implement this policy, [DEL: in view of current market
uncertainties and liquidity strains,] THE COMMITTEE SEEKS TO
PROMOTE SOMEWHAT GREATER GROWTH IN MONEY AND BANK CREDIT
OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD THAN IN THE FIRST HALF OF THIS YEAR,
SYSTEM open market operations until the next meeting of the
Committee shall be conducted with a view to [DEL: moderating pressures
on financial markets; while; to the extent compatible therewith;
maintaining bank reserves and money market conditions consistent
with the committee's longer run] THAT objective of-moderate-growth
[DEL: in money and bank credit;] PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT OPERATIONS
SHALL BE MODIFIED AS NEEDED TO COUNTER EXCESSIVE PRESSURES IN
FINANCIAL MARKETS, SHOULD THEY DEVELOP."
The phrase "somewhat greater growth in money" might be defined
as a 6 per cent annual growth rate over the third quarter. This would
be moderately more than the 4.2 per cent growth rate expected for the
first half of 1970, and slightly larger than the probably rate of
expansion after adjustment for the temporary bulge in December that
resulted from foreign transactions. As indicated in the table below, we
would expect such a growth rate in money to be associated with expansion
in the adjusted credit proxy at a 7.5 per cent annual rate in the third
quarter (compared with a 3.8 per cent growth rate estimated for the first
half). This result would reflect a somewhat larger expansion in time
deposits than under the preceding alternatives, offset in part by less reliance
on nondeposit funds.
Monthly
Target Paths for the Monetary Aggregates,
Assuming the Money Supply Grows at a 6 Per Cent
Annual Rate Over the Third Quarter
(Daily averages, seasonally adjusted)
Adjusted Credit Proxy Money Supply
Level (in Annual Rate Level (in Annual Rate
Total Reserves
Level (in Annual Rate
Months billions) of Change billions) of Change billions) of Chan
(22) For the money supply and bank credit to grow as targeted
in the table, we believe that money market conditions would need to be
eased somewhat relative to the conditions that have been prevailing recently.
Such an easing might be taken to mean a Federal funds rate generally
ranging between 7-1/4 and 7-3/4 per cent, net borrowed reserves averaging
around $650 million, and member bank borrowings averaging around $750
million. Under these conditions the rate on 3-month Treasury bills might
be expected to range generally between 6.40 and 6.80 per cent.
(23) Between now and the next meeting, weekly target paths for
the monetary aggregates that could be expected to be consistent with this
set of market specifications are as follows:
Weekly
Target Paths for the Monetary Aggregates,
Assuming a 6 Per Cent Growth in the Money Supply
Week ending Adjusted Credit Proxy Money Sipply
Concluding Comment
(24) Given the known pitfalls in projecting financial data,
the differences in implications of the three alternative directives
may not seem very significant. However, some possibility exists that
the changes in short-term market interest rates required under
Alternative B or C could be large enough to have appreciable effects
on market expectations about the course of interest rates. Thus,
the adoption of Alternative C might lead to a decline in short-term
market rates sufficient to make large CD's marginally competitive
again. If this were to happen, banks would be able to strengthen
their liquidity positions somewhat; and the resulting lessening of
tensions could improve market expectations regarding credit availability
and interest rates. On the other hand, given the still sensitive state
of securities markets, the adoption of Alternative B, involving a
marginal firming in money markets, might lead to some stiffening of
market interest rates and renewed apprehensions about financial
Table 2
AGGREGATE RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
kclt i - ti, Chnc , S ,<'-l A
(1i peT <r a rr ' asud mc t l aH % .2' I C r~ 2.2
Ser -annuall
l t H.1 l c
2nd Hall 1496
Ist Quat-er 1
0
a
68
Ist Quarter 1969
2nd Quarter 1o60
3rd Quarter 19t'.
Lth Quarter 1960
octhl'
19t--April
Ma\
June
Auogust
Seotemoer
Octoher
Noveber
April
Ma'
June
Ju!\
Se-terrr
Octoer
\cve-er
- -
'IC' .
- 3 3
+79
+15
+11 5
+96
+ 0.1
S12
S1 4
- :.9
- .9
+12 1
- 8.5
- 6.3
- 3.1
-1:. 2
+ 7 5+75
+11 5
+ 9 8+98
- 2.5
+26
+ 2 6
+ 8.-
-10 2
+12 7
- 3
- L
- 5r
-Se
- .^
+ 11
+21
+15 0
+ 5.3
- 0.4
+ 4 5
- 4.9
- ".2
-1-.1
. 7 -
4 5
+ 4 0
+69
S7 8
+ 7 6
+ 6 6+76+66
+ 7.0
+58
+87
+8 7
+ 8 5.85
+ 2.8
+11.;
+ 5.6
+ 2.8
+83
.12+ 2
+2.7
+ 8 1+81
+ 81
S5
S8.0
- 2.6
+10.t
+ 70
- 7.i .
S55
+67
+ 6 8
+ 7
+ 
4 1+68
+ 1 2+71+12
+ 2.5
2 5
+11 ,
+ 7 -
t &
- 1°1
+ 7 3+73
+ 1
+13 6
+12.7
+ 0.6
- .0
- -..
+ S
+ 6 8
+ 7 0
+ 3 2+70+32
+42
+ 2.°
- 7 1
+ 1 6
- 0.9
+11 0
- 1
- 1.
- 7
-08- .0
+1 '-1 ,
+76
43
+16 5
+17 3
- 5.1
-30
-1+ J
+26+ 2 6
.5 -
- 3 6
5-
- ' 6
- +2
n a
- - C
+ 2 0
- 7
- 7
-75
.- -
+ 
f
; - Pre..---.-
Table 4
AGGREGATE RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
Seasonally Ad usted
May 6
13
20
June 3 p
10 p
17 p
R'serve \)giegiles
Total Nonbor owed RequIij
reserves resci ve. * eserv.,SNnn wc cI rese.V4 Vs
I I L
Member Bank Deposits
Supported by Reouired Reserves
Tn i ITotl Time
in meo i h.nk elos t
d i dos iti(Irpusits
Private U.S. Gov't.
demand dem.and
deposits 1/ deposits
Money Supply
Total Currency
Private
demand
deposits J
1 a r
ComnerciallCredlt Proxy +
bank time lEuro-dollars +
dLposits other nondep.
adjusted 'sources of
Private demand deposits include demand deposits of individuals, partnerships, and corporations and net Interbank depsits. p Preliminary.
Includes currency outside the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and the vaults of all commercial banks.
Includes (1) demand deposits at a11 commercial banks, other than those due to domestic commercial banks 
and the U.S. Government, less cash items in
process of collection and Federal R serve float, and (2) foreign demand balances at Federal 
Reserve Banks,
Excludes interank and U.S. Government time deposits.
- ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ -- - -~ ~~ --- ~ ~ ~ - I ; 4 ~L _-- - -^-J^ « _ t -- f -.- Drl n *..
m i. J J
# m , I II i de-si 
t 3
