Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
November 13, 1970.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) November 13, 1970.
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) The adjusted money supply in October rose only slightly,
thus falling considerably short of the 4-1/2 per cent rate of increase
expected at the time of the last meeting of the Committee. While spread
throughout the banking system, the greater portion of the weakness in the
money supply appears to have been at reserve city banks and to be associated
with the weakness in demands for short-term credit, perhaps in large part
related to the auto strike. As shown in the table in paragraph (3), since
mid-October the weekly data have, without exception, run below the path
indicated in the last Blue Book; and in the week of November 4 the short-
fall amounted to some $1-1/2 billion.
(2) Growth in the adjusted bank credit proxy in October fell
even further below expectations than the money supply. Currently the proxy
is estimated to have increased at only about a 1/2 of 1 per cent rate over
the month, compared with a 7 per cent rate expected at the time of the
Committee meeting. In addition to the weakness in private demand deposits,
the increase in the proxy was held down by a slightly more rapid pace of
runoff of non-deposit sources of funds than allowed for, a slower growth
in time deposits than earlier anticipated, and a greater decline in U.S.
Government deposits. The October rate of increase in time deposits is
estimated at 22 per cent, compared with a projection of 26-1/2 per cent,
reflected some slowing in net inflows of both CD's and other time and
savings deposits. Like the weakness in the money supply, this slowing
was concentrated at reserve city banks,
(3) The following table shows recent developments in the money
supply and the adjusted credit proxy.
Recent Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Indicated at Actual Indicated at Actual
Last Meetingi/ Results Last Meetingi Results
Week ending
October 14
November 4
% Annual Ratesof Change
% Annual Rates of Change
(4) In view of the shortfall in monetary growth rates in
October, as well as in the fourth quarter, the Desk has encouraged more
comfortable money market conditions than those generally prevailing around
the time of the October 20 meeting. With the "even keel" constraint
lessened after the auction date of the new note, Federal funds began to
trade more frequently below 6 per cent and in the last day or two have
been trading around the new 5-3/4 per cent discount rate. Net borrowed
reserves over the statement weeks since the last meeting have fluctuated
in a $120 to $290 million range while average member bank borrowings have
remained quite stable around $430 million.
(5) Short-term interest rates have declined markedly since the
Committee meeting, particularly in the Treasury bill market where the
rate on 3-month issues has dropped about 50 basis points to around 5.45
per cent. The fall in bill rates was influenced by anticipation of a
near-term cut in the discount rate and the commercial bank prime rate
(both of which subsequently were reduced by 1/4 point),by reinvestment
of the proceeds of the heavy recent volume of capital market offerings,
and, also, by reduced demands for short-term credit partly as a result
of the prolonged auto strike. These same influences have worked to re-
duce rates on private short-term market instruments as well, and most of
these rates are about 25--50 basis points below their levels as of
October 20. Bond markets have rallied in the last two weeks, bringing
yields somewhat below those prevailing around the time of the last FOMC
(6) On October 23, the Treasury announced a rights exchange
for the $7.7 billion of maturing 5 per cent notes, $6.0 billion of which
were publicly held. Holders of the maturing notes were given the option
of an exchange into either a 3-1/2-year, 7-1/4 per cent note at par or
a 5-3/4-year, reopened 7-1/2 per cent note priced to yield 7.39 per cent.
The exchange was very successful with an attrition rate of only 11 per
cent, or about $650 million, of the public's holdings. These two new
issues were most recently trading at premiums of 1-3/4--2 points. In
conjunction with the October 30 announcement of the results of the rights
exchange, the Treasury announced a $2.0 billion cash financing in the
form of an auction on November 5 of a 6-3/4 per cent, 18-month note, with
very successful, and an average issuing rate of 6.21 per cent resulted,
a rate considerably below earlier market expectations.
(7) The following table summarizes seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change in major financial aggregates for selected periods:
First Half Third Most
Past Year of 1970 Quarter Recent Month
(Oct. over (June over (Sept. over (October over
October) December) June) September)
Total Reserves 6.5 - 0.2 19.2 -3.8
Money Supply, published 3.5 4.0 5,1 -0.6
Large CD's (dollar amount) $11.7 $ 1.7 $8.7 $1.9
Other time and savings
deposits 8.7 5,7 15,5 12.9
Member bank deposits and
related sources of funds
Commercial bank credit
(Month end)
seasonal adjustments.
1/ Actual dollar change over the period in billions.
Prospective developments
(8) The recent weakness in demand deposits, and also to a
degree in time deposits, suggests that the fourth quarter target growth
rate for the money supply of 5 per cent (and the anticipated attendant
bank credit growth rate of 9 per cent) are not likely to be attained,
even with money market conditions similar to the easier conditions
most recently prevailing. The latter might be taken to include a
Federal funds rate around the new 5-3/4 per cent discount rate and a net
reserve position for banks in a +$50 to -$200 million range. Given
these money market conditions, the staff's current projections of likely
growth in money supply, bank credit, and total reserves are shown below.
As may be seen the money supply over the quarter would be expected to
grow at a 3 per cent annual rate, with growth expected to accelerate
from the very low recent rates as economic activity picks up in connection
with the ending of the auto strike. The adjusted bank credit proxy
is expected to grow at only a 3-1/2 per cent annual rate for the quarter,
partly as U.S. Government deposits show a substantial decline.
Selected Monetary Aggregates, Monthly
($ billions, seasonally adjusted--% annual rate change in parenthesis)
Money Supply
Published Adjusted Bank Total
Basis Adjusted Credit Proxy Reserves
Fourth quarter 2 2/ 1/
(Dec. over Sept.) (2.5)-' (3.0)- (3.5) (5.0)-
With these aggregates and money market conditions, the staff would expect
the 3-month bill rate to be in a 5-1/4--5-3/4 per cent range. It is
possible that the bill rate could rise in the last few weeks of the year
as the result of an expected $2 billion Treasury bill offering for new
cash to be announced shortly, of usual seasonal pressures, and of some
renewed short-term credit demands following settlement of the auto strike,
A back-up in short-term rates, should it develop, would tend to limit,
though perhaps not completely halt, further declines in long-term interest
(9) In light of the staff's estimate of the outlook for
monetary aggregates noted above for the fourth quarter the Committee
may wish to consider a further easing in money market conditions in an
effort to move back to its previously desired track. But since
it seems likely that some of the recent deposit weakness
may have been related to diminished short-term credit and cash working
balance needs as a result of the auto strike, the Committee may also
wish to consider settling for a somewhat slower aggregate growth in the
fourth quarter than previously desired. This approach might then allow
for a counterbalancing growth in the money stock at a rate above 5 per
cent in the first quarter when the economy will be doing most of its
catching up from strike effects. For example, the Committee may not
wish to ease money market conditions, and other interest rates, as much
as now seems likely to be required to attain a 5 per cent money stock
growth in the fourth quarter, and then have to turn around and tighten
money market conditions in the first quarter in order to keep money
growth to 5 per cent at a time when transactions demands for cash will
likely be accelerating. One alternative would be for the Committee to
strive for, say, a 4 per cent money growth rate in the fourth quarter
and a compensating 6 per cent rate in the first, thus maintaining the
annual rate over the fourth and first quarters together at around 5 per
(10) The following table summarizes relationships between
money market conditions, typified for convenience by the Federal funds
rate, and rates of increase in monetary aggregates thought at the
moment to be consistent for the fourth quarter.
Annual rates of increase
Federal funds rate! /  Money supply Bank credit
(a) 5-3/4 3 3-1/2
(b) 5 4 4-1/2
(c) 3-1/2 5 6
Needless to say, these relationships are, at best, approximate, are no
doubt subject to considerable error, and should be considered as mid-
points of fairly wide ranges, But they are presented so that the
Committee might have some basis for expressing its preferences with
respect to trade-offs over the near-term between monetary aggregates
and money market conditions.
(11) The choice to be made among the range of alternatives
summarized in paragraph (10) would appear to depend to an important
extent on the trend rate of growth that the Committee desires for money
and bank credit over a longer period of time. As earlier noted, if the
FOMC wished to remain on a 5 per cent growth trend for money stock, it
might accept a slower rate in the fourth quarter and a more rapid rate
in the first quarter in the interest of not unduly wrenching money and
credit markets. If the FOMC's basic desired path, on the other hand,
were to move up to a trend rate of growth that was about 6-7 per cent
for money in the fourth and first quarters taken together, the Committee
might then wish to be more aggressive with respect to reserve provision
in the fourth quarter in order to effect a smooth adjustment to the more
rapid money supply growth path. Two broad alternatives are discussed in
the next two subsections: one (alternative A) calls for maintaining the
target for money growth for the fourth and first quarters taken together
at a 5 per cent annual rate; the other (alternative B) calls for a higher
average rate of growth over that time span.
Policy alternative A. (12) If the Committee wishes to stay
on a 5 per cent growth path for the money supply, but is wiling to
permit some shortfall in the fourth quarter which would be made up in
the first quarter, it might consider the following language for the
second paragraph of the directive:
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to
promote some easing of conditions in credit markets and
moderate growth in money and attendant bank credit expan-
sion over the months ahead, WITH ALLOWANCE FOR TEMPORARY
SHIFTS IN MONEY AND CREDIT DEMANDS RELATED TO THE AUTO
STRIKE. System open market operations until the next
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view
to maintaining bank reserves and money market conditions
consistent with those objectives-[DEL:taking account of the
forthcoming Treasury financings."]
This alternative might be best achieved if the Federal funds rate were
permitted to move progressively downward in a 5-3/4 - 5 per cent range
over the weeks ahead in the interest of attaining the Committee's longer-
run money supply and bank credit objectives. As noted earlier, our
estimates would suggest that a 5 per cent funds rate may be required to
achieve 4 per cent money growth over the fourth quarter. At such a
funds rate, it would be expected that this money growth shortfall might
be made up in the first quarter without any very substantial further
alteration of money market conditions. But in view of uncertainties
about the funds rate-deposit relationship and given the possibility of
exaggerated market reactions, it may be prudent to work the funds rate
down gradually between now and the next meeting while checking incoming
data to determine whether expected relationships are in fact developing.
(13) The table below shows monthly patterns of monetary
aggregates consistent with this policy alternative.
Selected Monetary Aggregates, Monthly
($ billion, seasonally adjusted--% annual rates of change in parentheses)
Adjusted Bank Total
Adjusted Money Supply Credit Proxy Reserves
Fourth quarter
(Dec. over Sept.)
First quarter
(March over Dec.)
(14) A weekly pattern of monetary aggregates consistent with a
Monetary Aggregates Weekly
($ billion, seas. adj.)
Money Supply Bank Credit Total Reserves
If it proved necessary to push the Federal funds rate to around the low
end of a 5 - 5-3/4 per cent range over the next few weeks, the 3-month
Treasury bill rate would be likely to move into a lower range than the
to 5 per cent, or below, partly on expectations that the discount rate
would soon be reduced again. And longer-term interest rates would tend
to decline more rapidly than otherwise as banks continued to acquire
securities even as loan demands picked up.
(15) It is most difficult to specify the net reserve position
of banks likely to be consistent with a Federal funds rate in the 5 -
range. Member bank borrowings would likely average in a $300-$400
million range (with the lower end of the range respesenting largely
necessitous long-term borrowing from the window by two banks). But it
is very unclear as to how banks' demands for excess reserves are likely
to change as the Fed funds rate drops further. One would expect that
banks would want to hold somewhat more excess reserves as the Fed funds
rate declined, but at a rate still as high as 5 per cent the level of
excess reserves desired over time may be only $50 - $100 million above
recent experience. This would mean that over a period of several weeks
sizable net free reserves are not likely to be prevalent. But, with
required reserves in a given week fixed by the lagged reserve scheme,
the banking system as a whole (with borrowings at minimal levels) would
have no way in any particular statement week to dispose of excess reserves
created when open market operations supply nonborrowed reserves in
excess of current required reserves in order to encourage bank credit
and deposit expansion. Individual banks could, of course, reduce their
own excess reserves, and the rapidity and eagerness with which they did
so would affect the Federal funds rate. In practice, though, banks may
be slow to realize that the System is easing the money market and thus,
at least for a while, may be sluggish in selling off excess reserves in
the Federal funds market. This could mean that at the beginning of an
effort significantly to ease the money market it would take fairly
sizable excess reserves in the banking system to lower the Federal funds
rate to, say, a 5 per cent average for a statement week. But once
indivdual banks realized that it did not pay to be slow in disposing of
excess reserves, a lower average level of excess reserves for the banking
system would result for any given Fed funds rate.
Policy alternative B. (16) This alternative is presented in
the event that the Committee may wish to consider a more aggressive
easing in the money market than under alternative A in order to increase
the likelihood of moving closer to a 5 per cent money growth rate (and
around 6 per cent bank credit) in the fourth quarter, partly as a way
station to moving on to a 6 - 7 per cent growth path for money for the
fourth and first quarters taken together. Suggested language for such a
directive is shown below.
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to promote
some FURTHER easing of conditions in credit markets and moderate
SOMEWHAT GREATER growth in money THAN SOUGHT EARLIER and
attendant bank credit expansion over the months ahead. System
open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves
and money market conditions consistent with those objectives;
[DEL: taking account of the forthcoming Treasury financings."]
(17) To achieve a 5 per cent money growth in the fourth quarter
(with the quarter already half over) the staff would expect the Federal
funds rate to have to drop well below 5 per cent, and probably also below
however, expect that a Federal funds rate in a 4--5 per cent range would
prove consistent with a money growth rate somewhere in a 4--5 per cent
annual rate range. The weekly patterns of money supply and bank credit
in the inter-meeting period consistent with a 5 per cent growth rate in
money are shown in the following table:
November 11
December 2
Monetary Aggregates, Weekly
($ bil'., seae. cdj.)
Money Supply Bank Credit
Total Reserves
_ _~~ ___ __ ______
(18) Over this period member bank borrowings would be expected
to be at minimal levels (apart from the necessitous borrowing noted
earlier) and net free reserves might consistently emerge, although it is
very difficult, for reasons noted earlier, to predict how large net free
reserves may be. The 3-month Treasury bill rate might drop to around
tained rally in bond markets would likely be generated. With short-term
market rates low, Euro-dollar borrowings of banks would tend to drop
significantly further as banks would be willing and able to obtain
domestic CD's in volume; moreover, as markedly lower interest rates
developed, banks would begin to lengthen CD maturities to lock up rela-
tively low interest cost funds, and short-term Euro-dollars (maturing
within thirty days) would become relatively less attractive.
(19) If a 5 per cent growth rate in money supply were attained
in the fourth quarter, the Federal funds rate could likely remain in a
first quarter, assuming GNP in nominal terms rises in the first quarter
by about the 9 per cent annual rate that is projected. If money growth
were less than 5 per cent in the fourth quarter, money market conditions
probably would have to be eased somewhat further in the first quarter
since it would take a larger than 7 - 8 per cent money growth rate in
that quarter to compensate for the shortfall from 5 per cent in the
fourth quarter.
(20) The table below shows monthly patterns of monetary
aggregates consistent with alternative B.
Selected Monetary Aggregates, Monthly
($ billion, seasonally adjusted--% annual rates of change in parentheses)
Adjusted Money
Supply
Adjusted Bank
Credit Proxy
September, 1970
December, 1970
March, 1971
Fourth quarter
(Dec. over Sept.)
First quarter
(March over Dec.)
(7.0) (10.5)
Total
Reserves
_ __ __ ____
INTEREST BEARING SOURCES OF BANK FUNDS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
TOTAL TIME AND
SAVINGS DEPOSITS
- 180
TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS180
OTHER THAN CD'S
NONDEPOSIT SOURCES
/ - 20
