Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) February 6, 1970.
MONEY MARKET AND RESERVE RELATIONSHIPS
Recent developments
(1) The monetary and banking aggregates moved divergently in
January, with current estimates showing the bank credit proxy (adjusted
to include nondeposit sources of funds) to have declined on average at a
cent annual rate. The estimate of the proxy is within the range pro-
jected in the last blue book, but that for the money supply is well
above the blue book projection of little change.
(2) The effective rate on Federal funds ranged generally
between 9 and 9-3/8 per cent over the past three statement weeks; member
bank borrowings averaged slightly over $1 billion; and net borrowed
reserves around $900 million. All of these conditions were somewhat
tauter than in the preceding three week period, which had been influenced
by year-end churning. The Federal funds rate during the past three weeks
tended toward the upper end of the range specified in the blue book,
while net borrowed reserves and member bank borrowings were maintained
near the low ends of their respective blue book ranges.
(3) The rate on 3-month Treasury bills rose in late January
toward the upper end of its specified 7-1/2-8 per cent range, reversing
about half of the 25 basis point decline that had developed just prior
FINANCIAL MARKETS AND RELATIONSHIllPS IN PERSPECTIVE
(Monthly averages and where available, weekly averages of daily figures) I
Monty Marki Indt l rs HBond Yl lds Flo.w i 1,1 isi .LI nk (rdit nd Mont , S A
Frt
L  
Borrowl n l id 1-month II 5 Corpiornt No.lllrr.odi h t ,I I Hank I HoIt y linmeperiod IkI -nCtne l II 1 loniIty
period . iimll.ons "id Inl ' ary I .. rnnn .. '". (a " ... s vI .r... Crdt ily ep ltt
dollars for wks " (Ats) (I I ll .ns
endin , n) 1 4 2/ - ol dollr ) I (In billions ol dollars)
1968--September
Ot tober
sovember
De< emher
A.. I
lt iiii r p
I IL- la I irv P
I I
, I
S170--lan 7 p
I\ p
21 p
28 p
Feb 4 p
- 'II 715
S 0 H36
- i 11)7
- 44 1 1il
-I lb I 1159
- 1178 1 1
- I I Ill'7 I II
I P) 1
S213
- I I ) io
. I j I 1
I 1021
I ' t 1 2 ,1 1 lI 71I I I ll
. It 1 l O-1 u I 2IIl I i}
A A
i4 117H II
« /
I )4
HI 10
A 71
A 4'
8 III
) 10
S104
6 94
- 7
+ 144
- 71
-Jlb
t 170
- 211
t 0
I 51
21 .'1
+ -0
- 60
+ 1
-did
Sr - Revised. p - PI
:1 Average of 'rtal ntolhu f days il p trlld
2' Includes " I.i II -*year "id 0-t r I1 ploleit, 1 i t, n -
e rv I ill r
J - fleLts, .0i Ill I i ' I r hi Jlep Ilt. r t ll. 1 lw. l . "ll tr I s
from Svst. n,' rt i hip Percentage a.nnal riLts art dul su9re tio cllii att tll break n in sent .
+ 2.1
+ 3.2
+ 2.8
+ 1.2
- 1.21*
- 0, 1
- 2,5
+ 1.2
-0.3
- 2.5
- 4,6
- 2.7
+ 0,-
-22
- 0.1
- 0.8
- 0.9
- .3
- 1.3
+ 0.7
+ 0.7
- 2.1
+ *.4
- 2.1
- 0.8
-05
- 1.8
+22
- 0 7-07
+ 2.6
- 0.1
-. 2.
- U.2
-1- 7 7
+19
- 0.1
- 1.4
- 0.8
- 1.0
+ 0 4
+ 0.4
+ 1 8
SI 2
S1 0.
t 0.5
+ 1.1
iii II A
+ II
+ 0.4
- 0.6
+ 0.6
- 0.2
+ 1J
+ 1 2+12
- 1.4
S02
+ 1 0
- .6
+ I
+ 0.2
- 11,9
- U.4
- 25
t 0.1
+ 2.6
+ 3.0
+ 2.7
+ 2.8
- 1.7
- 0.8
- 0.1
- 0.9
- 1.2
- 0.1
+07
+ 0 7
-2
- 1.1
-07
- 0.5
- 0.5
+ 0,1
- 0.1
+ 0.3
- 0.2
- 0.1
- 0.2
+ .2
+ . I
+n ?
- 0.4
- 0.5
Annual rates of increase 4/
- 1.6 - 4.1 + 2.5
+ 0.7 - 3,5 + 4.3
- 3 9 - 47 + 0.6
+ 0.6 - 2.3 + 57 + 3.9
- 2.8 - 5 8 - 0 - 7.7
rt I lrinary
February 6 1970
S A - Seasonally adjusteo
to the last meeting of the Committee. Since early February, however,
the 3-month bill rate has dropped sharply again, and most recently was
bid at 7.42 per cent (with an equivalent offering yield on an investment
basis of 7.60 per cent). Rates on the 6-month and 1 year bills have
declined to 7.53 and 7.30 per cent, respectively, on a discount basis
(equivalent to investment yields on the offering side of 7.85 and 7.73
per cent). All of these bill rates are well above the new Regulation Q
rate ceilings for large denomination CD's of corresponding maturities.
Rates on private short-term debt instruments have declined 1/8 to 3/8
of a percentage point since the last Committee meeting, carrying the
quote on 6-month commercial paper down to 8.50 per cent.
(4) The general downturn of short-term rates was triggered by
strengthened market expectations of a near-term lessening of monetary res-
traint that followed various Administration statements and publication of the
new Federal budget. This changed market attitude occurred at a time
when demands for bills were being generated by swaps out of "rights" to
the Treasury's Feburary refinancing, and dealers' positions in short-term
bills were being depleted. The shift in expectations also contributed to
a highly successful Treasury refinancing. Of the $5.9 billion of public
holdings of maturing debt involved in the operation, only about 15 per
cent were redeemed for cash. This relatively modest attrition reduced
the size of the Treasury's estimated remaining need for cash somewhat.
(5) Other bond markets have also been buoyed to some extent
that
from the same expectational factors / have been affecting the
U. S. Government securities market. Earlier, however, yields in these
other markets had been under substantial upward pressure from the heavy
volume of recent offerings, and had reversed a sizable part of the declines
that had developed early in January during the period of largest savings
withdrawals from depositary institutions. Even in the most recent period,
the continuing weight of new issue volume has tended to brake the size
of the yield decline.
(6) The larger-than-anticipated average growth in the money
supply during January chiefly reflected failure of the sharp year-end
money supply bulge to be eroded as rapidly as projected. To some extent
was
this slower-than-anticipated contraction / probably due to the unusual
volume of security transactions that continued as funds flowed out
of depositary institutions. Despite the unexpectedly large average growth
in the money supply, however, the adjusted bank credit proxy remained
within its projected range because time and savings deposit outflows at
banks were much larger than projected. The blue book forecast for such
deposits in January had been for a decline at an annual rate of 3--6 per
cent; the actual decline is now estimated at a 12-1/2 per cent annual
rate, with the larger attrition entirely accounted for by more rapid
run-off of consumer-type accounts. Among the nondeposit sources of
funds, sales of commercial paper through affiliates rose sharply in January
as several key banks which had not resorted to this source of funds until
late 1969 pressed their sales actively. Altogether, growth in these sales
amounted to the equivalent of about 3-1/2 percentage points in the adjusted
credit proxy. But the effect of this change on the proxy was almost entirely
offset by a decline on average in Euro-dollar borrowings from foreign branches.
(7) The following table summarizes the annual rates of growth
in major deposit, reserve, and credit aggregates for 1968 and 1969, and,
on a preliminary basis, for January 1970:
Total reserves
Nonborrowed reserves
Money supply
Time and savings deposits
Savings accounts at non-bank
thrift institutions
Member bank deposits and
related sources of funds
Total member bank deposits
(bank credit proxy)
Proxy plus Euro-dollars
Proxy plus Euro-dollars and
other nondeposit sources
Commercial bank credit
(month end)
Total loans and investments
of all commercial banks
L&I plus loans sold
outright to affiliates
and foreign branches
Year Year
1968 1969
n. a.
n.a. 3.4
July -
Sept. '69
- 9.3
- 4.8
- 9.4
- 6.2
- 4.0
- 0.8
Oct. -
Dec. '69
January
1970
- - 3.4
l/ For savings and loan associations only; preliminary.
Prospective developments
(8) If the Committee wishes to maintain an unchanged stance
with respect to its views as to monetary aggregates and money market
conditions, it may wish to consider the following second paragraph for
the directive (alternative A):
To implement this policy, while taking account of the
CURRENT forthcoming Treasury refunding, possible bank regula-
tory change, and the Committee's desire to see a modest
growth in money and bank credit, System open market opera-
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be con-
ducted with a view to maintaining firm conditions in the
money market; provided, however, that operations shall be
modified if money and bank credit appear to be deviating
significantly from current projections.
(9) Over the next four weeks, firm money market conditions
could encompass a Federal funds rate most frequently in an 8-1/2--
to a little over $1 billion range, and member bank borrowings around
$1 billion, and sometimes a little less. Under these conditions, the
range. The Treasury may announce a small cash offering, presumably
in bills, toward the end of February to cover the seasonal drain on its
cash balance during the first half of March, and another similar
operation may be needed at the end of March.
(10) Assuming day-to-day money market conditions averaging
in the middle of the range noted above--which would be a shade lower
than the last three weeks for the Federal funds rate--growth in the
money stock is likely to be at about a 3--4 per cent annual rate over
the first quarter (measured from the December daily average level to
the March daily average level). On the same assumption, the adjusted
bank credit proxy appears likely to decline over the quarter in about
a 2--4 per cent annual rate range. Thus, our projections would appear
to suggest that money market conditions may have to be toward the lower
ends of the ranges specified above if modest growth in the aggregates,
taken together, is to be achieved,
(11) In terms of monthly average levels, the money stock
on average
--following the unexpectedly large rise/in January--is projected to
decline in February and then to rise in March, changing little on
balance in the two months. During the course of February, the money
stock is likely to begin rising as Government deposits decline. The
average level now projected for March is above that projected four
weeks ago, in part because of large transactions needs for
cash in connection with sizable bond and money market transactions,
and a smaller-than-expected Treasury cash financing paid in early March.
(12) The projected decline in the bank credit proxy is
based largely on continuation of the recent greater weakness in time
and savings deposits, particularly consumer-type deposits. In
February, we expect total time and savings deposits to drop in an
decline may come to a halt in late February and March, as holders of
claims on depositary institutions tend to defer further withdrawals
until after March interest-crediting. The new higher Regulation Q
interest rate ceilings have not yet had a discernible effect on time
deposit flows, but by March large CD's, particularly for longer maturities,
may begin to become marginally competitive.
(13) In view of the recent and expected behavior of time
deposits, it would appear to be difficult to bring about even a modest
growth in the adjusted bank credit proxy over the first quarter without
an immediate drop in the 3-month Treasury bill rate to below 7 per cent.
But keeping money market conditions near the low end of the ranges specified
in paragraph (9) would be a step in the direction of halting bank credit
contraction. The expectational effects on markets could move the bill
rate down from current levels toward or possibly even below the 7-1/4 per
cent bottom of the range projected above. Assuming commensurate declines
throughout the bill yield curve, this would permit banks to sell more longer-
term CD's and draw more successfully on customer relationships to hold down
the rate of attrition on shorter maturities. Under the circumstances, the
decline in the adjusted bank credit proxy might be stemmed, accompanied by
only a minor additional increase in the rate of growth in the money stock.
Additionally, market expectation of further interest rate declines could,
at some stage, stimulate speculative purchases of securities that would
further enhance bank credit totals and bank demands for reserves.
(14) Our projections have assumed that banks will continue
to issue commercial paper over the next two months, but at a slower
pace than in January, when several large banks entered the market for
the first time. In addition, if a 10 per cent reserve requirement on
such paper is made effective at the end of February, the additional
costs would reduce the relative attractiveness of this source of funds.
Euro-dollar borrowings through branches are assumed to change little,
on balance, in February and March.
(15) Should the Committee wish to move toward somewhat
easier conditions in the money market, concomitant with somewhat
stronger growth in the banking and deposit aggregates, it might con-
sider the following second paragraph for the directive (alternative B):
To implement this policy, while taking account of the
CURRENT forthcoming Treasury refunding, possible bank
regulatory changes and the Committee's desire to see
MODERATE a-modest growth in money and bank credit, System
open market operations until the next meeting of the
Committee shall be conducted with a view to maintaining
firm MOVING TOWARD SOMEWHAT EASIER conditions in the
money market; provided, however, that operations shall be
modified if money and bank credit appear to be deviating
significantly from current projections.
(16) Somewhat easier conditions in the money market, con-
sistent with moderate growth in money and bank credit, could encompass
a Federal funds rate in a 7-1/2--8-1/2 per cent range, net borrowed
reserves in a $550 - $750 million range, and member bank borrowings of
around $750 million. Such an easing in money market conditions would
likely be accompanied by a sharp drop in short-term interest rates,
partly on expectational grounds, with the 3-month Treasury bill rate,
for example, moving to and probably somewhat below 7 per cent.
(17) Under such conditions, banks might be in a position to regain
a substantial amount of CD's, Instead of an attrition running at about
the $100-$300 million per month rate likely under alternative A (depending
on the degree of firmness achieved under the specifications of that
alternative), we would expect banks at least to maintain outstanding CD's
at around the current $10 billion level. And if the bill rate fell to
to add to CD's. Indeed, they might well add substantial amounts if loan
demand remains strong or if they wish to replenish their liquidity and
to start rebuilding investment portfolios at attractive yields. Another
alternative for banks would be to move into CD's at the expense of non-
deposit sources. On balance, a reasonable guess would be that CD's
could rise at a rate of $500 million per month, or even more.
(18) The effects of easing money market conditions would first
become pronounced in the March aggregates, since February is in large
part already determined and since it would take some time to effect the
degree of easing specified. Assuming that large CD's rise at around
$500 million per month, that consumer-type time and savings show less
weakness, and that banks are somewhat less active in the Euro-dollar
and commercial paper markets, the adjusted bank credit proxy in March
could rise in a 3 - 6 per cent annual rate range. For the first quarter
as a whole, the adjusted credit proxy might show little net change, or
a slight growth, with the main thrust of the greater rate of bank credit
expansion being seen in the second quarter figures.
(19) The money stock, too, would be likely to show more ex-
pansion in March under easier money market conditions, as the public
rebuilds its liquidity. For the first quarter the money stock
could grow in a 4 - 5 per cent annual rate range, assuming the economy
does not weaken more than projected.
(20) Long-term interest rates would decline under this policy
alternative, as banks began to re-enter the bond markets and as dealers
took larger positions in longer-term U.S. Government and corporate
securities in anticipation of more favorable market conditions ahead.
Moreover, the volume of corporate bond offerings could abate somewhat,
at least in the short-run, as some businesses deferred financing temporarily
to await even more favorable market conditions.
Table 3
AGGREGATE RESERVES AND MONETARY VARIABLES
Seasonally Adjusted
(Based on monthly averages of daily figures)
- I
Reserve Aggregates 5/
Nonborrowed Required
reserves reserves
hlyr
--January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
February
March
April
May
June
ly
gust
September
0 tober
November
December p
)--January p
liars) (
I I I
Member Bank Deposits
A U A d
SI uporteu y Requi u R erv
Total
member bank deposits
deos deposits
Private
demand
deposits
In b i
Money Supply
U.S. Gov't
demand
I/ deposits
l o n
Total Currency
/
o f
dollions of do
l ars
Private
demand
en- 4-t
Co mercial Credit Proxy
bank time Incl. Euro-dols.
deposits and nondeposit
adjusted sources of
(In mi
)7, 154
27,783
27,923
27,983
Private demand deposits include demand deposits of individuals, partnerships, and corporations and net interbank deposits.
Includes currency outside the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and the vaults of all commercial banks.
Includes (1) demand deposits at all commercial banks, other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government, less cash items in
process of collection and Federal Reserve float; and (2) foreign demand balances at Federal Reserve Banks.
Excludes interbank and U.S. Government time deposits.
Includes increases in required reserves due to changes in Regulations M and D of approximately $425 million since October 16, 1969.
Total
reserves
I~~----'
1 21
V ' 
L
I e'o2its III
Explanation of Projections in Table 6
