Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
October 16, 1970.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) October 16, 1970.
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Interest rates on short-term credit instruments and on
Treasury notes and bonds have moved lower since the September 15 meeting
of the Committee, while yields on corporate and municipal bonds have
changed little on balance under the pressure of a very heavy volume of
new issues. The latest yield on the 3-month Treasury bill was around
Other short-term rates, which tend to lag behind bill rates, have drifted
steadily lower, as banks have continued to reduce their borrowings in the
commercial paper market and the GM strike has lessened demands on the
finance paper market.
(2) The Federal funds rate has fluctuated widely since the
last meeting. Immediately following the meeting, an unexpected bulge
in reserve availability pushed the Federal funds rate into the 5-3/4--6 per
cent range and helped give rise to market expectations that the discount
rate was about to be reduced. Most recently, however, trading has taken
place generally in the 6-1/8--6-1/2 per cent range specified in the last
Blue Book. With large and unexpected shifts in market factors affecting
reserves over the last four weeks, net reserves have fluctuated in a
-$500 million to +$25 million range. At the same time, weekly average
member bank borrowings have ranged from around $400 million to about
$660 million.
(3) The outstanding level of the money supply in September
turned out to be higher than was estimated at the time of the last meeting
mainly as a result of higher-than-expected weekly money supply figures in
the first half of the month. At the moment, the third quarter rate of
expansion in money is 5 per cent corrected for bias (and 5.3 per cent on
a published basis). The adjusted bank credit proxy is estimated to have
grown from August to September and also over the third quarter as a whole
at rates in line with previous Blue Book indications. Banks continued to
run off commercial paper in anticipation of the new reserve requirement,
with the $2.0 billion September decline (September 2-September 30) bringing
the total run-off from the August 17 reserve requirement announcement through
September to
/$3.1 billion. Bank liabilities to their foreign branches dropped by
about $600 million over the four weeks ending September 30 as the widening
spread between Euro-dollars and domestic rates caused banks to reduce their
use of foreign funds, and, in some instances, to allow these deposits to
fall below the reserve free base. These reductions in September in non-
deposit sources of funds were only partially offset by a $1.5 billion in-
crease in CD's over the month. But growth of other time and savings
deposits was very strong in September--at a 14 per cent average annual
rate, close to that in the two previous months taken together.
(4) The following table shows recent developments in the
money supply and the adjusted credit proxy.
Recent Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Adjusted Credit Proxy Money Supply
Indicated at .
Last Meeting-
Actual Indicated at ,
Results Last Meeting-
Week ending
September 9
October 7
% Annual Rates of Change
% Annual Rates of
September over
August 9.5
Third Quarterl/
(Sept. over June) 17.5
e/ partly estimates.
Actual
Results
(5) The following table summarizes seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change in major financial aggregates for selected periods:
First Half Third
Past Year of 1970 Quarter
(Sept. over (June over (Sept. over
Sept.) December) June)
Total Reserves 6.7 - 0.2 19.1
Nonborrowed Reserves 8.8 1.9 24.3
Large CD's (dollar amount)2/ $9.5 $ 1.6 $ 8.7
Other time and savings
deposits 7.3 5.7 15.3
Savings account at nonbank
thrift institutions 5.0 4.5 9.4
Member bank deposits and
related sources of funds
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy) 7.8 3.3 24.1
Proxy plus Euro-dollars
and other nondeposit sources 6.7 3.5 17.2
Commercial bank credit
(Month end)
Total loans and investments
of all commercial banks 6.3 1.9 16.3
L&I plus loans sold
outriiht to affiliates
and foreign braaches 6.6 3.9 13.2
Nonbank commercial paper 8.1 14.2 -17.7
Prospective developments
(6) If the Committee wishes to continue the policy stance
adopted at the previous meeting, the language incorporated in the second
paragraph of the directive at the last meeting could be continued, with
an amendment to take account of the Treasury financing schedule, as
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to
promote some easing of conditions in credit markets and
moderate growth in money and attendant bank credit
expansion over the months ahead. System open market
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall
be conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves and
money market conditions consistent with that objective,
TAKING ACCOUNT OF THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCINGS."
(7) "Moderate growth in money and attendant bank credit expansion
over the months ahead" could be interpreted to encompass a 5 per cent annual
rate of growth for the money stock over the fourth quarter. It would appear,
at this point, that such a money growth would be accompanied by around a
paths for money and bank credit consistent with these growth rates are shown
in the table below, along with the associated supply of bank reserves needed
to sustain bank deposits.
Adjusted
Money Supplyl/ Credit Proxy Total Reserves
Annual Rate Annual Rate Annual Rate
Month Levels of change Levels of change Levels of change
Dec. " (213.4) (4.0) 331.6 8 .5 30.0 5.5
Sept.) 5.0 9.0 7.5
the fourth quarter would be 5 per cent also.
(8) To sustain a 5 per cent growth rate in the money supply over
the fourth quarter may entail some declines in interest rates from current levels
between now and year-end. The economy is expected to be generally sluggish in the
current quarter, partly because of the auto strike and its ramifications, with a
consequent slackening in the transactions needs for cash. Business loan demands
at banks are likely to be sluggish, if the rate of inventory accumulation
declines as expected and as corporations continue to finance heavily in capital
markets partly for debt structure reasons. Under these circumstances, injections
of bank reserves through open market operations to achieve the desired money
growth are likely to be reflected, among other things, in relatively sizable bank
purchases of U.S. Treasury and other market securities. As a result, interest
rates may edge downwards on balance.
(9) The actual movement of short- and long-term rates will
depend in large part on bank liquidity preferences, Treasury financing
strategy, the volume of new corporate and municipal issues, bank loan
demands, and shifts in market expectations. Banks are still likely to
have a general preference for more liquid, short-term instruments.
However, there is some evidence that more banks are beginning to make
longer-term investments in the municipal market; these banks have already
restored some liquidity and may be attracted by wider spreads of long-
term over short-term rates. Moreover, the drop in short-term market
rates has come to make both large CD's and other time deposits seem to
be a more permanent source of funds. Such considerations may encourage
banks to be more willing buyers of a long option in the Treasury's forth-
coming mid-November financing, to be announced on October 22, with books
open in the last week of October.
(10) While it is too early at this writing to be certain about
the form of the forthcoming Treasury financing, it would appear that it
may entail a rights offering of two note issues, plus a cash offering to
cover attrition and whatever additional cash may be desired. The rights
portion would have to be settled on November 16. The cash portion may
be settled on that date, or possibly, if the attrition is low enough, at
a later time; the cash portion could take the form of a bill auction or
perhaps an auction of a short note. In any event, the Treasury will have
to raise some additional cash by early December. During the fourth
quarter, the Treasury is likely to have to raise about $7 billion of net
new cash mainly in the bill area, including additions to the weekly and
monthly bill auctions and the $2-1/2 billion tax bill financing
currently in the market. This may cushion further declines in short-
term rates.
(11) A continuing large calendar of corporate and municipal
issues will tend to inhibit declines in long-term rates. Nevertheless,
investors have shown a desire to lock up high long-term yields--as
indicated by the market absorption of a huge volume of long-term secur-
ities with little upward yield pressure. Thus, the absorption capacity
of the market should tend to offset upward yield pressure from a con-
tinued very large supply of new offerings. And long-term market rates
could work lower if weak loan demand leads to liberalization of bank
lending terms and/or greater bank interest in longer-term securities.
(12) Between now and the next meeting, day-to-day operating
targets for money market conditions designed to lead to injection of
sufficient bank reserves to promote the desired growth path for other
monetary aggregates and lead to some easing of credit market conditions
might include a Federal funds rate in a 6--6-1/2 per cent range, member
bank borrowings averaging around $350-$450 million per week, and net
borrowed reserves in a wide 0-$500 million range. The 3-month bill rate
might be expected to be in a 5-3/4--6-1/8 per cent range.
(13) With the bill rate at this level, banks will be in a
position to obtain large CD's virtually throughout the whole maturity
spectrum, although investor interest in longer-term CD's thus far seems
quite modest, Also banks may not be as aggressive as in recent months in
the CD area, and offering rates on short CD's have dropped while a few
banks have even reduced offering rates on 3- and 6-month CD's below
ceiling rates. Thus, the rate of increase in time deposits may still be
at about a 22 per cent annual rate in the fourth quarter, although this
is about 10 percentage points less rapid than in the third quarter. Some
of the new bank deposit funds will be used to repay nondeposit sources,
as banks have no further incentive to maintain a high level of borrowing
through the round-about channel of the commercial paper market and as they
react to the unfavorable yield spread of Euro-dollars over CD rates. It
is not clear to what extent banks will take account of yield relationships
in their behavior toward Euro-dollar borrowings, but we have estimated all
outstanding non-deposit funds will drop by about$150 million per week
through mid-November, and by lesser amounts thereafter, thus contributing
to the slower expected growth rate in the adjusted credit proxy for the
fourth quarter as compared with the third.
(14) In October the adjusted credit proxy may rise at about a
as shown in the table in paragraph (7). On the other hand, money supply
growth may rebound to around a 4-1/2 per cent annual rate from the 1-1/2
per cent growth rate of September. Both the credit proxy and the money
supply are expected to rise a little more rapidly in November, as the
Treasury financing stimulates some additional credit and money flows.
Weekly paths for the monetary aggregates through mid-November that seem
consistant with these developments are shown below.
Money Supply1/ Credit Proxy adjusted Total Reserves
Week ending
October 14t/
November 4
SELECTED MONETARY AGGREGATES
SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
MONEY AND GOVERNMENT DEPOSITS
WEEKLY AVERAGES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
TOTAL MONEY SUPPLY
PRIVATE DEMAND DEPOSITS
GOVT DEPOSITS
MEMBER BANKS
I I I I I
BANK CREDIT PROXY
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
I I II II
SELECTED MONETARY AGGREGATES - Cont.
COMMERCIAL BANK TIME DEPOSITS MEMBER BANK RESERVES
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
TIME AND SAVINGS
WEEKLY AVERAGES BIL
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS AND INTEREST RATES
INTEREST RATES Short-term INTEREST RATES Long-term
