Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) September 11, 1970.
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Published data show that the money stock and the adjusted
credit proxy both grew rapidly on average during August, at annual rates
of about 11 per cent and 24 per cent, respectively. For both aggregates,
much of the greater-than-anticipated August strength reflected an unusually
rapid rise in private demand deposits, as security and business loans at
banks expanded sharply. Most recently, however, partial data for the
statement week ending September 9 indicate that the level of the money
stock has probably fallen sharply relative to its expected path and would,
unless revised substantially, lead to a considerably weaker-than-anticipated
September performance.
(2) The rapid August growth rate for the published money stock
also reflected a marked reduction in the importance of several types of
international transfers at major banks; these transfers had the effect on
the published figures of understating the growth rate of the money supply
earlier in 1970. Because the sources of bias became less important in
August than in earlier months, once the published data are roughly ad-
Justed to eliminate the effect of these biases (as explained in the
appendix), the August change in the money stock adjusts downward to an
annual rate of around 9 per cent. Since only one of the sources of bias
in the money supply data affects the bank credit proxy, adjustments to
eliminate bias produce only very minor changes in the proxy series.
Recent Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Adjusted Credit Proxy Money Supply
Indicated at Actual Indicated at Actual
Last Meeting/ Results Last Meeting Results
Week ni ing
August 12
Sept. 2
% Annual
Rates of Change
% An-ual
Rates of Change
e/ partly estimated.
1/ Alternative A path of previous Blue Book consistent wich a 5 per cent
annual rate of growth in money stock for third quarter.
2/ Figures in parentheses reflect estimated money supply levels and per
cent annual rates of growth after correction for bias.
(210.6/
(210.6)-
(3) Total time and savings deposits grew less rapidly in August
than in July, partly as CD expansion dropped to a little less than half of
the $5 billion July pace. A part of this CD growth was offset by shrinkage
of bank-related commercial paper, amounting to about $500 million over the
month. As major banks have approached the statement week beginning
September 17 to which the new reserve requirement on bank-related commercial
paper will first apply, the run-off of such paper has accelerated. The rate
of growth of time and savings deposits other than large CD's also slowed
in August from the unusually rapid July pace.
(4) Conditions in the money market were easier on average during
the three statement weeks that followed the last meeting of the Committee,
with the rate on Federal funds averaging just under 6-1/2 per cent. While
Federal funds traded generally in a 6-1/8--6-3/8 per cent rate range during
the week immediately following the last Committee meeting, inthe statement
week just past the funds rate averaged 6.64 per cent, the same as in the
week of the Committee meeting, but still about 25 basis points below
the average level of the previous three statement weeks. The drop in the
funds rate just after the Committee meeting reflected a marked shift in
reserve distribution favoring the money center banks. Since then, there
has been a reversal of this flow. As a result, the average basic reserve
deficit at the 46 major reporting banks rose $1.2 billion from the state-
ment week ending August 26 to that ending September 9.
(5) Net borrowed reserves averaged $500 million, and member
bank borrowing $700 million in the three statement weeks following the
Committee meeting, some $250--$300 million below the comparable averages
for the three preceding weeks. However, these earlier higher numbers
still included about $250 million of special member bank borrowing related
to loans generated by churning in the market for non-bank-related commercial
(6) The drop in the Federal funds rate immediately following the
announced reduction of reserve requirements and the August meeting of the
Committee led security market participants to anticipate a significant
further near-term easing of monetary policy and a consequent cut in the
prime rate at banks. These changed expectations were quickly reflected in
interest rates. Bond yields in late August were down about a quarter of
a percentage point from levels prevailing just before the last Committee
meeting, and the average rate for new three-month bills reached a low
of 6.20 per cent in the August 24 auction. Since then, however, the
combination of a heavy and growing calendar of corporate and municipal
issues and uncertainty about the course of monetary policy in light of the
August bulge in monetary aggregates and the recent upward drift in day-to-
day money market rates have contributed to a general backing up of interest
rates. The three-month bill rate has most recently been around 6.40 per
cent, still around 15 basis points below the level prevailing just before
the last FOMC meeting.
(7) The following table summarizes seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change in major financial aggregates for selected periods:
First Half Latest two
Past Year of 1970 months
(Aug. over (June over (Aug. over
Aug.) December) June)
Total reserves 2.7 - 0.2 14.8
Nonborrowed reserves 4.3 1.9 16.1
Time and savings deposits 8.8 7,1 31.9
Savings accounts at nonbank
thrift institutions n.a. 4.5 n.a.
Member bank deposits and
related sources of funds
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy) 6.3 3.3 26.2
Proxy plus Euro-dollars 4.8 1.9 22.0
Proxy plus Euro-dollars
and other nondeposit sources 6.0 3.5 21.0
Commercial bank credit
(Month end)
Total loans and investments
of all commercial banks 4.7 1.9 16,6
L&I plus loans sold
outright 'to affiliates
and foreign branches 5.8 3.9 16.1
Non-bank commercial paper 7.0 14.2 -50.8
Prospective developments
(8) If the Committee wishes to continue with a policy that
encompasses financial flows and credit conditions consistent with a 5 per
cent rate of growth for the money supply, the following language for the
second paragraph of the directive might be considered (alternative A):
To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to promote
[DEL:some easing of conditions in credit markets and somewhat greater
MODERATE growth in money over the months ahead than occurred in the
second quarter, while taking account of possible liquidity problems
and allowing bank credit growth to reflect BANK EFFORTS TO REBUILD
LIQUIDITY AND any continued shift of credit flows from market to
banking channels. System open market operations until the next
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to main-
taining bank reserves and money market conditions consistent with
that objective, taking account of the effects of other monetary
policy actions.]
(9) Specification of monthly and weekly target paths for the
monetary aggregates is complicated insofar as the money supply is concerned
by the need to adjust, for purposes of monetary policy formulation, for the
known amount of bias in the published figures (the sources of bias and their
effect are detailed in the appendix). The following table presents target
paths for the money stock that would be consistent with a 5 per cent target
growth rate in the fourth quarter for the unbiased, or adjusted, money supply
series. To provide a link with published data on the money supply and with
weekly data (for which bias estimates are not yet available), the table
also shows monthly target paths for the existing series through October.
In the third quarter, growth of the money supply is expected to be below a
per cent in the adjusted series. This develops because it seems unlikely
that over the last half of September the money supply could be expanded
sharply enough through open market operations to achieve the desired 5 per
cent growth rate for the quarter as a whole, barring a drastic easing of
money market conditions. However, revisions in data, particularly for
the week ending September 9, not to mention errors in projection for the
latter half of September, would of course strongly influence the actual
third quarter results as compared with currently expected results.
Money Supply--Monthly and Quarterly
(Daily averages, seasonally adjusted)
Published Series Adjusted Series
Levels Annual Rate Levels Annual Rate
Month ($ bills.) of change ($ bills.) of change
Sept. (proj.) 205.9 - 1.5 209.9 -4.0
Oct. (proj.) 207.2 7.5 211,2 7.5
Nov. (proj.) (1/) 212.2 5.5
Dec. (proj.) (1/) 2.2.5 1.5
2/
(10) Target paths for the reserve and the adjusted bank credit
proxy that are consistent with the 5 per cent target growth rate for money
supply in the fourth quarter are shown in the following table:
Other Monetary Aggregates--Monthly and Quarterly
(Daily averages, seasonally adjusted
Adjusted Credit Proxy Total Reserves
Levels Annual rate Levels Annual rate
Month ($ mills.) of change ( bills.) of change
Oct. 327.4 10.5 29.6!/ 7.0
(11) The third quarter growth rate in money supply of 3-1/2 per
cent is substantially short of policy goals and a money growth rate around
market conditions recently prevailing. As a result some easing of money
market conditions would seem to be needed to attain a 5 per cent growth
target in the fourth quarter. Achievement of this objective might require
a Federal funds rate averaging down in a 6-1/8--6-1/2 per cent range and
member bank borrowings averaging a little below $500 million. Net borrowed
reserves might be expected to average around $350 million, with the volume
of needed open market operations in the week ending October 7 reduced by an
estimated $450 million of reserves released by the net effect of the recent
reserve requirement changes. These money market conditions would be likely
to contribute to renewed general declines of interest rates. Over the
near-term, with major Treasury cash borrowing deferred until the latter part
of October, the 3-month bill would probably move down into a 6--6-3/8 per
cent range. As short-term market rates decline generally, expectations
of a prime rate cut would be heightened, and bond yields would probably
drift lower, although the heavy calendar of new offerings might tend to
limit the size of such declines.
(12) Even with some easing of money market conditions, time
deposit growth is likely to slow somewhat further over the months ahead
from the unusually rapid rate that followed the late June suspension of rate
ceilings on short-term CD's. During September and early October, CD
expansion may be sustained at the pace of recent weeks as banks continue
to adjust to the commercial paper reserve requirement, but over the rest
of the quarter CD growth seems likely to slacken further.
(13) A weekly path for monetary aggregates consistent with the
published monthly series in paragraph 9 is shown below for the period until
the next FOMC meeting.
Monetary Aggregates--Weekly
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Week ending Adjusted Credit Proxy Money Supply Total Reserves
September 9 e/
October 7
e/ Estimated.
1/ Beginning October 1, the level of total reserves includes a $300 mil-
lion estimated increase in reserves required against bank related paper.
Alternative B
(14) Should the Committee desire to seek a 6 per cent growth
rate for the money supply over the fourth quarter and a significant easing
in credit market conditions, it may wish to consider the following
language for the second paragraph of the directive (alternative B):
To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to promote
some FURTHER easing of conditions in credit markets and somewhat
greater growth in money over the months ahead than occurred in
the first half of the year, while taking account of possible
liquidity problems and allowing bank credit growth to reflect
BANK EFFORTS TO REBUILD LIQUIDITY AND any continued shift of
credit flows from market to banking channels. System open
market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall
be conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves and
money market conditions consistent with that objective, taking
[DEL: account of the effects of other monetary policy actions.]
(15) The following table presents monthly target paths for
a 6 per cent fourth quarter growth rate in the money supply.
Money Supply--Monthly and Quarterly
(Daily averages, seasonally adjusted)
Published
Levels
($ bills.)
Series
Annual Rate
of Change
Adjusted
LeveLs
($ bills.)
Series
Annual Rate
of Change
Sept. (proj.)
Oct. (proj.)
Nov. (proj.)
Dec. (proj.)
(1/)
(I)
(16) Paths for other monetary aggregates as they are likely
to develop under this alternative are shown below:
Other Monetary Aggregates--Monthly and Quarterly
(Daily averages, seasonally adjusted)
Sept. (proj.)
Oct. (proj.)
Nov. (proj.)
Dec. (proj.)
Adjusted
Leve Is
($ bills.)
Credit Proxy
Annual Rate
of Change
Total Reserves
Levels Annual Rate
($ bills.) of Change
(17) Attainment of the more rapid growth in the money supply
indicated in the above tables would require a more pronounced easing of
money market conditions than under Alternative A. These easier conditions
might include a Federal funds rate fluctuating in a 5-3/4--6-1/4 per cent
range, member bank borrowings around $300-$400 million and net borrowed
reserves in a $100-$250 million range. Such conditions could well
trigger an immediate cut in the prime rate and reduce the 3-month
Treasury bill rate to 6 per cent or below. Such a development might also
create expectations of a reduction in the Federal Reserve discount rate,
contributing to general downward pressures on interest rates, in both
short- and long-term markets. On the other hand, some partly offsetting
upward interest rate pressure, chiefly in longer maturity ranges,
might develop if there were a heightening of expectations that signifi-
cantly easier credit availability would lead to intensification of
inflationary conditions later on.
(18) The adjusted credit proxy is expected to grow some-
what more rapidly, along with the more rapid growth in money supply,
as compared with alternative A. Money supply growth is not expected to
become more rapid until October, although the exact lags over the near-
term in public and bank responses to monetary policy changes are con-
jectural. Net inflows of time deposits to banks are likely to become
larger as market interest rates decline--making CD's viable throughout
the maturity range. However, since business loan demands are expected
to be moderate, we would expect banks to drop their CD offering rates
in line with declines in other market interest rates. As CD's become
a more certain source of funds, banks may become more willing to let
commercial paper run off and to reduce Euro-dollar borrowings. Thus,
the upward effect on the adjusted bank credit proxy of the rather
marked lowering of market interest rates expected under this alterna-
tive might not be extremely sharp, and will likely depend in part on the
extent to which businesses switch from open market to bank borrowing
and on the extent to which banks and dealers take speculative positions
in securities.
(19) Weekly figures for monetary aggregates over the period
between now and the next meeting are shown in the table below (with
the money supply figures linked to the published series as under
alternative A).
Monetary Aggregates--Weekly
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Week ending
September 9 e/
October 7
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Money Supply
Total Reserves
I/ See footnote of table in paragraph (13).
Preliminary Corrections for Money Supply Bias in 1970
For some time it has been apparent that current measure of
monetary growth were being distorted, as bank float increased more than,
deposits at large banks.l/ In 1969, the money supply s-rLes was, re-
vised upward to take account of bills payable and London checks, but
this revision only partially corrected the series for the downward bias
arising from international transfers. To attempt to measure the remain-
ing bias, the staff has obtained additional information from several
sources in preparation for a revision of the money supply series this
fall. While this information is not yet complete, some rough estimates
have been made of monthly average corrections that may be appropriate
for 1970.
Effects on growth rates as currently measured
Table 1 compares growth rates in M as current measured and
as corrected for the estimated bias. The corrected growth rate. indicate
expansion over the first half of 1970 at a 5-1/2 per cent annual rate,
compared to 4 per cent for the published series, and for the first eight
months of the year at 5.9 per cent, as compared with 5 per cent for
the published series. As had been anticipated, the largest adjustment
is for the second quarter. However, the second quarter adjustment will
be larger than the 1 percentage point previously indicated in the Blue
Book of June 19.
In the third quarter the growth rate will probably be lower
by about 1 percentage point after correction for bias. This level of
the money supply in the third quarter will be higher than published aft -
bias correction. But the effect of tne sources of bias on the rate of
growth depends on how the amount of bias is changing relative to the
change in private demand deposits; for the rate f ~L. :o 'e biased
downward, the amount of bias would have to be e pu:lng a- a faster rate
than private demand deposits. In fact, during the third quarter the
amount of bias in the published figures is expected to decline, thus
leading to a fairly significant overstatement in the actual rate of growth
when measured by the figures as presently published. The expected decline
in bias in the published figures is in large part attributable to termina-
tion of use of "guerilla" drafts at three major New York City banks, as
explained below.
Estimates of bias
Table 2 provides monthly average estimates of four sources of
bias. Edge Act Corporations and agencies of foreign banks are not repre-
sented in commercial banking statistics from which the money supply series
is constituted, so their demand deposits are not included at present. Yet
these institutions are responsible for a very large daily volume of Euro-
dollar and foreign exchange transactions which clear through their major
New York City correspondents. New York banks account for these trans-
actions by crediting cash items in process of collection and debiting due
to banks. Deduction of these cash items from the money supply is in-
appropriate so long as the demand deposits of Edge Corporations (which
to a great extent represent official checks written in repayment of Euro-
dollar borrowings by their parent) and agencies are excluded.
Edge Corporations submit daily deposit reports to the New York
FRB in the same form as those provided by member banks. Hence, their
demand deposits other than interbank can be added to the money supply as
an offset to the cash items generated by these institutions. Such deposits
consist mainly of checks written but not yet cleared, judging from their
parallel movement with New York City bank cash items over European holiday
periods. Transactions of Edge Corporations are responsible for the largest
portion of the estimated current bias in money supply statistics. This
source of bias increased in the first half of 1970, but it has declined
slightly since mid-year.
The basis for correcting bias associated with the foreign
agencies is much less satisfactory, although it is known that the effect
of agency transactions is similar to that for Edge Corporations. The only
information available from agencies currently is in month-end condition
reports to the New York State Banking Commisioner. These single-date
reports lack standardized depcsit figures, making it difficult to estimate
their contribution to money supply bias directly from the deposits that
give rise to it. However, our investigation suggests that figures on "due
from U.S. banks and trust companies", as reported by the agencies, is a
suitable proxy for the agency cash items submitted to New York City banks
for collection. Table 1 reflects totals for 25 foreign agencies operating
in New York. This single-date, indirect measure of agency activity leaves
considerable room for error in the bias correction, but it. appears to he
the best retrospective information available. It is estimated that agency
transactions declined in importance in the first quarter, but rose above
year-end levels by mid-year. As explained below, it is planned to obtain
more representative data directly from the agencies to carry the money
supply series forward after revision.
The other major component of bias included in these estimates
is the so-called "guerilla draft". This accounting device was utilized
by a few large banks from late 1969 until recently to obtain reserve bene-
fits under both Regulations D and M. Such transfers involved "guerilla"
or clearing house checks drawn by foreign agencies at the request of a
U.S. bank but which do not appear on the books of a foreign agency.
They had the effect of generating cash items at New York banks which
collected the drafts without any corresponding debits to demand deposits
included in the money supply. This practice resulted in downward bias
in both levels and rates of growth of the money supply throughout the
first half of 1970, but its termination recently will reduce the amount
of bias in third quarter estimates significantly.
The smallest component of measurable bias, as indicated by
figures on Table 2, is the net effect of transactions through the
relatively new Clearing House International Payments System (CHIPS).
A large volume of international transactions are now cleared by major
New York banks through CHIPS by means of electronic equipment tied into
a clearing house computer. Until recently it was by no means certain
that these clearings were introducing only small errors into money
supply measurement. The problem for money supply statistics evolved
from changes in statistical reporting with the advent of this computer
clearing system. Some banks, but not all, began reporting payments and
receipts through CHIPS as due to and due from banks, respectively, where
formerly they reported officers checks and cash items. Other banks main
tained their former reporting practice. Depending on the pairing of
banks with mixed reporting methods, money supply data could be overstated
or understated by such transactions. CHIPS began operation in April,
with the volume of payments increasing to several billion dollars
currently. The clearing house has provided daily data on these trans-
actions which indicate very little net effect up to now. The staff is
currently negotiating with other regulatory agencies to achieve standard-
ized reporting. This will eliminate distortions from this source.
On balance, the total measurable downward bias in the level
of the money supply is estimated to have increased from about $3 billion
at the end of 1969 to about $4-1/2 billion at mid-year. Since June, the
total bias has been reduced about $500 million, reflecting mainly termina-
tion of the use of guerilla drafts in response to Mr. Hayes' August 13
letter to New York City banks. No information is yet available for banks
outside New York on the possible use--if any--of this or similar devices
that might affect the money supply.
Plans for money supply revision
The bias corrections discussed above are still too rough to
publish. Moreover, it would be desirable to extend these corrections
back as far as the adjustments appear significant to avoid a break in
series. It would also be desirable to obtain better information on
foreign agency transactions for purposes of carrying the corrected
series forward. These tasks, as well as the annual benchmark and season-
al factor revision, have been given a high priority by the staff, and a
major revision incorporating all of these elements will be published this
fall, probably around the end of October.
Appendix -4-
It should be noted that the proposed corrections for trans-
actions of Edge Act Corporations and foreign agencies will require con-
tinued attention as the money supply series is carried forward. This
situation will change when Euro-dollar and foreign exchange transactions
are converted from clearing house to Federal funds settlement. Such
Federal funds settlement will eliminate the cash items bias discussed
above. However, implementation of such a system will require close
cooperation between the Federal Reserve, commercial banks, and other
institutions involved in international transactions.
Table 2
Preliminary Adjustments for Downward Bias in Money Supply
(Monthly averages in millions of dollars)
New York City cash items bias from
Foreign Net effect Total
Edge Act Corp. agency "Guerilla of CHIPS adjustment
transactions transactions drafts" transactions to MI
Month
1969--Oct. 2,044 867 100e 3,011
e - Estimated.
NOTE: Figures for Edge Act Corporations were derived from daily average
deposit reports submitted to New York FRB; foreign agencies from end-
of-month condition reports submitted to the New York Banking Commissioner;
"guerilla drafts" from special reports by 3 New York City banks; and
effects of CHIPS (Clearing House International Payments System) from
special reports by the New York Clearing House.
