Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
May 7, 1971
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 7, 1971
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Since the last meeting of the Committee interest rates in
domestic securities markets have risen very sharply, with advances ranging
to three quarters of a percentage point or more on some long- as well as some
short-term instruments. As their short-term borrowing costs rose, major banks
raised the prime rate from 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 per cent. The steepness of the
general advance in market rates appears to be largely attributable to changed
market expectations about the outlook for interest rates and monetary policy;
banks, for instance, have become less active buyers of securities. This
shift in psychology was prompted initially by a combination of firmer money
market conditions and better business news, and was strongly reinforced by
deepening market uncertainties arising from the foreign exchange crisis.
(2) The rate on the 3-month Treasury bill has been an exception
to the general uptrend of rates. Heavy bill demands from foreign central
banks and domestic investors seeking liquidity have substantially depleted
dealers' bill positions, particularly in shorter maturities. As a result,
while the 3-month rate has fluctuated widely over the inter-meeting period,
reaching a peak level cf more than 4 per cent, most recently it has declined
to about 3.78 per cent, close to the level prevailing at the time of the last
meeting. However, the 6-month and 1-year bills are around 40 and 75 basis
points, respectively, above their levels at that time.
(3) Over the four-statement-week period since the last meeting,
the Federal funds rate has averaged about 4-1/4 per cent, the upper end of
the range specified by the Committee. Since this was 35 basis points above
the average for the preceding four statement weeks, it was widely interpreted
as evidence of a shift in monetary policy, initiated partly for balance-of-
payments reasons and partly to slow the growth of the money supply. In the
Treasury financing week ending May 5, market uncertainties about monetary
policy were intensified by the crisis psychology created by foreign develop-
ments. In this atmosphere the Federal funds rate rose temporarily to levels
as high as 4-7/8 per cent and averaged 4.41 per cent. In the latter part of
that statement week, and early in the current week, some banks appeared to be
bidding aggressively for Federal funds in anticipation of drains from funds
flowing abroad. In addition, the funds rate was affected by a large
temporary demand for funds from a key money center bank which apparently
substantially miscalculated its weekly reserve position.
(4) The Desk moved actively to supply reserves during the
Treasury financing week and early in the current week, in an effort to move
the Federal funds rate back to the 4-1/4 per cent target. As a result, the
net reserve position of all member banks showed average net free reserves
of $202 million for the week ending May 5. Over the preceding three weeks
the average net reserve position had been close to zero and member bank
borrowing had averaged about $140 million. While both of these latter
averages were significantly less deep than had been specified, the bulk of
the difference reflected a considerable drop in the special borrowing by the
bank that has been a necessitous borrower.
(5) With securities markets generally unsettled, the Treasury
elected to limit the new issues in its May refunding to two relatively
short maturities--one, a new 15-month, 5 per cent note; and the other,
an outstanding 3-1/2 year, 5-3/4 per cent note (reopened at a discount to
yield 5.88 per cent). While books on the refunding were still open, rumors
of possible revaluations triggered massive speculative dollar flows into
some foreign currencies; this ultimately forced the withdrawal of central
banks from foreign exchange markets in several countries, Uncertainties
regarding this crisis and its implications for domestic interest rates created
generally weak conditions in domestic securities markets and led to major
concern about the success of the Treasury refunding. In this environment
Treasury trust accounts made support purchases of nearly $600 million of U.S.
Government securities, and the Federal Reserve purchased $1.3 billion of
securities, net,--mainly through repurchase agreements--in the week ending
May 5. The results of the Treasury refunding turned out better than might
have been expected, with redemption of public holdings kept to about 30 per
cent of the $5.8 billion of maturing issues.
(6) Immediately following the last meeting of the FOMC the Federal
funds target was moved up to the upper part of the 3-3/4--4-1/4 per cent
range specified by the Committee. Thereafter as new data suggested that
the money supply aggregates were running well in excess of their bluebook
paths, the funds rate target was moved up to 4-1/4 per cent. With data for
April nearly complete, however, the monetary aggregates now show a mixed
performance relative to their bluebook paths. The narrowly defined money supply
(M1 ) grew faster than targeted, as the table shows. But the broader money
supply (M2) ran about in line with, and the adjusted credit proxy fell sub-
stantially behind their respective growth targets.
April Growth Rates in Key Monetary Aggregates
(Per cent annual rates of changes)
Desired at Previous
FOMC Meeting Actual 1/
M1  8.0 10.9
M2 12.5 12.9
Adjusted
Proxy 11.5 5.6
(7) The overshoot of M1 relative to the bluebook path was
greatest in the first week of the month, as the following table shows,
Thereafter, the level of M1 receded and by month-end was slightly
below the bluebook path. 1/ The overshoot of M2 relative to target was
much smaller than for M1 because the unexpectedly large bulge in
private demand deposits early in the month was largely offset by a
slowing of the increase in time and savings deposits other than large
CD's. Some deceleration in such deposits was expected from the
record first quarter rate, but the actual slowing exceeded expecta-
tions as the pace of reintermediation at banks apparently dropped off.
Cut-backs in the use of non-deposit sources of funds were also
larger than projected, and large negotiable CD's failed
to grow by even the rather modest amount projected. With both time and
savings deposits and non-deposit sources of funds performing less
strongly than forecast, growth of the adjusted credit proxy was well below
the projection and relatively small.
Recent Paths of the Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Month
March
April
Week ending
April 7
May 5
M
1
Bluebook
Path Actuals
M2
Bluebook
Path Actuals
Adjusted
Credit Proxy
Bluebook
Path Actuals
(8) The table on the next page summarizes more fully seasonally
adjusted annual rates of change
in major financial aggregates for selected
Fourth
Quarter
(Dec. over
First
Quarter
(Mar. over
Six
Months
(Mar. over
Sept.)
April over
March
Total Reserves 6.6
Nonborrowed Reserves
Concepts of Money
M1 (Currency plus demand
deposits 1/)
M2 (M1 plus time deposits
at commercial banks
other than large CD's)
M3 (M2 plus deposits at
thrift institutions)
Bank Credit
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy adj.)
Loans and investments of
commercial banks 2/
Short-term market paper
(actual $ change in billions)
Large CD's
Bank-related commercial
paper N.S.A.
Nonbank commercial paper
$ 4.3
- 2.3
Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
Based on month-end figures. Includes loans
March 1971 over February 1971.
sold to affiliates and branches.
N.S.A. Not seasonally adjusted.
$ 1.9
- 0.7
- 1.9
- 2.1
$ 0.5
- 0.2 3/
- 1.4 3/
$ 6.1
- 2.9
- 0.4
Prospective developments
(9) Although recent foreign exchange market developments heighten
all the usual uncertainties in assessing the future, the relationships among
money market conditions and monetary aggregates that have evolved since the
last meeting of the Committee strongly suggest that the FOMC's desires expressed
at the last Committee meeting with respect to aggregates for the second quarter
will not be achieved under prevailing money market conditions. Given such
money market conditions, the table on the next page compares the Committee's
desires for the aggregates with current expectations. (The paths shown as
"desired" take the June levels for the aggregates indicated in the previous
Blue Book under alternative C as targets. The annual rates of change for
April and the second quarter differ in many cases from those shown in the
previous Blue Book because the March levels for the aggregates have been
revised since the last Committee meeting. For example the March level of M1
was revised up by $400 million to $219.4 billion. Thus the level of $222.4
billion for M 1 in June represented a 6 per cent annual rate of growth over the
second quarter at the time of the last Committee meeting, but it now represents
a 5-1/2 per cent rate of growth.)
(10) As indicated in the table, the current expectation for growth
in M 1 over the second quarter, given a 4-1/4 per cent funds rate, is 9 per
cent, well above Committee desires. This partly reflects the more rapid
growth that already has occurred in April. But May-June growth--at about a
Previously Desired and Currently Expected
Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates (at 4-1/4% Fed Funds Rate)
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Desired at previous
FOMC meeting
Current
Expectation
Desired at previous
FOMC meeting
Current
Expectation
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
March
April
May
June
Adjusted Credit Proxy Total Reserves
Desired at previous
FOMC meeting
Current
Expectation
Desired at previous
FOMC meeting
Current
Expectation
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
March
April
May
June
March
April
May
June
March
April
May
June
- 6.5
desired by the Committee. The relatively rapid growth expected for May-June
reflects in the main the lagged effect of earlier interest rate declines as
well as further upward revision made in light of the unexpected strength in
(11) The future behavior of money supply and U.S. Government
deposits is, of course, subject to considerable uncertainty in view of foreign
exchange market conditions. We have assumed that about $2-1/2--$3 billion
dollars taken in by foreign central banks in recent days will be invested for
at least a few weeks in Treasury special issues, with proceeds flowing into
Treasury deposits. This could be associated to some extent with a temporary
reduction in money growth from what it otherwise would be. On the other hand,
money growth could be temporarily stimulated if further sizable reserve
supplying operations were to be required in the event, for instance, that the
foreign exchange situation is not unwound in such a way as to calm domestic
credit market nervousness.
(12) While M1 growth seems likely to be more rapid than desired
in the second quarter, given a 4-1/4 per cent Federal funds rate, growth in
M2 may turn out quite close to the previously desired path and growth in the
adjusted credit proxy may be considerably less than desired. Given recent
experience, we are projecting a somewhat greater slowing in net inflows
of time deposits other than large CD's than we had earlier; and this offsets,
in its effect on M2, the greater than desired growth in M1. As a result,
the current expectation for about a 10 per cent M2 growth rate in the second
quarter is about the same as that earlier indicated as being acceptable to
the Committee.
(13) The projected second quarter slowing in growth of time
deposits other than large CD's also tends to restrain growth in the
adjusted credit proxy. Growth in the proxy is also dampened by the
sharp drop in nondeposit sources of funds and by relatively weak behavior
of large CD's. There would seem to be little need for aggressive
bidding for CD money, at least between now and mid-year, given the
comfortable liquidity positions of banks and expectations of only
moderate business loan growth.
(14) Diverse movements developing in the aggregates, unresolved
(as of this writing) exchange market uncertainties, and the recent weak-
ness in bond markets present the Committee with many potentially conflict-
ing objectives. To clarify policy possibilities in view of these conflicts,
three distinct policy alternatives--with sharply differing specifications
--are presented on the following pages: Alternative A aims at stabiliz-
ing credit market conditions; Alternative C aims at pursuit of the
Committee's previously expressed desires with respect to M1 growth; and
Alternative B aims at a "standard-sized" FOMC tightening of operational
targets in the interest of moderating the growth of the aggregates some-
what. Aggregate specifications monthly for these alternatives through
the third quarter are shown in the table on the following page. 1/ Alterna-
tive A there represents a continuation for the aggregates of the column
"current expectations" shown in the table on page 8. Alternative C
represents a continuation from that table of what was desired for
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly
Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
M1  M2
Alt. A. Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
Adjusted Credit Proxy Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
M1 at the previous FOMC meeting together with needed modifications of
other aggregates for the sake of consistency, given the recent changes
that have evolved in relationships among the various aggregates.
Alternative B takes a middle course. The text table below shows money
market conditions believed consistent with these alternatives.
Fed Funds Member Bank M1
Rate Borrowings 2nd Qtr 3rd Qtr
Alternative A 4-1/4 100-200 9% 8-1/2%
Alternative B 4-3/4 250-350 8-1/2% 7-1/2%
Alternative C 6--8 450-700 5-1/2% 6%
(15) Under alternative A, with a funds rate around 4-1/4 per
cent, M1 is expected to continue growing relatively rapidly through the
third quarter, although slowing somewhat on balance from the very rapid
pace of recent months. The growth rate in M2 is expected to moderate
further to a 9 per cent annual rate by the third quarter. On the other
hand, following a sluggish performance in the spring, the adjusted credit
proxy may grow more rapidly on balance in June and the third quarter as
nondeposit sources of funds stop running off and as modest CD growth is
resumed. For the second quarter, growth in the proxy may be at only a
third quarter.
(16) Between now and the next meeting of the Committee, the
range. The rate could temporarily come under downward pressure over the
very near-term in view of the relatively small market supply of short
bills in a period when customer demands for bills may be sizable, includ-
ing demands from investors who chose to redeem the mid-May Treasury
maturities and from some foreign official accounts who do not place
dollars in special Treasury issues. However, in late May the Treasury
will be raising a substantial amount of new cash probably in the bill
area, with the amount depending on how long foreign funds remain invested
in special issues and on whether the Treasury offers another Euro-dollar
certificate abroad. With the Federal funds rate returning to around
a reasonable resolution of current exchange market uncertainties. The
current Treasury refunding will be settled on May 17; dealer positions
in the new issues are very light, as the Treasury has undertaken sizable
buying of when-issued securities.
(17) Alternative B--which assumes a funds rate centering on
over time. The growth rate in M1 slows gradually; it is still likely to
be growing at around an 8-1/2 per cent annual rate on average in May, but
in subsequent months through the summer the growth rate may move down to
around 7 per cent on average. Growth in M2 may be affected somewhat
sooner by the higher funds rate, and over time the growth rate may diminish
by about a percentage point relative to alternative A. Only a minor slow-
ing in the credit proxy is projected, as CD growth may be sustained, if not
enhanced, as tighter money market conditions lead to anticipatory borrow-
ing by banks.
(18) The 3- onth bill rate would be likely to rise under
alternative B, perhaps to around 4-1/2 per cent, or somewhat higher if
expectations of an upward adjustment in the discount rate should develop.
Should expectations of a discount rate move become pervasive, it may also
tend to keep bond yields under upward pressure. Apart from the effects of
such expectations, the recent run-up in bond yields has anticipated a good
part of the firming in day-to-day money rates of the magnitude contemplated
in this alternative.
(19) Alternative C presents the staff's best estimate as of
this moment of the money market conditions required to rapidly move M 1
back to the growth path previously desired by the Committee for the second
quarter, and assuming M1 growth at a 6 per cent rate in the third quarter.
A wide and high range of 6 to 8 per cent for the funds rate is presented,
partly to allow for the sharp increase in interest rates that might be
required to dampen money demand over a short period of time. For instance
in May and June, growth in M1 would have to be reduced to a 2-1/2 per cent
annual rate under this alternative. The higher interest rates likely to be
associated with this M1 behavior would have a considerable dampening effect
on growth in time deposits other than large CD's, and growth in M2 would be
further constrained, with about a 7-1/2 per cent rate expected for the second
quarter. Growth in the credit proxy would likely be quite small. Even
though banks are assumed to bid more aggressively for large CD's and perhaps
non-deposit funds as growth in demand deposits and consumer-type time
deposits diminish, bank credit would be expected to rise by only a 2-1/2
per cent annual rate over the second quarter under this alternative.
(20) Should money market conditions tighten as much as indicated
for this alternative between now and the next meeting of the Committee, both
short- and long-term rates would likely rise very dramatically, and questions
would be raised about the prospects for continued growth in consumer-type
time and savings deposits under current interest rate ceilings. The current
discount rate would obviously be far out of line with the market conditions
associated with this policy alternative.
Possible directive language
(21) This section presents possible language for the second
paragraph of the directive for the three alternative policy courses discussed
above. All three alternatives include a reference to the current Treasury
financing (for which the payment date is May 17) and to uncertainties in
foreign exchange markets. In addition, all three alternatives retain the
language of the present directive relating to purchases of coupon issues.
(22) Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides to call for maintenance of prevailing money
market conditions, subject to a proviso clause.
"To implement this policy, [DEL: while taking account of
the Treasury financing the terms of which are to be
announced late in the month,] System open market opera-
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be
conducted with a view to [DEL: attaining temporarily some
minor firming in] MAINTAINING PREVAILING money market
conditions, while continuing to meet some part of
reserve needs through purchases of coupon issues in the
interest of promoting accommodative conditions in
long-term credit markets; provided that SOMEWHAT
FIRMER money market conditions shall be SOUGHT
[DEL: modified] if it appears that the monetary and
credit aggregates are [DEL: deviating] significantly
EXCEEDING [DEL: from] the growth paths EXPECTED [DEL: desired],
TAKING ACCOUNT OF THE CURRENT TREASURY FINANCING
AND UNCERTAINTIES IN FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS."
If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the
money market conditions noted for alternative A in paragraph (14) as a
description of "prevailing" conditions, and for purposes of the proviso
clause to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in connec-
tion with alternative A as the "expected" paths. Use of the word
"expected" rather than "desired" is suggested in connection with these
growth paths since the rates shown for M1 are well above those the
Committee has previously indicated that it desired. Also, a one-way
proviso clause (guarding against significant excesses but not shortfalls)
is suggested, on the assumption that the Committee would not want market
conditions to be eased on the coming period if the aggregates should fall
short of the indicated paths. A directive with this general structure--
putting primary emphasis on money market conditions rather than the
aggregates--can, of course, be used in connection with specifications
other than those shown for alternative A, with suitable language changes.
(23) Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides (a) to formulate its primary instruction
in terms of desired growth rates for the monetary and credit aggregates
(subject to the constraints that might be imposed by the Treasury financing
and foreign exchange market uncertainties), and (b) to adopt as targets the
growth rates (including an 8-1/2 per cent second-quarter rise in M1) discussed
earlier in connection with alternative B.
"To implement this policy, THE COMMITTEE SEEKS
TO MODERATE GROWTH IN MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES
OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD, [DEL: while] taking account of the
CURRENT Treasury financing [DEL: the terms of which are to be
announced late in the month,] AND UNCERTAINTIES IN FOREIGN
EXCHANGE MARKETS. System open market operations until
the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted
with a view to [DEL: attaining temporarily some minor firming
in] MAINTAINING BANK RESERVES AND money market conditions
CONSISTENT WITH THOSE OBJECTIVES, while continuing to meet
some part of reserve needs through purchases of coupon
issues in the interest of promoting accommodative conditions
in long-term credit markets; [DEL: provided that money market
conditions shall be modified if it appears that the monetary
and credit aggregates are deviating significantly from
the growth paths desired]."
The phrase "to moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over the
months ahead" is suggested as a summary description of the objectives for
the aggregates because the paths anticipated for both M1 and M2 involve
some gradual slowing on average in coming months.
(24) Alternative C. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides to adopt as targets the growth rates
(including a 5-1/2 per cent second quarter rise in M1) discussed earlier
in connection with alternative C.
"To implement this policy, THE COMMITTEE SEEKS
TO PROMOTE MODERATE GROWTH IN MONETARY AND CREDIT
AGGREGATES, while taking account of the CURRENT
Treasury financing [DEL: the terms of which are to be
announced late in the month,] AND UNCERTAINTIES IN
FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS. System open market opera-
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall
be conducted with a view to [DEL attaining temporarily
some minor firming in] MAINTAINING BANK RESERVES AND
money market conditions CONSISTENT WITH THOSE
OBJECTIVES, while continuing to meet some part of
reserve needs through purchases of coupon issues in
the interest of promoting accommodative conditions in
long-term credit markets; [DEL: provided that money market
conditions shall be modified if it appears that the
monetary and credit aggregates are deviating significantly
from the growth paths desired]."
This language differs from that shown under alternative B only in that it
describes the objective for the aggregates as that of seeking "to promote
moderate growth" (rather than "seeking" to moderate growth')and it omits
the phrase "over the months ahead." This formulation is suggested since
the growth paths associated with this alternative involve a sufficient
slowing of the aggregates to bring growth in M1 down to the pace
previously desired by the Committee within the present quarter.
Alternative Weekly Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, in billions of dollars)
Adiusted Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
May 5
June 2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
May 5
June 2
Table 1-A
PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
STRICTLY CON FIDENTIAL (FR)
May 7, 1971
Apr.
May
Apr.
May
May 5
12
Monthly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
Annual Percentage Rates of Change--Quarterly and Monthly
1.4
are rounded to the nearest half per cent.
FR 712-K
Rev2/16/71
