Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
November 12, 1971.
November 12, 1971.
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Since the October meeting, the narrowly defined money stock
(M1) has been running well below the path associated with the policy directive
adopted at that meeting. This marks the third consecutive inter-meeting period
in which there has been a substantial shortfall. On the average in October, M1
declined at a 2.6 per cent annual rate, in contrast to the expectation that it
would rise at a 3 per cent rate. M2 and the adjusted bank credit proxy also
fell below target paths in October, as the table on the next page shows.
However, shortfalls in these aggregates were much less than for M1, as time
and savings deposits other than large CD's grew more rapidly than expected,
offsetting part of the weakness in demand deposits.
(2) In recent months the staff has been projecting that growth in
M1 would slow considerably in the fourth quarter, partly in response to lagged
effects of earlier high interest rates. But a sustained contraction in the
outstanding money stock was not anticipated. The shrinkage which has occurred
began shortly after the President's announcement of his new economic program--
suggesting that the changed circumstances created by the program may have in-
duced important shifts in the demand for domestic money balances at given
interest rates. As previously reported, the Demand Deposit Ownership Survey
for August indicated that the relative drop-off in IPC accounts for that month
was centered in deposits of nonfinancial businesses--a development that is
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
RECENT PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES 1/
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
M1  M2 Adjusted Proxy
Oct. 19 Oct. 19 Oct. 19
Path Actual Path Actual Path Actual
Annual Rates of
Growth, per cent
Levels, billions
of $
Week ending
consistent with other evidence suggesting heavy transfers of business funds
into foreign currencies. Ownership data just available for September indicate
that the continuing relative weakness of demand deposits in that month was
spread more widely through all major ownership groups. Whether this September
pattern of change carried through into October is not yet known.
(3) With the money supply aggregates falling persistently below
path the Desk aimed for gradually easier money market conditions as the inter-
meeting period progressed. Initially, the objective was to achieve money
market conditions characterized by a funds rate in the 5 to 5-1/8 per cent
range, but as new evidence on the aggregates emerged, the aiming point was
lowered to around 5 per cent or a little less. Most recently, with the
discount rate reduced to 4-3/4 per cent, Federal funds have been trading
around 4-7/8 per cent. And, asweakness in the aggregates continued, the Desk
has begun to aim at a 4-3/4 per cent funds rate. Over the three full state-
ment weeks of the inter-meeting period the net reserve position of member
banks fluctuated between $200 million free reserves and $370 million net
borrowed reserves, with the average for the period $ 90 million on the
negative side. Over the same period weekly member bank borrowing ranged
from $122 million to $414 million and averaged $250 million.
(4) Between the last meeting of the Committee and the discount
rate reduction of November 10, the easing in day-to-day money market con-
ditions and growing uncertainty about business prospects brought further
reductions in market interest rates of 10-15 basis points on some types of
longer-term securities and of from 20 to 50 basis points on short-term
securities. The bank prime rate was cut from 6 to 5-1/2 per cent. As rates
declined market expectations of a discount rate cut became widespread. At the
same time, the overhang of unsold securities in the market was building up.
Government security dealers added more than $2 billion to their net positions--
about half in maturities of more than 5 years--as a result of the recent
financings. Aggressive bidding by underwriters for new corporate, Federal
agency, and municipal issues also added to security inventories. With the
technical position of markets thus coming under some strain, there were
scattered yield advances just prior to the discount rate cut.
(5) There was little immediate reaction to the discount rate
move. The market did steady, but attitudes nevertheless appear to remain
cautious. The 3-month bill rate was most recently quoted 4.17 per cent bid,
about the same as its level just prior to the discount rate reduction and
about 30 basis points below its level at the time of the previous FOMC meeting.
(6) Over the three statement weeks ending November 10, required
reserves fell consistently below path as shown in the table on the following
page. Nonborrowed reserves available to banks also remained below path over
the period on balance, as the Desk, while easing, attempted to avoid an overly
rapid easing of money market conditions. With banks also reducing their
borrowings from the Federal Reserve under the easier conditions, total
reserves were well below path.
(7) The preceding analysis has not been based on the newly revised
monetary aggregate series since those were not available during the inter-
meeting period. This latest annual revision is generally minor in its effect.
This is particularly true for the monthly money supply series, for which
Reserve Aggregates: October 19 Paths vs. Actual
(Seasonally unadjusted, in millions of dollars)
Actual
Minus
Statement October 19 October 19
Week Ending Actual Path Path
October 27
November 3
Total reserves 30,974 30,898 (30,919) + 76 (+ 55)
Nonborrowed reserves 30,759 30,498 (30,519) +261 (+240)
Required reserves 30,561 30,648 (30,669) - 87 (-108)
Excess 413 250 +163
Borrowings 215 400 -185
November 10
seasonal factor changes were small and benchmark adjustments were minimal--
raising the level of M1 by only about $150 million and lowering M2 by about
$600 million. The intra-monthly weekly seasonals have been changed more
substantially, however. A table comparing levels and annual rates of change
for the old and new series is appended on page 19. The text table on
page 7, showing major financial aggregates for selected recent periods, is
based on the revised data insofar as it is currently available (revised figures
for reserves and the end-of-month bank credit series are not yet available).
Fourth and
First Qtrs.
combined
(March over
Sept.)
Second
Quarter
(June over
March)
Third
Quarter
(Sept. over
June)
Total Reserves
Nonborrowed Reserves
Concepts of Money
M1 (Currency plus demand
deposits 1/)
M2 (M1 plus time deposits
at commercial banks
other than large CD's)
M3 (M2 plus deposits at
thrift institutions)
Bank Credit
Total member bank deposits
(Bank Credit proxy adj.)
Loans and investments of
Commercial banks 2/
Short-term market paper
(Actual $ change in billions)
Large CD's
Nonbank commercial paper
Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
Based on month-end figures. Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
Not Seasonally Adjusted.
Not Available.
All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on
total loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper and
thrift institutions--which are either end-of-month or last Wednesday
of month figures.
Latest
Month
Oct. over
Sept.)
$ 6.1
- 0.4
$ 1.3
- 0.9
N.S.A.
N.A.
NOTE:
$ 2.3
- 0.1
$ 1.1
Prospective developments
(8) Two alternative sets of specifications for Committee
consideration are summarized in the text table below. The two sets of
specifications correspond to three directive alternatives, with the
first set associated with both directive A and B and the second set
with directive C. As noted in the final section of this blue book, the
choice between directives A and B depends on the degree of emphasis the
Committee wishes to place on monetary aggregates as compared with money
market conditions.
Alternative A/B Alternative C
Federal funds rate 4-1/2--4-7/8 3-7/8--4-1/2
Member bank borrowings 150-300 50-150
Growth in M (SAAR)
November -1 -1
December 1-1/2 3
(9) Money market conditions consistent with alternative A/B
might encompass a Federal funds rate in a 4-1/2--4-7/8 per cent range;
member bank borrowings in a $150-$300 million range; and, taking account
of recent wide swings in excess reserves, a net reserve position for
member banks in a plus $250 million to minus $150 million area. These
conditions are somewhat easier than prevailed at the time of the last
Committee meeting, and reflect a response over the past few weeks to the
weakness of the monetary aggregates and, in recent days, to the reduction
in the discount rate. Alternative C would imply a significant further
easing of money market conditions from those that have recently evolved,
with, for example, the Federal funds rate thought to be consistent with
this alternative in a 3-7/8--4-1/2 per cent range.
(10) Under alternative A/B, we would expect the 3-month bill
rate to be in a 4--4-5/8 per cent range between now and mid-December.
The bill rate could rise from recent levels in response to normal seasonal
pressures, particularly in view of the current wide spread of the funds
rate above the bill rate. In addition, the Treasury is expected to raise
$3 billion of new cash in the bill area in late November. The Treasury
will have to raise another $2--$3 billion of cash before year-end, but
it seems likely at this point that this operation will not be undertaken
until late December. Sizable sales of bills by foreign central banks in the
event of reflows of funds from abroad would also tend to exert pressure
on the bill market. Under alternative C, however, short-term interest
rates would almost certainly decline over the period ahead, with the bill
rate likely to be in a 3-3/4--4-1/4 per cent range.
(11) The monthly and quarterly paths for monetary aggregates
for the two sets of suggested specifications are detailed in the table
on the next page. These paths are based on the newly revised series.
(Two tables on pages 17 and 18 at the end of the text show weekly paths
for the monetary aggregates and more detail on aggregate reserves.)
(12) The narrow money supply (M1) under alternative A/B is
expected to show only a slight decline in November at a one per cent
annual rate, but to resume growth beginning in December. On the basis
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly
Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A/B
October
November
December
Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
November
December
Year 1971
Credit Proxy
Alt. C
Total
Alt. A/B
Reserve
Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
November
December
Year 1971
Alt. A/B
Alt. C
.5
8.0
Adjusted
Alt. A/B
September
October
November
December
of past relationships, the depressant effect on money demand of the
high short-term interest rates of late spring and summer should have
about run its course. Prospects for a reduced rate of inflation in-
duced by the new economic program have probably also encouraged money
holders to reduce cash balances relative to income, offsetting the
large build-up of spring and early summer. With these two types of
adjustments largely completed, it appears that money supply should
soon begin rising more in line with the transactions demands implicit
in the staff's GNP forecast, which indicates about a 9 per cent rate of
rise on average in nominal GNP in the fourth and first quarters. M 1
is expected to grow at only a 1-1/2 per cent annual rate from November
to December, but to be followed by a 6 per cent growth rate in the first
quarter. The lower interest rates and greater reserve supply under
alternative C would likely lead to a more rapid 3 per cent rate of growth
in December, followed by an 8 per cent expansion in the first quarter.
(13) Growth in time and savings deposits other than large CD's
is expected to slow in late November and December from the recent rapid
pace. On balance, under alternative A/B, we would anticipate a growth
rate in consumer-type time deposits of around 11 per cent in the fourth
quarter, but slowing to about 7 per cent in the first quarter as consumer
spending continues to rise. Such a development would lead to growth
rates for M2 of 5-1/2 and 6-1/2 per cent in the fourth and first quarters,
respectively. Growth rates would be somewhat more rapid under alterna-
tive C as lower market interest rates enhanced the relative attractiveness
of bank deposits.
(14) Although the outstanding amount of large CD's and non-
deposit sources has shown little net change in recent weeks, these sources
of funds, particularly large CD's, are expected to resume expansion in
the period ahead. The expansion is likely to be moderate, however, under
either alternative. Over the balance of this year, business loan demands
are expected to be modest in view of the continued comparatively large
volume of capital market financing and the relatively small rate of business
inventory accumulation anticipated. Under alternative C there could be a
pick-up in business borrowing from banks as lending terms ease further,
but the increased inflow of demand and consumer-type deposits associated
with that alternative would probably generate enough resources so that
banks would not need to be more aggressive in that CD market.
(15) With private demand deposits flat and outstanding U.S.
Government deposits declining on balance over the fourth quarter, the
bank credit proxy is expected to grow at only about a 3--4 per cent
annual rate over the period, followed by only a modest pick-up in the
first quarter. Banks may initially take a substantial share of the bills
offered in the forthcoming Treasury cash financings, but it is anticipated
that the banks will find it economical to sell them as U.S. Government
deposits are drawn down to finance the budgetary deficit. And more
generally, with bill rates below the Federal funds anddiscount rates,
banks have an incentive to reduce their generally ample liquid asset hold-
ings as loan demands develop. Under alternative C, bank credit expansion
would be somewhat more rapid in the last few weeks of the current quarter,
and considerably larger than under alternative A/B in the first quarter
of next year as growth in M2 accelerates.
(16) Assuming the tight end of the money market range for
alternative A/B, it is possible that the technical position of markets
will lead to an increase in interest rates over the near-term despite
the recent discount rate reduction. Factors that may put bill rates
under upward pressure have been noted in paragraph (10). In longer-
term markets, dealer and syndicate positions are large in the wake of
the recent Treasury financings and the sizable volume of municipal and
corporate bond offerings; and uncertainties as to the viability of the
announced wage-price program could result in nervous holders pressing
their inventories on the market. An easing on the money market toward
the lower end of the alternative A/B range would likely offset such a
tendency should it arise. And if the money market moved into the
alternative C range, the whole market would likely adjust downward in
yield, impelled in part by expectations of a further decline in the
discount rate.
Possible directive language
(17) Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible use
if the Committee decides to place more emphasis on money market conditions
than on the aggregates and wishes to call for maintenance of the conditions
"that have evolved since the discount rate reduction", subject to a proviso
"To implement this policy, [DEL: the Committee seeks to achieve
moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over te months
ahead.] System open market operations until the next meeting of the
Committee shall be conducted with a view to [DEL: achieving bank reserve
and] MAINTAINING THE money market conditions [DEL: consistent with that
objective, taking account of the forthcoming Treasury financings.]
that have evolved since the discount rate reduction; provided that
somewhat easier conditions shall be sought if it appears that the
monetary and credit aggregates are falling significantly below
the growth paths expected."
If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the
money market conditions noted for alternative A in paragraph (9) as
a description of the conditions to be maintained, and for purposes
of the proviso clause to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed
earlier in connection with alternative A as the "expected" paths.
The proviso clause has been formulated in one-way terms, guarding against
significant shortfalls but not excesses, on the assumption that the
Committee would not want money market conditions to be tightened in the
coming period if the aggregates should appear to be expanding on paths
above those projected, which involve no growth over the fourth quarter for
M1 and relatively low growth rates for M2 and the bank credit proxy.
(18) Alternative B. The language for alternative B,
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to
achieve moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over
the months ahead. System open market operations until the next
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to
achieving bank reserve and money market conditions consistent
with that objective [DEL: , taking account of the forthcoming Treasury
is proposed for use if the Committee wishes to continue its emphasis on
monetary aggregates. It could involve the same initial specification as
A, but the reaction to specification misses would be different. For
instance, if the Committee adopts this alternative, it presumably will want
the Desk to be more sensitive to movements away from the paths in the
aggregates and to adjust the Federal funds rate promptly, and perhaps
more aggressively, in response to such deviations. As in alternative A,
the Committee may wish to indicate a greater willingness to countenance
overshoots in the aggregates than shortfalls.
(19) Alternative C. This language differs from that of alternative
B in indicating that the Committee seeks "to promote substantial growth" rather
than "to achieve moderate growth" in the aggregates over the months ahead. It
is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to pursue the more
aggressive course contemplated by the specifications given earlier for
alternative C.
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to PROMOTE SUB-
STANTIAL [DEL: achieve moderate] growth in monetary and credit aggregates
over the months ahead. System open market operations until the next
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to achieving
bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with that
objective [DEL: , taking account of the forthcoming Treasury financing]."
Alternative Weekly Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Alt. A/B
November 17
24
December 1
8
15
Alt. C
Credit Proxy
Alt. A/B Alt. C
Alt. A/B Alt. C
Total Reserve
Alt. A/B Alt. C
November 17
24
December 1
8
15
M 1
Total and Nonborrowed Reserve Paths
(Daily averages in millions of dollars, seasonally adjusted)
Total Reserves
Alt. A/B Alt. C
Nonborrowed Reserves
Alt. A/B Alt. C
Per cent annual rates of growth
November
December
Weekly Paths--Seasonally Adjusted
Total Reserves
Alt. A/B
November 17
24
Alt. C
Nonborrowed Reserves
Alt. A/B Alt. C
Weekly Paths--Not Seasonally Adjusted
Alt. A/B Alt. C Alt. A/B Alt. C
November 17
24
November
December
REVISIONS IN MONETARY AGGREGATES
Comparison of Levels ($ billions)
Adjusted Credit
M1 M2 Proxy
Old
series
Revised
series
Old
series
Revised
series
Old Revised
series series
Comparison of Annual Growth Rates (per cent)
Old
Series
Revised
series
Old
series
Revised
series
Adjusted Credit
Old Revised
series series
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
MONEY SUPPLY M1 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
I 1 I I I I I
I J J J
MONEY SUPPLY M2
I I J 1 i <
J A S O N 0
- Actual
-- Currently Projected
--- Wkly. Path, Indicated
at FOMC Meeting (10/19/71)
_Z- Longer Run Path
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
11/12/71
MONETARY AGGREGATES
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY /
-1364
(1111
0
- 360
I I I I I I
TOTAL RESERVES
- Actual
-" Currently Projected
--- Wkly Path, indicated
at FOMC Meeting (10/19/71)
-Z- Lorger Run Path
INTEREST BEARING SOURCES OF BANK FUNDS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
TOTAL TIME AND
SAVINGS DEPOSITS
TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS
OTHER THAN CD'S
CHART ,2
Table 1 A
PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
STRICTLY CON FIDENTIAL (FR)
November 12, 1971
J, lv
Aug.
Sept
Julyllly
Aug.
Sept.
ect.
Nov.
Nov. 3
10 pe
Monthly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
5.4
4.2
3.9
Annual Percentage Rates of Change--Quarterly and Monthly
Weekly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
I. L' I- I. A L .I____ _ &
are rounded to the nearest half percent.
( 9.0)
FR 712-K
Rev2/16/71
(Dollar amounts
