Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
July 23, 1971.
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent Developments
(1) Growth of the narrowly-defined money supply in July appears
to be somewhat faster than projected in the last blue book, as best can be
judged by information available through the week of the 21st, with data for
the latter week partly estimated. The broader money supply (M2) appears to
be increasing less rapidly than projected, however, as a substantial short-
fall below path in time deposits other than CD's more than offset the over-
shoot in private demand deposits. And with U.S. Government deposits much
weaker than expected and nondeposit sources of funds continuing to decline
on balance, the bank credit proxy appears to be falling very considerably
short of expectations in July.
Growth Rates in Key Monetary Aggregates 1/
(Per cent annual rates of change)
Bluebook Current
Bluebook Current
Path 2/ Estimate
Tables 7 and 7A in the back of
the various aggregates.
Alternative B path of the last
Bluebook
Path 2/
the bluebook
Adjusted Proxy
Current Bluebook Current
Estimate Path 2 / Estimate
show the reconciliation among
(2) The actual course of the monetary aggregates in recent weeks is
compared with the alternative B paths of the previous bluebook in-the following
July 23, 1971.
Recent Paths of the Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
SM Adjusted
1 _M2 Credit Proxy
Bluebook Bluebook Bluebook
Path Actual Path Actual Path Actual
Week ending
(3) In the first half of July, following the relatively weak
end-of-June behavior of the aggregates, the Desk aimed at a Federal funds
rate generally in the lower half of the 5--5-1/2 per cent range; and during
those weeks the effective Federal funds rate averaged just slightly over
confirmed, however, and with the increase in the discount rate to 5 per
cent, the Desk has most recently moved to promote a Federal funds rate at
about the upper end of the range.
(4) During the first three statement weeks of July member bank
borrowings averaged about $930 million, about $415 million above the June
average. Apparently in recent weeks many banks that had borrowed relatively
little at the discount window have become more willing borrowers, given the
spread of the Federal funds rate above the discount rate. Excess reserves
have been volatile over the past three weeks, and net borrowed reserves of
member banks have ranged from $350 to $950 million, with the average level
considerably deeper than in June.
Reserve Aggregates
(Daily averages in millions of dollars, seasonally adjusted)
Total Nonborrowed Required
Bluebook Bluebook Bluebook
Path 1/ Actual Path 1/ Actual Path 1/ Actual
June 31,307 31,257 30,932 30,801 31,087 31,046
July pe 31,794 31,339 31,416 30,443 31,585 31,127
Week ending
July 7 31,224 31,071 30,915 30,495 31,013 30,769
July 14 31,359 30,867 31,069 29,984 31,334 31,026
July 21 32,212 31,583 31,727 30,376 31,852 31,133
pe -- Partly estimated.
1/ Alternative B.
(5) Although M1 in July has turned out to be somewhat
stronger than previously projected, the need for reserves in the first three
weeks of the month was considerably less than expected (as shown by the
difference between "path" and "actual" required reserves in the table above).
The lower level of required reserves relative to path was mainly the result
of large downward adjustments in preliminary estimates of private demand
deposits during the last two weeks of June, and much lower than expected U.S.
Government deposits in early July. Thus, with the need for reserves reduced,
growth of member bank total reserves in July is falling substantially short
of what was implied by the alternative B path at the time of the last
Committee meeting, as shown in the table above, despite the sharp rise
in member bank borrowings. Nonborrowed reserves were even further below
path than total reserves--and showed an actual decline from June to July
--as the Desk provided fewer reserves given the increased demand for
borrowings by banks.
(6) Market interest rate adjustments to the increase in the
Federal funds and discount rates have been relatively modest. After an
initial upward adjustment of from 10 to nearly 30 basis points to the
discount rate announcement, the bill market strengthened, partly in
reflection of large foreign demands and expectations of some re-investment
demand from holders of "rights" who may not wish to opt for the longer-
term offerings in the exchange position of the financing. This strength
faded most recently, and the 3-month bill closed on Friday at 5.45 per
cent, a little above its level just prior to the discount rate hike, and
well above its 5.19 per cent level at the time of the June 29 FOMC meeting.
Reflecting the discount rate action and also the Treasury financing, yields
on Treasury coupon-bearing securities rose by about 10 to 20 basis points
after mid-month. Other short- and long-term yields showed very little
reaction to the System's firmer policy stance.
(7) On July 21, the Treasury announced that holders of the $5.1
billion of securities maturing on August 16, $4.1 billion of which are
publicly held, would be able to exchange those issues for either a 4-1/4
year note yielding 7.06 per cent or a 10-year bond at a yield of 7.11 per
cent. It was also announced that, in the case of the 10-year bond, cash
subscriptions by individuals up to $10,000 would also be accepted.
Although a good deal of individual interest seems to be developing,
this latter feature is not expected to raise much new cash according
to Treasury comments. A cash auction of an 18-month note in early
August is expected to cover attrition in the exchange and to raise
around $1 billion in new money, and an additional cash offering of
$2 billion or so--probably in tax bills--is anticipated for late
(8) The table on the following page summarizes seasonally
adjusted annual rates of change in major financial aggregates for selected
(March over
Sept.)
Second
Quarter
(June over
March)
Total Reserves
Nonborrowed Reserves
Concepts of Money
M1 (Currency plus demand
deposits 1/)
M2 (M1 plus time deposits
at commercial banks
other than large CD's)
M3 (M2 plus deposits at
thrift institutions)
Bank Credit
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy adj.)
Loans and investments of
commercial banks 2/
Short-term market paper
(Actual $ change in billions)
Large CD's
Bank-related commercial
paper N.S.A.
Nonbank commercial paper
N.S.A. Not seasonally adjusted.
sold to affiliates and
July
over
June
n. a.
$ .7
$ 1.6
- 1.0
n. a.
Prospective Developments
(9) The table on the next page shows two paths for monetary aggregates
between now and year-end. Money market specifications thought to be consistent
with these paths are summarized in the table below. 1/
Alternative A Alternative B
Federal funds rate 5-1/2% 5-1/2--6%
Member bank borrowings $.8--$1 billion $.9--$1.2 billion
Growth in M1
(SAAR)
August 6% 5-1/2%
September 8-1/2% 8%
(10) The money market specifications for alternative A represent
a continuation of conditions recently prevailing, as would be consistent with
a strict interpretation of "even keel". The current Treasury refunding will be
settled on August 16, only about a week before the next FOMC meeting. It is
possible also that conditions following the settlement date will present more
than the usual constraint on open market operations in view of the greater price
risk in the distribution process of a long-term offering. Specifications for
alternative B, on the other hand, would envisage a gradual firming of the
money market, to the extent permitted by the Treasury financing, to a Federal
funds rate of 6 per cent by late in the inter-meeting period; a funds rate
fluctuating around 6 per cent has been assumed for the alternative B paths
for the monetary aggregates.
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly
Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
M1
Alt. A Alt. B
M2
Alt. A Alt. B
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
July
August
September
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B
Total Reserves
Alt. A
Alt. B
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
July
August
September
July
August
September
December
July
August
September
December
(11) Growth in narrowly defined money (M1 ), given current money
market conditions, is expected to slow between now and year-end. There are
a number of reasons for this. First, the apparent broad build-up in pre-
cautionary demand balances over the past few months is likely to abate as
liquidity demands are sated and as gradual economic recovery helps to restore
consumer confidence. Second, the cumulative impact of the higher short-term
interest rates of the past several months will be making the high cost of
holding cash more and more evident. Third, the recent tendency for credit
markets to stabilize may attract funds of small or medium-size investors
who had temporarily permitted cash balances to rise in anticipation of higher
interest rates.
(12) While there are reasons to expect slower growth in M1 , it
is difficult to pinpoint the timing. Experience makes it clear that interest
rates affect money demand with a lag, but the exact timing of this effect
is uncertain. Moreover, shifts in demand for financial assets, given interest
rates, are notoriously hard to predict, since they depend to a great extent
on the mysterious elements that work on consumer and investor confidence.
At the present time, the staff expects M1 growth to average a little over
cent growth rate for the third quarter. In the fourth quarter, we would
expect a drop in the growth rate to around 4 per cent, despite the increase
in purely transactions balances required to finance the accelerated growth
in nominal GNP expected in the fall. Under alternative B, growth is expected
to be only about 1/2 percentage point lower than under alternative A in the
third quarter, but about 1-1/2 percentage points lower in the fourth quarter.
(13) Time and savings deposits other than large CD's are
expected to grow much less rapidly over coming months than in the second
quarter, given the recent weakening in such deposits and continued
relatively attractive market interest rates. Thus, under alternative A,
growth in M2 is expected to drop to a 6-1/2 per cent annual rate in August,
and to 8 per cent in the third quarter; growth would be a little slower
under alternative B.
(14) Growth in the adjusted bank credit proxy during August
and September is expected to be more rapid than in recent months, and the
growth rate for the third quarter may be around 9 per cent. Business loan
demands are expected to remain fairly weak until around the fourth quarter,
but banks are likely to be substantial net buyers of forthcoming Treasury
offerings, including the bills to be announced toward the end of August.
Banks have obtained a sizable amount of large CD funds in recent weeks,
reflecting in part investment by AT&T of the proceeds of its recent pre-
ferred stock offering. The last payment on the offering will be made in
late July. Apart from this and any investment of foreign funds in CD's,
only a modest net growth in large CD's is expected until business loan
demands pick up.
(15) The deposit patterns described above for alternative A
imply a 7-1/2 per cent annual rate of increase in total reserves, seasonally
adjusted, from June to September, assuming excess reserves average about
$225 million. In August total reserves are expected to rise by about 13-1/2
per cent, reflecting in part the increase in required reserves
resulting from the expected expansion in U.S. Government demand deposits in
the latter half of July and early August and from the lagged effects of
the anticipated July money supply expansion. On the assumption that the
average level of borrowings is about unchanged from July and August, non-
borrowed reserves would grow at about the same rate as total reserves in
August; for the third quarter as a whole, however, nonborrowed would be
expected to grow at a slower rate of about 3 per cent in view of the
sharp drop in such reserves in July. Reserve growth would be somewhat
less under alternative B, particularly for nonborrowed reserves, with
part of the drop-off in nonborrowed offset by increased borrowing. The
following table shows monthly average levels of total and nonborrowed
reserves (in millions of dollars)--both seasonally adjusted and unadjusted
--believed to be consistent with alternatives A and B.
Alt. A Alt. B
Not Not
Seasonally  Seasonally Seasonally Seasonally
Adjusted 1/ Adjusted Adjusted 1/ Adjusted
Total Reserves
July 31,339 30,602 31,339 30,602
August 31,693 30,416 31,669 30,384
September 31,888 30,531 31,824 30,469
Nonborrowed Reserves
July 30,443 29,683 30,438 29,679
August 30,825 29,516 30,675 29,358
September 31,050 29,631 30,836 29,419
(16) The slowing of growth in M1 and accompanying reserve
developments under alternative A would not be expected to lead to higher
interest rates in either short- or long-term markets, at least in the
immediate future. For one thing, growth in the demand for money is likely
to be abating. Also the credit demands of corporations and State and local
governments in bond markets are expected to continue around the somewhat
more moderate dimensions of the past month or two, and thereby take some
rate pressure off long-term markets. In addition, Treasury cash borrowing
demands during the third quarter are turning out to be somewhat less than
expected in view of the low level at which the Treasury is running its cash
balance. In the fourth quarter, however, Treasury cash borrowing is expected
to be substantial.
(17) The tighter money market conditions assumed under alterna-
tive B could lead to a fairly substantial upward interest rate adjustment
over the near term. The market at present appears to be uncertain as to
how far the System intends to go in combatting high monetary growth rates,
and in that respect would be very sensitive to upward movements in the
Federal funds rate. With further tightening in the money market, market
expectations of another rise in the discount rate--and possibly the prime
rate--at a time when a Treasury refunding is in process could lead to strong
protective measures by dealers and other active participants. Higher short-
and long-term interest rates could also begin to impinge more substantially
on savings inflows to nonbank thrift institutions. At the same time,
however, it is not clear that the upward interest rate pressures would be
long sustained, particularly in long-term markets, in view of the likelihood
that credit demands will be moderate and the possibility that a further
move toward achieving lower monetary growth rates would over time have a
constructive influence on market psychology.
Possible directive language
(18) This section presents possible language for the second
paragraph of the directive corresponding to the two alternative policy
courses discussed above.
(19) Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible use
if the Committee decides to call for maintaining about the money market
conditions that have recently been attained, subject to a proviso clause.
"To implement this policy, [DEL: the Committee seeks to
achieve more moderate growth in monetary aggregates over
the months ahead, taking account of developments in capital
markets.] System open market operations until the next
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view
to MAINTAINING PREVAILING [DEL: achieving bank reserve and]
money market conditions; [DEL: consistent with these objectives]
PROVIDED THAT SOMEWHAT FIRMER CONDITIONS SHALL BE SOUGHT,
TAKING ACCOUNT OF THE CURRENT TREASURY FINANCING AND OF
DEVELOPMENTS IN CAPITAL MARKETS, IF IT APPEARS THAT THE
MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES ARE SIGNIFICANTLY EXCEEDING
THE GROWTH PATHS EXPECTED."
If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the money
market conditions noted for alternative A in paragraph (9) as a description
of "prevailing" conditions, and for purposes of the proviso clause to adopt
the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in connection with alternative A
been
as the "expected" paths. The proviso clause has/formulated in one-way terms,
guarding against excesses but not shortfalls, on the assumption that the
Committee would not want money market conditions to be eased in the coming
period if the aggregates should fall short of the indicated paths. The
proposed language contemplates that in making operating decisions under the
proviso clause the Manager would take account of both the current Treasury
financing and developments in capital markets.
(20) Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible use
if the Committee decides to hold to the course of continued orderly firming
of bank reserve and money market conditions, insofar as that might be
necessary to maintain downward pressure on the growth rates of the aggregates
and insofar as such firming proves to be feasible in light of the current
Treasury financing. As will be noted, the language is identical to that
adopted at the June 29 meeting except for the inclusion of the Treasury
financing, as a factor to be taken into account, along with developments
in capital markets.
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to
achieve more moderate growth in monetary aggregates over
the months ahead, taking account of THE CURRENT TREASURY
FINANCING AND OF developments in capital markets. System
open market operations until the next meeting of the
Committee shall be conducted with a view to achieving
bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with
those objectives."
If the Committee adopts this alternative it may wish to instruct the Manager
to seek to firm money market conditions within the ranges mentioned earlier
in connection with this alternative--including the proposed 5-1/2 to 6 per
cent range for the Federal funds rate--to the extent feasible in light of
the Treasury financing and capital market conditions. unless the monetary
aggregates appear to be increasing at rates well below those discussed
earlier under alternative B. On the other hand, the formulation of this
alternative--with its greater emphasis on monetary aggregates--would also
be consistent with the specifications of alternative A (or some modification
thereof) since a more moderate growth in M1 in particular is indicated in
the paths associated with alternative A.
Alternative Weekly Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Alt. A Alt. B
July 28
M 2
Alt. A Alt. B
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B
July 28
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL 7/23/71
MONETARY AGGREGATES
MONEY SUPPLY M1 BILLIONS OF DOLI PF
I I 41 1 I ~
BROADER MONEY SUPPLY M
f-2
J A SA M J
- Actual
-- Currently Projected
--- Wkly. Path, indicated
at ,FOMC Meeting r4/2Q/71)
_Z2 Longer Run Path
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
1355
TOTAL RESERVES
- Actual
--- Currently Projected
--- Wky Path, Indicated
at FOMC Meeting t /29/71)
J J A S
'71
..- Longer Run Path
Table 1-A
PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL(FR)
July 23,1971
U.S. Gov't Deposits Total Time & Time Deposits other arge NegotiableCD's Nondeposit SourcesSavings Deposits than large CD's Large Negotiable of Funds
Period Path as of 2 Actuals & 3 Path as of 4 Actuals & Path asof 6 ctuals & Path as of 8Actuals & Path as of 10 Actuals &
June 29 Current Prol June 29 Current Prol June 29 Current Prol June 29 Current Prol June 29 Current Proj
Apr.
May
June
July
Annual Percentage Rates of Change--Quarterly and Monthly
a~ a i iam
to the nearest half per cent. FR 712-K
Rev2/16/71
T.ble 4
MARGINAL RESERVE MEASURES
(Dollar amounts in millions, based on period averages of daily 11 i
Member Banks borrowin a
Period Free Excess Reserve C 1 ty
reserves reserves Total Major banks Other Country
Monthly (reserves weeks
ending in)'
n  
217 261
p - Preliminary.
(Dollar amounts
