Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
June 4, 1971
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) June 4, 1971
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent Developments
(1) In May all of the key monetary aggregates substantially
exceeded the paths acceptable to the Committee at the last meeting. Growth
in the narrowly defined money supply accelerated to an annual rate estimated
on a preliminary basis, at around 17 per cent. If this preliminary estimate
holds up, it will be the largest increase for any month in the 25 year
history of the daily average series. The annual growth rate of the adjusted
credit proxy remained relatively moderate--at only about half that for
M1 --although it exceeded the expected rate by about the same number of
percentage points as M1.
RECENT GROWTH RATES IN KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Per cent annual rates of change)
April May
Bluebook 1/
Actual Path Actual
M1  9.8 8.5 17.0
Adjusted
Proxy 5.3 0.0 8.5
(2) Shortly after the last Committee meeting, preliminary data
for the statement week ending May 12 indicated that M 1 and M2 had increased
to levels well above their bluebook paths. Because this increase occurred
in the week when settlement was being made on the heavy early May volume of
June 4, 1971
dollar transfers into foreign currencies, question was raised whether it
might not simply be a temporary reflection of such transfers. However,
disaggregated final data for the week indicated that the increase was not
concentrated at the money centers through which the bulk of foreign exchange
transactions probably occurred. Moreover, since the week of the 12th,the
level of the money stock has continued to run well above the bluebook path.
The reasons for the extraordinary recent strength of money supply are unclear,
but they may reflect a lagged response to the marked reductions of interest
rates in earlier months, a more rapid growth of money GNP thus far in 1971,
and perhaps a precautionary build-up in cash balances by consumers and others
in an uncertain economic atmosphere.
RECENT PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Month
April
May
Week ending
April 28
May 5
June 2p
r = revised after
p = preliminary es
(3) At
advancing sharply
crisis. With the
,luebook
Path
M2
Bluebook
Path Actuals
Adjusted Credit
Proxy
Bluebook
Path Actuals
last meeting.
stimate.
the time of the last Committee meeting, bond yields were
further in the aftermath of the international currency
Federal funds rate remaining around the 4-1/2 per cent
level to which it had risen in early May, this tendency persisted immediately
following the Committee meeting, adding another 1/8 to 3/8 of a percentage
point to the overall yield advance and perhaps contributing to further stock
price declines. By the third week of May, however, bond markets began to rally
and stock prices turned upward. Most recently key bond yields in all market
sectors have dropped a little below the levels prevailing at the time of the
last meeting. During the period when yields were still under upward pressure,
the Desk purchased about $130 million of Treasury coupon issues on small orders
placed directly through dealers rather than through a general go-around.
(4) During the period immediately following the May 11 meeting, in
view of the general weakness of bond markets and with the Treasury financing
still a factor, the Desk continued to aim at a Federal funds rate around 4-1/2
that the aggregates were exceeding
per cent even after new data indicated/the paths specified at the May 11 meeting.
On May 20, when the securities markets rally began and new evidence indicated
that the aggregates were even stronger than thought earlier, the Desk aimed
at a funds rate in the 4-1/2--4-3/4 per cent range. On May 26 the funds rate
target was raised again to around 4-3/4 per cent, and a week later to around
in the first statement week following the last meeting, and 4.68 and 4.82 per
cent respectively in the two succeeding weeks.
(5) In maintaining a higher average rate on federal funds, the
Desk provided non-borrowed reserves somewhat less liberally than otherwise.
This has been reflected in the marginal reserve measures. Over the three
full statement weeks since the last meeting, net borrowed reserves averaged
about $215 million in contrast to average free reserves of $70 million over
the three preceding statement weeks. Similarly, in the most recent three
weeks, member bank borrowings at the Federal Reserve averaged a little over
$400 million, nearly double the average for the preceding period.
(6) The general firming of day-to-day money market conditions
in May was reflected--with some lag--in further marked advances of other
short-term interest rates. The rate on 3-month Treasury bills, for example,
moved from a level around 3.85 per cent at the time of the last meeting to
a recent high of 4.45 per cent, while advances of other short-term rates
ranged generally from 1/4 to 5/8 of a percentage point. During late May
and early June when the bond market was rallying, bill rates also declined
somewhat as they often do at this time of the year. But most recently, the
(7) The table on the next page summarizes seasonally adjusted
annual ratesof change in major financial aggregates for selected periods.
Fourth
Quarter
(Dec. over
Sept.)
First
Quarter
(March over
Dec.)
(March over
Sept.)
Total Reserves
Nonborrowed Reserves
Concepts of Money
Ml (Currency plus demand
deposits 1/)
M2 (Ml plus time deposits
at commercial banks
other than large CD's)
M3 (M2 plus deposits at
thrift institutions)
Bank Credit
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy adj.)
Loans and investments of
commercial banks 2/
Short-term market paper
(actual $ change in billions)
Large CD's
Bank-related commercial
paper N.S.A.
Nonbank commercial paper
Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
Based on month-end figures. Includes loans sold to
April 1971 over March 1971
affiliates and branches.
N.S.A. Not seasonally adjusted.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on
total loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper and
thrift institutions--which are either end-of-month or last Wednesday
of month figures.
Latest
Two
Months
(May over
March)
$ 0.1
.3/
- 0.1-
$ 4.3
- 2.3
$ 1.8
- 0.7
- 1.9
$ 6.1
- 2.9
- 0.4
Prospective developments
(8) The continued strengthening of the aggregates has led the
staff to raise its estimates of both the levels of and growth rates in
money supply and bank credit that might be expected in the near term at
any given level of interest rates. In view of recent developments the
Committee at the last meeting appears practically impossible to achieve
(except for accidental developments or substantial projection misses not
related to deliberate policy operations). Moreover, the average 8 per
cent growth rate over both the second and third quarters together--which
represented the intermediate path acceptable to the Committee last time--
would also be very difficult to attain. At the present time, such a path
would require a very sharp drop to around 4 per cent annual rate in third
quarter growth in M1 . This would appear to entail a considerable wrench-
ing of the money market, with a near-term rise in the Federal funds rate so
large as seriously to upset capital markets, possibly followed later in
the summer or early fall by the need to induce a sharp drop in the funds
rate in order to keep M1 growth from falling below even a 4 per cent rate
over the fourth quarter. Though not as magnified, similar control problems
could develop in moving onto other less restrictive paths--for instance,
the alternative C path presented for consideration at this time.
(9) Three alternative paths for the various aggregates are
shown in the detailed table on page 7. The text table on page 8 summarizes
staff estimates of the relation between money market conditions and the three
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly
Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
June
July
August
September
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
1971
June
July
August
September
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
June
July
August
September
June
July
August
September
alternative paths for the aggregates. Monthly, as well as quarterly, rates
of growth are shown in this summary table for M 1 (taken to represent the
collection of aggregates) to highlight the sharply diminished rates of growth
that might be expected by late summer, particularly if money market condi-
tions are to be tightened significantly further. In specifying the constella-
tion of money market conditions, it should be pointed out that as the Federal
funds rate moves above the discount rate, bank attitudes toward use of the
discount window will change, with consequent uncertainties in estimating the
expected level of member bank borrowings during such a transition period.
Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Federal funds rate 4-3/4 5-1/4 6
Member bank borrowings 250 - 350 350 - 450 450 - 600
Growth in M1:
(10) Given a Federal funds rate of around 4-3/4 per cent, M1
growth in June would be expected at about a 9-10 per cent annual rate,
and for the second quarter as a whole it would be around 12 per cent.
The third quarter rate of growth would be projected to slow only modestly
to around 10-1/2 per cent. But by late in that quarter and in the fall a
substantially slower growth rate would be expected, as the lagged effect
on the demand for money of the higher short-term interest rates that will
have prevailed since mid-March begins to take hold.
(11) A tightening of the money market between now and mid-year
to the degrees indicated by the suggested specifications for alternatives B
and C would have little effect on growth in M1 during June, but would begin
to have more noticeable effects in ensuing months.1/ Under alternative B the
M 1 growth rate in the third quarter would be expected to be reduced to 9-1/2 per
cent and under alternative C to 8 per cent. However, by late summer or early
fall, it is our best estimate that the growth rate would be sharply reduced,
perhaps in alternative C to only about a 3--4 per cent annual rate, although
there are great difficulties of course in pinpointing exact months in which
low growth rates would be likely to emerge. Growth at such low rates would
continue for some months as sharply higher short-term interest rates gradually
reduce the demand for money balances and as higher long-term interest rates
over the next few months and possibly weakness in the stock market depress
individuals' net worth (which also reduces money demand). Thus, during fall
the money supply could be growing considerably less than might be desired
unless interest rates were moved sharply downward in the interim.
(12) Alternative B, which indicates a somewhat more gradual
deceleration of the aggregates than alternative C, is less likely to lead
to sharp and sustained upward interest rate adjustments and hence to the
need for a later easing in money market conditions. However, over the near-
term a funds rate around 5-1/4 per cent, as specified in alternative B, would
likely induce a renewed increase in long-term interest rates, particularly as
expectations of a discount rate increase became more prevalent and another
rise in the prime rate more likely. But the general interest rate increase
would not carry as far as under alternative C and there would be a greater
probability of a corrective market rally later on.
(13) Under all three alternatives, growth in M2 is expected to
slow more than growth in M1 between the second and third quarters. Time and
savings deposits other than large CD's are growing less rapidly in the second
than the first quarter, although the slowing thus far has been less than
anticipated. We expect a further slowing in the third quarter as consumer
spending strengthens and as short-term interest rates rise--with the slowing
in such deposit inflows becoming more pronounced to the extent the money
market tightens. Under alternative A, we would expect the 3-month bill rate
between now and mid-year to be in a 4-1/4--4-3/4 per cent range, and it may be
expected to rise somewhat above that range in the summer as the Treasury finances
large and partly seasonal cash needs. Under alternative B, the 3-month bill
would be likely to move into a 4-5/8--5-1/4 per cent range by or shortly
after mid-year; and the rate would likely be substantially higher under
alternative C.
(14) Loan demands on banks over the summer months are expected to
be fairly strong as economic recovery proceeds and as some borrowers switch
from the open market to banks. And growth in the adjusted credit proxy may
be somewhat greater in June and the third quarter than in April-May, although
it is in general expected to continue on the moderate side. Instead of
declining, nondeposit sources of funds are projected to show little net change
from their recently prevailing minimal levels; thus, they would no longer be a
negative factor affecting bank credit. Outstanding large CD's are expected
to show little net change from current levels under alternative A, given the
relatively comfortable liquidity position of banks. But with tighter money
market conditions--as under alternatives B and C--a moderate net growth in CD's
might develop as banks attempt to compensate in part for slower growth in other
time and demand deposits. In addition, under tighter reserve conditions, banks
would become less willing purchasers of securities.
Possible directive language
(15) This section presents possible language for the second
paragraph of the directive corresponding to the three alternative policy
courses discussed above. In all three alternatives it is proposed to
delete the reference not only to the now-completed Treasury financing,
but also to uncertainties in foreign exchange markets. Although such
uncertainties do, of course, continue, the likelihood that exchange
market developments may pose significant problems for domestic financial
markets in the near-term now seems considerably less than it did at the
height of the tensions in early May.
(16) Alternative A. The following language is proposed for
possible use if the Committee decides to call for maintenance of prevail-
ing money market conditions, subject to a proviso clause.
"To implement this policy, [DEL: the committee seeks to
moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates over
the months ahead, taking account of the current Treasury
financing, developments in capital markets, and uncertain-
ties in foreign exchange markets.] System open market
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall
be CONDUCTED WITH A VIEW TO [DEL: aimed initially at] maintaining
[DEL: currently] prevailing money market conditions; [DEL: and thereafter
conducted with a view to maintaining bank reserves and money
market conditions consistent with the above cited objectives.]
PROVIDED THAT SOMEWHAT FIRMER CONDITIONS SHALL BE SOUGHT
IF IT APPEARS THAT THE MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES ARE
SIGNIFICANTLY EXCEEDING THE GROWTH PATHS EXPECTED AND
IF CAPITAL MARKETS ARE NOT UNDER EXCESSIVE PRESSURE."
If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the
money market conditions noted for alternative A in paragraph (9) as a
description of "prevailing" conditions, and for purposes of the proviso
clause to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in connec-
tion with alternative A as the "expected" paths. The proviso clause
has been formulated in one-way terms, guarding against significant
excesses but not shortfalls, on the assumption that the Committee would
not want money market conditions to be eased in the coming period if the
aggregates should fall short of the indicated paths. As will be noted,
the proposed proviso retains the sense of the reference to capital
market developments in the present directive (i.e., to take account of
such developments in any firming operations) by indicating that somewhat
firmer conditions are to be sought under the proviso only "if capital
markets are not under excessive pressure."
(17) Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides (a) to formulate its primary instruction
in terms of desired growth rates for the monetary and credit aggregates
(subject to any constraints that might be imposed by developments in
capital markets), and (b) to adopt as targets for the time being the
growth rates discussed earlier in connection with alternative B.
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to
moderate growth in monetary [DEL: and credit] aggregates over the months
ahead, taking account of [DEL: the current Treasury financing,]
developments in capital markets [DEL: , and uncertainities in foreign
exchange markets]. System open market operations until the
next meeting of the Committee shall be [DEL: aimed initially at]
[DEL: maintianing currently prevailing money market conditions,
and thereafter] conducted with a view to maintaining bank
reserves and money market conditions consistent with the
[DEL: above cited] THOSE objectives."
It is proposed to use the phrase "to moderate growth in monetary aggregates
in the months ahead" as a summary description of the objective for the
aggregates, deleting the words "and credit", on the assumption that the
Committee will not view recent rates of growth in the adjusted proxy as
so large as to require moderation.
(18) Alternative C. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides to adopt as targets the growth rates dis-
cussed earlier in connection with alternative C, and to instruct the Desk
to move to the money market conditions noted in paragraph (9) in connec-
tion with that alternative.
"To implement this policy, [DEL: the Committee seeks to
moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregate over
the months ahead, taking account of the current Treasury
financing, developments in capital markets, and uncer-
tainties in foreign exchange markets.] System open market
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall
be [DEL: aimed initially at maintaining currently prevailing
money market conditions, and thereafter] conducted with a
view to MOVING ACTIVELY TO [DEL: maintaining] bank reserves and
money market conditions [DEL: consistent with the above cited
objectives] THAT WILL LEAD TO A SUBSTANTIAL MODERATION OF
GROWTH IN MONETARY AGGREGATES OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD."
This language has been formulated in a manner which the staff believes
would underscore the Committee's determination to slow the growth rates
in the aggregates.
Alternative Weekly Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
M
1 2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
May 26
June 2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
May 26
June 2
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
STRICTY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
NARROW MONEY SUPPLY M1
BROADER MONEY SUPPLY M
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
I I I I
.1 1 -,
F M A
'71
M J
- Actual
Currentiv Pfoected
--- Wk y Path, ndhcated
at FOMC Meeting (5/11/71)
..- Longer Run Path
STRICTLY CONFIENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
F M A
'71
M J
- Actual
-- Cirrntiv Pro4ected
--- Wkly Path, Indicated
at FOMC Meetmng 5/il/7
..- Longer Run 'Path
I I I I I
INTEREST BEARING SOURCES OF BANK FUNDS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
IME AND
TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS
OTHER THAN CD'S
NONOEPOSIT SOURCES
Table 1-A
PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
June 4, 1971
U.S Gov't. Deposits Total Time & Time Deposits other Nondeposit Sources
Savings Deposits than large CD' Large Negotiable CDs of Funds
Perod Pathasof Actuals & Path as of 4 Actuals & 5Path asof Actuals & Path as of 8Actuals & Path as of 1Actuals &
May 11 Current Prol May 11 Current Prol May 11 Current Prol ay 11 Current Prol May 11 Current Prol
Monthly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
1971: Jan.
May
Tune
May
June
June 2 pe
9
Annual Percentage Rates of Change--Quarterly and Monthly
1.4
Weekly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
___________ a ________ _______ aL _______ .a 1
FR 712-K
Rev2/16/71
