Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
October 14, 1971.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) October 14, 1971.
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) In September and early October both the narrowly and broadly
defined money supply aggregates fell considerably short of the paths projected
in the last blue book, as shown in the table on page 2. The outstanding
level of M1, instead of rising from the reduced levels of early September as
expected, dropped further as the month progressed, and for the month as a
whole, declined at a 3.7 per cent annual rate. As a result, M 1 growth over
the third quarter was reduced to 3.0 per cent and for the second and third
quarters combined to about 7.0 per cent. With private demand deposits turning
down and time deposits other than CD's growing less than anticipated, the
expansion of M2 was virtually halted in September and was reduced to a 4.5
per cent annual rate in the third quarter. Growth of the adjusted credit
proxy, on the other hand, remained about on target for both September and the
third quarter, as greater than expected strength in large CD's and nondeposit
sources of funds approximately offset the shortfalls in other deposits.
(2) As incoming data on the money supply aggregates continued to
fall short of path levels, the Desk sought to provide enough reserves to
promote somewhat easier money market conditions, aiming at gradually reducing
the Federal funds rate to around 5-1/4 per cent or a little below. In the
two weeks ending October 6, required reserves were below path, on balance, as
indicated in the table on page 3. At the same time nonborrowed reserves were
Recent Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
M
1  M2  Adjusted Proxy
Sept. 21 Sept. 21 Sept. 21
Path Actual Path Actual Path Actual
Annual Rates of
Growth, per cent
Levels, billions
of $
Week ending
p - Partly projected.
Reserve Aggregates: September 21 Paths vs. Actual
(Seasonally unadjusted, in millions of dollars)
Actual
Minus
Statement September 21 September 21
Week Ending Actual Path Path
September 29
October 6
October 13
above target path, and as a result net borrowed reserves were much reduced,
with banks electing both to hold more excess reserves and to reduce their borrow-
ings from the Federal Reserve. The funds rate initially dropped less than might
have been expected under these conditions--averaging, for example, 5.43 per
cent in the week ending September 29. But by the week ending October 13
the Federal funds rate had softened to about the 5-1/4 per cent target. In
that week, nonborrowed reserves dropped off sharply relative to target,
but the demand for reserves, as indicated by the shortfall in required
reserves relative to target, was also lower than earlier anticipated.
(3) Since the last meeting of the Committee, market interest
rates have experienced significant across-the-board declines as shown in
the table below. In fact, for most series, recently prevailing rate levels
Recent Interest Rates
On Market Securities
Rate Levels (Per cent per annum)
Prevailing at
Series August Last Meeting Most recent
Buyer) 6.03 5.38 4.99
are close to or below the earlier lows reached in the immediate aftermath
of the President's mid-August speech. While there is still uncertainty
surrounding the wage-price control program, the plans recently announced
have so far contributed to strengthening of bond markets. But in addition
bond prices have risen in response to the recent moderate easing of money
market conditions and to the prospects for further easing of money market
conditions inferred from the recent slow growth of the monetary aggregates.
(4) The following table provides a somewhat broader and longer-
range perspective on developments in major financial aggregates for selected
recent periods.
Fourth and Second and
First Qtrs. Second Third Third Qtrs.
combined Quarter Quarter combined
(March over (June over (Sept. over (Sept. over
Sept.) March) June) March)
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term market paper
(Actual $ change in billions)
Large CD's $ 6.1 $ 0.7 $ 3.8 $ 4.6
Bank-related commercial
paper N.S.A. - 2.9 0.0 - 0.1 - 1.0
Nonbank commercial paper - 0.4 - 0.9 0.1 3/ 0.1 4/
loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper and thrift
institutions--which are either end-of-month or last Wednesday of month
figures.
Prospective developments
(5) Three alternatives for Committee consideration are summarized
in the text table below, with the monetary aggregate paths laid out in
more detail in the table on the next page. (Two tables at the end of
text show weekly paths for the monetary aggregates and more detail on
aggregate reserves).
Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Federal funds rate 5--5-3/8 4-1/2--5 3-3/4--4-1/2
Member bank borrowings 300--450 150--300 50--150
Growth in M1 (SAAR)
(6) The money market conditions shown for the three paths vary
from a range around those recently prevailing (Alt. A) to considerably
easier specifications. Overall credit conditions--as typified by behavior
of short- and long-term interest rates--might well ease somewhat between
now and the next Committee meeting even under Alternative A. Credit demands
from businesses and State and local governments in long-term markets appear
to be tapering off, and investors have shown a greater willingness to purchase
longer-term securities. Investors' demands will be influenced, however, by
their evaluation, as the details of Phase II become known, of the extent
to which it seems to promise significant restraint on wage and price pressures.
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly
Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
M1
Alt. A Alt. B
October
November
December
March 231.4
Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
October
November
December
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Total Reserve
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
October
November
December
- 6.0
- 3.5
- 4.0
- 2.0
- 2.5
October
November
December
(7) Short-term credit demands are likely to expand in the fourth
quarter both for seasonal reasons and as business activity improves cycllically.
But we would not expect such demands to be reflected in much, if any, near-
term upward pressure on Treasury bill or private short-term rates. The
peak period of seasonal pressure on short-term markets normally comes after
mid-November. Also, the Treasury's mid-November refunding--to be announced
on October 27--may reduce short-term market pressures by emphasizing debt
lengthening, perhaps partly through incorporation of an advance refunding.
On the other hand, the Treasury could announce in conjunction with the
refunding that it will raise cash around mid-November through a bill issue.
On balance, we would expect the 3-month bill rate to be in a 4-1/4--4-3/4
per cent range between now and the next meeting of the Committee, given the
money market specifications of alternative A. This bill rate range assumes
no substantial bill sales by foreign central banks.
(8) An easing of money market conditions that entailed a Federal
funds rate dropping appreciably below the 5 per cent discount rate for a
sustained period could well lead to significant declines in other market
rates, particularly if expectations of an accompanying discount rate cut
should become pervasive. The lower the Federal funds rate were to drop--
and particularly if it moved into the range of alternative C--the greater
would be the possibility of a large speculative build-up in bond positions,
especially during this forthcoming Treasury financing period. Such a
build-up would carry with it the potential for a sharp subsequent market
reversal or for the need to expand money and credit rapidly to forestall
such a reversal.
(9) The growth rate in M1 is expected to remain quite small
in October and November under all three alternatives considered here.
However, in the course of the ensuing several months money growth is expected
to pick up to a more normal rate in relation to projected GNP expansion.
The exact timing is particularly hard to predict, though, depending as it
does on when the public completes the readjustment of its cash position
following the very large, partly precautionary build-up of cash balances
in the spring and early summer. The timing and extent of this readjustment
is especially uncertain in light of the limited degree to which Phase II
has been spelled out thus far.
(10) Our best present estimate is that under the money market
conditions of alternative A, M1 will grow in the first quarter of next
year at a 4-1/2 per cent annual rate following the 2-1/2 per cent rate
indicated for the fourth quarter. Under the easing alternatives, money
growth would accelerate more as lower interest rates themselves tended to
increase the public's demand for cash. For alternative B, the annual rate of
money growth rises from 3 per cent in the fourth quarter to 6 per cent in the
first quarter,.andfor alternative C from a 4 per cent annual rate to a
(11) The bank credit proxy in the fourth quarter is expected
to grow less rapidly than in the third quarter under any of the alternatives;
under alternative A, the growth rate is projected to drop below 5 per cent.
The slowing in growth reflects mainly a turn-around in the availability of
U.S. Government deposits to finance credit expansion; these deposits are
expected to decline irregularly in the fourth quarter following a sub-
stantial rise in the third. Growth in time deposits other than large
CD's is expected to remain moderate in the fourth quarter, with growth rates
somewhat larger under alternativesB and C as a result of the lower market
interest rates likely to develop.
(12) A fairly sizable expansion in bank CD's is anticipated
between now and year-end, although the growth rate is likely to be less
than the exceptional September pace. Somewhat stronger business loan
demands, assuming GNP growth as projected in the Greenbook, and a will-
ingness to acquire securities in anticipation of declining long-term
market interest rates are expected to encourage banks to issue CD's.
It is likely, though, that banks will lower CD offering rates if short-
term market rates decline, but not so rapidly as to forestall a somewhat
greater increase in CD's in November under alternatives B and C than
under alternative A, with the additional funds used to build up positions
in securities.
Possible directive language
(13) This section presents possible language for the second
paragraph of the directive for the three alternative policy courses
discussed above. All three alternatives include a qualifying instruc-
tion to the Manager to take account of the forthcoming Treasury refund-
ing, the terms of which are expected to be announced on October 27, as
proposed to delete the instruction to take account of developments in
capital markets, given the recent strengthening of those markets.
Finally, in alternatives B and C--in which the primary instruction is
oriented toward the monetary and credit aggregates rather than money
market conditions--the objective is described in terms of growth "over
the months ahead." Restoration of tnat phrase is suggested on the
assumption that, after focusing on the near-term at its September meeting,
the Committee will now wish to return to its more customary time-horizon
for policy.
(14) Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides to call for maintenance of prevailing money
market conditions, subject to a proviso clause.
"To implement this policy, [DEL: the Committee seeks to achieve
moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates, taking account
of developments in capital markets.] System open market operations
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a
view to [DEL: achieving bank reserves and] MAINTAINING ABOUT THE PREVAILING
money market conditions; [DEL: consistent with that objective] PROVIDED
THAT SOMEWHAT EASIER CONDITIONS SHALL BE SOUGHT, TAKING ACOUNT
OF THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCING, IF IT APPEARS THAT THE
MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES ARE FALLING SIGNIFICANTLY BELOW
THE GROWTH PATHS EXPECTED."
If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the
money market conditions noted for alternative A in paragraph (5) as
a description of "prevailing conditions", and for purposes of the pro-
viso clause to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in
connection with alternative A as the "expected" paths. The proviso
clause has been formulated in one-way terms, guarding against signif-
icant shortfalls but not excesses, on the assumption that the Committee
would not want money market conditions to be tightened in the coming
period if M1 and M2 should appear to be expanding on paths above those
projected, which represent comparatively low growth rates for the
fourth quarter.
(15) Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides to seek the growth rates for the aggregates
over the months ahead discussed earlier in connection with alternative B,
including a fourth-quarter rate for M1 of 3 per cent and moving up to a
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to achieve
moderate growth in monetary and credit aggregates [DEL: , taking account
of developments in capital markets] OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD. System
open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee
shall be conducted with a view to achieving bank reserve and
money market conditions consistent with that objective, TAKING
ACCOUNT OF THE FORTHCOMING TREASURY FINANCING."
(16) Alternative C. This language differs from that of
alternative B in indicating that the Committee seeks "actively to
promote" rather than "to achieve" moderate growth in the aggregates
over the months ahead. It is proposed for possible use if the
Committee decides to pursue the more aggressive course contemplated
by the specifications given earlier for alternative C.
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks ACTIVELY
to PROMOTE [DEL: achieve] moderate growth in monetary and credit
aggregates [DEL: , taking account of developments in capital markets]
OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD. System open market operations until
the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a
view to achieving bank reserve and money market conditions
consistent with that objective, TAKING ACCOUNT OF THE FORTH-
COMING TREASURY FINANCING."
Alternative Weekly Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
October 20
27
November 3
10
17
Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B
October 20
27
November 3
10
17
Alt. C
Total Reserve
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. C
Total and Nonborrowed Reserve Paths
(Daily averages in millions of dollars, seasonally adjusted)
Total Reserves Nonborrowed Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
1971
October
November
December
Weekly Paths--Seasonally Adjusted
Total Reserves Nonborrowed Reserves
October 20
27
November 3
10
17
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Weekly Paths--Not Seasonally Adjusted
Total Reserves Nonborrowed Reserves
October 20
27
November 3
10
17
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
October
November
December
- 6.0
- 3.5
8.5
- 4.0
- 2.0
9.5
- 2.5
- 0.5
11.5
- 5.5
- 3.0
8.5
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
NARROW MONEY SUPPLY M1
BROADER MONEY SUPPLY
It,I -
-35% PATH
/1I Ill II I I
I i _____
J A S 0 N D
- Actual -
- Currently Projected
--- Wkly Path, indicated
at FOMC Meeting (9i21/71)
Z- Longer Run Path
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY
TOTAL RESERVES
J A S '0
'71
- Actual
- Currently Projected
--- Wkly Path, ndicated
at FOMC Meeting (9/21/71)
- Longer Run Path
INTEREST BEARING SOURCES OF BANK FUNDS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
TOTAL TIME AND
SAVINGS DEPOSITS
TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS 200
OTHER THAN CD'S
- 30
CO'S- s -
NONOEPOSIT SOURCES
DE S10
Table 1-A
PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
Monthly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
July 3.7
Aug. 6.1
Sept. 6.2 6.3 261.2
Oct. 5.7 ( 4.6) 263.6
July
Aug.
Sept.
I I
Annual Percentage Rates of Change--Quarterly and Monthly
Weekly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
October 15, 1971
( 4.6)
Oct. 6
13 pe
20
NOT pe-Partially estimated.
O : Annual rates of change other than those for the past
Data shown in parenthesis are current projections.
are rounded to the nearest half per cent.
FR 712-K
Rev 2/16/71
Semti-annua lly
1st Half 1970
2nd Half 1970
Quarterly
3rd Qtr. 1970
4th Qtr. 1970
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept. p
