Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR) April 2, 1971
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) The money supply, both narrowly (M1) and broadly (M2 )
defined, grew more rapidly in March than targeted in the last bluebook,
as the table shows. Growth in the adjusted bank credit proxy, however,
fell somewhat short of its target rate. If these March figures are not
significantly revised, M1 will have grown at about an 8 per cent annual
rate over the first quarter and at around a 5-3/4 per cent annual rate
since September.
Recent Rates of Growth in Key Monetary Aggregates
(Per Cent Annual Rates
March I
Actual 1/
Bluebook
Path
of Change)
First Quarter
Bluebook
Actual 1/
(2) Shortly after the last Committee meeting, deposit data
coming available for the first two weeks ending in March suggested that
levels of M1 and M2 were running well above their bluebook target paths.
As a result, annual growth rates for both money supply measures appeared
M
1
Adjusted
Proxy
April 2, 1971
to be exceeding their bluebook targets by more than the 3 to 4 percentage
point deviation allowable under the directive proviso. In light of this
development, the Desk adjusted the sights of its open market operations
slightly, aiming at a Federal funds rate in a 3-1/2 to 3-3/4 per cent
range. Later in the month, the money supply remained above target levels,
sustained in part by a much sharper drop in U.S. Government deposits at
banks than had been projected at the time of the last meeting. The short-
fall in Government deposits occurred chiefly because the Treasury had to
delay planned new financing until Congress raised the Federal debt ceil-
ing. The greater than anticipated drop in Government deposits also
explains most of the shortfall in the bank credit proxy below target,
although the further run-off of Euro-dollar borrowings by major banks was
appreciably larger than assumed.
Recent Paths of the Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
M1 M2 Adjusted
Credit Proxy
Bluebook Bluebook Bluebook
Path Actuals Path Actuals Path Actuals
(3) Even though the Desk has been aiming over most of the inter-
meeting period at a Federal funds rate in the 3-1/2 to 3-3/4 per cent range,
unforeseen technical factors have continued to push the funds rate to or
above the high end of this range, despite very large System repurchase
agreements with dealers. In the tax date week, ending March 17, the
effective funds rate averaged over 3.90 per cent, and in the week ending
March 31, the average slightly exceeded 4.00 per cent. A succession of
large daily shortfalls in Desk estimates of reserve availability from
float and the Treasury balance intensified the money market tightness in
the tax date week. In the latest week, which included the publication
date for bank statements, normal pressures arising from bank desires to
avoid borrowing on the final day of the quarter were strongly accentuated
by heavy dealer demands for financing, including the need to pay for the
new tax bill noted below. In the week ending March 31, net free reserves
amounted to $163 million, as a number of major banks--uncertain about
their statement date positions--ran cumulative reserve surpluses in
excess of what could be carried over. In the tax date week, net borrowed
reserves averaged about $55 million, while in the statement week ending
March 24 they averaged $270 million. Member bank borrowings averaged
about $290 million over the three week period.
(4) Treasury bill yields, while fluctuating rather widely
since the last meeting of the Committee, show net advances for the period
of as much as 35 basis points. Most recently, the 3-month issue has been
quoted around 3.65 per cent. Other short-term interest rates have shown
less variability than Treasury bill rates, but have also tended to back
up somewhat in response to the changes in bill rates. A key factor in
the recent rise of short-term rates has been the heavy volume of Treasury
cash financing in the bill market. These operations involve a $2 billion
addition to the April tax bill (auctioned March 24 for payment March 30
without tax and loan credit); a $2.2 billion bill strip (auctioned March 31
for payment April 6); and $800 million of new 6-month bills (being
offered $200 million at a time in the four weekly auctions starting
March 22). Moreover, with the Federal funds rate tending to rise over
the period, and with no further Federal Reserve cut in the discount rate,
market participants began to ask whether the System might be moving toward
a somewhat tighter money market stance in view of large short-term
capital outflows from the U.S. and resultant uneasiness in foreign exchange
markets and in light of the recently more rapid growth of the monetary
aggregates. This tended to encourage the modest rise in short-term rates
and was also a factor in the recent hesitation in capital markets and the
partial reversal of long-term rate declines.
(5) The table on the next page summarizes seasonally adjusted
annual rates of change in major financial aggregates for selected periods.
Third
Quarter
(Sept. over
June)
Fourth
Quarter
(Dec. over
Sept.)
First
Quarter
(Mar. over
Dec.)
Last
6 months
(Mar. over
Sept.)
Total Reserves
Nonborrowed Reserves
Concepts of Money
M1 (Currency plus demand
deposits 1/)
M2 (M1 plus time deposits
at commercial banks
other than large CD's)
M3 (M2 plus deposits at
thrift institutions)
Bank Credit
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy adj.)
Loans and investments of
commercial banks 2/
Short-term market paper
(actual $ change in billions)
Large CD's
Bank-related commercial
paper N.S.A.
Nonbank commercial paper
Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
Based on month-end figures. Includes loans
February 1971 over December 1970.
February 1971 over September 1970.
sold to affiliates and branches.
N.S.A. Not seasonally adjusted.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on total
loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper and thrift
institutions--which are either end-of-month or last Wednesday of month
figures.
$ 8.5
- 1.2
$ 4.3
- 2.3
$ 1.9
- 0.5
$ 6.2
- 1.5 4/
Prospective developments
(6) The table on the next page shows three alternative monthly
paths for key monetary aggregates through the second quarter. Money
market conditions now estimated to be consistent with these paths are
collection of aggregates.
Federal funds Member Bank Net M1
rate Borrowings Reserves
Alternative A 3-3/4 250-350 +50 to -150 9%
Alternative B 4 -- 4-3/4 400-500 -150 to -300 7%
Alternative C 4-3/4--5-1/2 500-600 -250 to -400 6%
(7) The money market specifications for alternative A include a
Federal funds rate around 3-3/4 per cent, the most recent Desk operating
target. The Federal funds rates assumed to be consistent with the various
monetary aggregate paths are all somewhat higher than specified at the
time of the last FOMC meeting for given second quarter growth rates in
M1 . This is partly because demand for M1 in March was stronger than
anticipated under prevailing money market conditions. The funds rates
have been moved up more for alternatives B and C, since these alternatives
involve a slowing in the M 1 growth rate over the second quarter from the
recent pace and since there is one month less than there was at the time
of the last meeting to affect public demand for cash balances in the
second quarter.
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly
Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
March
April
May
June
March
April
May
June
(8) Under all three alternatives, growth rates in M 2 are
expected to slow from the exceptionally rapid first quarter pace. Growth
in time and savings deposits other than large CD's has slowed somewhat
in recent weeks. It is expected to slow further as a result of spreading
downward adjustment by banks in rates offered on time deposits and as the
public's shift from market to deposit assets tends to lose force. Growth
in the bank credit proxy in the second quarter may also be slower than
in the first. With banks already quite liquid and loan demand expected
to be modest, large CD's are expected to grow relatively little over the
quarter, although banks may seek longer-term CD's more actively if
expectations of rising interest rates become prevalent. Liabilities to
foreign branches are assumed to decline more slowly--apart from an abrupt
adjustment related to financing of the recently announced offshore Treasury
issue--as the cost of holding the relatively small amount of such liabil-
ities remaining becomes less burdensome. After the new Treasury certificate
goes on the books, about half of the banks' remaining Euro-dollar base
would be in the form of high-yielding Ex-Im Bank and Treasury securities.
(9) Assuming a Federal funds rate trading around 3-3/4 per
cent growth in M 1 in April--at around 10 per cent--is expected to be
little changed from the March pace. In large part this growth rate
reflects the high level of demand deposits already reached by the end
of March; if there were no change from that level during April, M 1
would average 8 per cent higher than in March. Even at the higher funds
rates specified under alternatives B and C, the slowing in the growth rate
in April is likely to be modest, with more of an effect later in the
quarter. Weekly paths for the various monetary aggregates are shown
in the table on the next page.
(10) With money market conditions as specified for alterna-
tive A, the 3-month bill rate is likely to be in a 3-1/4--3-3/4 per cent
range between now and the next meeting of the Committee. Reinvestment
demand from the $4-1/4 billion maturing April tax bill, temporary
purchases from the proceeds of a large though diminishing volume of
capital market financing, temporary investment of State and local
tax receipts,and potentially large demands from foreign monetary authorities
may exert downward pressure on bill rates. However, higher Federal funds
rates--such as contemplated under alternatives B and C--would likely
raise bill rates significantly--with the 3-month bill perhaps up to
ranges of 3-3/4--4-1/2 per cent and 4-1/2--5-1/4 per cent, respectively--as
dealers attempt to get out from under sizable bill positions.
(11) The Treasury is expected to announce its mid-May refund-
ing on April 28. Nearly $6 billion of publicly held securities mature.
It is too early to tell whether an advance refunding will be undertaken
and/or whether some new cash will be raised in conjunction with the
refunding. The possibilities of an advance refunding will depend in part
on whether or not money market conditions tighten significantly between
now and then. The Treasury may, however, offer a coupon issue maturing
in more than seven years as a part of the mid-May financing.
Alternative Weekly Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, in billions of dollars)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
April 7
May 5
April 7
May 5
Alt. A
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B
p--Preliminary.
e--Estimated from partial data.
Alt. C
(12) Long-term markets are likely to remain sensitive to money
market conditions as indicators of Federal Reserve policy. Thus, attain-
ment of the conditions specified in alternative A would be likely to re-
inforce other trends in capital markets now expected to contribute to
some further decline in long-term rates, as noted in the Greenbook. On
the other hand, if money market conditions are made firmer, as specified
under alternatives B and C, shifts in market expectations about the course
of short-term rates and monetary policy might tend to offset the under-
lying trends. A rise in long-term rates would seem likely if the Federal
funds rate were to trend convincingly above 4 per cent, with the rise in
long rates largest if money market conditions were to tighten as much as
specified under alternative C.
Possible directive language
(13) Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides to retain the form of the present directive,
involving a primary instruction concerned with money market conditions
and long-term interest rates and a proviso clause relating to the aggre-
"To implement this policy, System open market
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall
be conducted with a view to maintaining prevailing money
market conditions while accommodating any downward move-
ments in long-term rates; provided that money market con-
ditions shall be modified if it appears that the monetary
and credit aggregates are deviating significantly from
the growth paths expected, TAKING ACCOUNT OF THE FORTH-
COMING TREASURY FINANCING."
With respect to the proposed reference to the forthcoming Treasury financ-
ing (in this and the other alternatives) the Treasury's announcement is
expected on April 28, as indicated in paragraph (11) above. If the
Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the money market
conditions noted for alternative A in paragraph (6) as a description of
"prevailing" conditions, and for purposes of the proviso clause, to adopt
the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in connection with alterna-
tive A as the "expected" paths. The Committee could also specify a slow-
er growth path for purposes of the proviso, the effect of which would be to
activate the proviso sooner if the staff projections prove to be correct.
Or, if the Committee so desires, it could use a directive with a structure
similar to alternative A but with the specifications for money market con-
ditions and aggregates given above in connection with alternative B or C.
In such a case, the language preceding the proviso clause might be modified
to call for "attaining firmer money market conditions;".
(14) Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides (a) to formulate its primary instruction in
terms of desired growth rates for the aggregates, and (b) to adopt as
targets the growth rates (including a 7 per cent second-quarter rise in
M1) discussed earlier in connection with alternative B, which would be
somewhat more moderate than the rates experienced recently,
"To implement this policy, THE COMMITTEE SEEKS TO
PROMOTE SOMEWHAT MORE MODERATE GROWTH IN MONETARY AND
CREDIT AGGREGATES OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD, WHILE CONTINUING
TO MEET SOME PART OF RESERVE NEEDS THROUGH PURCHASES OF
COUPON ISSUES IN THE INTEREST OF PROMOTING ACCOMMODATIVE
CONDITIONS IN LONG-TERM CREDIT MARKETS. System open
market operations until the next meeting of the Committee
shall be conducted with a view to maintaining [DEL: prevailing
BANK RESERVES AND money market conditions CONSISTENT WITH
THOSE OBJECTIVES, TAKING ACCOUNT OF THE FORTHCOMING
TREASURY FINANCING [DEL: while accommodating any downward move-
ments in long term rates, provided that money market]
[DEL: conditions shall be modified if it appears that the
monetary and credit aggregates are deviating signifi-
cantly from the growth paths expected]."
Accommodation of declines in long rates is not listed as a specific
Committee objective under this (and the following) alternative because
of the likelihood that such rates would rise if the money market is
firmed to the degree that would appear to be necessary to achieve the
aggregate growth rates specified. However, a reference is suggested to
purchases of coupon issues "in the interest of promoting accommodative
conditions in long-term credit markets" on the assumption that even if
the Committee adopts this alternative it will want to index a concern
with conditions in capital markets.
(15) Alternative . This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides to adopt as targets the growth rates for the
aggregates (including a 6 per cent second quarter rise in M1) discussed
earlier in connection with alternative C.
"To implement this policy, THE COMMITTEE SEEKS TO
PROMOTE MODERATE GROWTH IN MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES
OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD, WHILE CONTINUING TO MEET SOME PART
OF RESERVE NEEDS THROUGH PURCHASES OF COUPON ISSUES IN
THE INTEREST OF PROMOTING ACCOMMODATIVE CONDITIONS IN
LONG-TERM CREDIT MARKETS. System open market operations
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be con-
ducted with a view to maintaining [DEL: prevailing] BANK
RESERVES AND money market conditions CONSISTENT WITH
THOSE OBJECTIVES, TAKING ACCOUNT OF THE FORTHCOMING
TREASURY FINANCING {DEL: while accommodating any downward
movements in long term rates, provided that money
market conditions shall be modified if it appears
that the monetary and credit aggregates are deviating
significantly from the growth paths expected]."
This language differs from alternative B only in the use of the term
"moderate" to describe the lower target growth rates for the aggregates.
That term is suggested because the second-quarter growth rates specified
are within the range the Committee recently has considered moderate in
an absolute sense.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
I I I
TOTAL RESERVES
D
'70
J F M A
71
-- Actual
--- Currently Projected
--- Wkly Path, indicated
at FOMC Meeting3/9/71)
.Z- Longer Run Path
,CHART IA
I I
I I I I I !
Table 1-A
PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
April 2, 1971
Monthly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
6.2
Annual Percentage Rates of Change -Quarterly and Monthly
1.4
S 19.5
Weekly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
(248.1)
I A I S I & a a L
pe - Partially estimated.
are rounded to the nearest half per cent. FR 712-K
Rev2/16/71
Apr. 7
(27.8)
I r I i
