Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
August 20, 1971.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Security markets have responded strongly to the President's
announcement of new domestic and international economic measures. Prices
of both equities and fixed-income securities bounded upward on the basis
of new hopes for stronger economic recovery and more effective control of
inflation and the balance of payments problem; and, related to the latter,
expectations that monetary policy might be less restrictive than anticipated
earlier. Yields on Treasury coupon issues have declined by 50 to 70 basis
points; corporate bond yields have dropped by around 80 basis points; and
municipal yields have fallen by about 50 basis points.
(2) Treasury bill yields have also declined sharply on balance
over the past week, as persistent large Desk purchases for foreign official
accounts--and more recently for System Account--have tended to pre-empt
scarce market supplies of bills at a time when dealers have also been
trying to add to depleted positions. Currently, bill yields are 60 to
bid at 4.65 per cent, compared with 5.15 per cent on August 13 and 5.46
per cent at the time of the last Committee meeting. In private short-term
credit markets, rate declines have thus far been less pronounced--ranging
generally from 1/8 to 1/4 of a percentage point.
August 20, 1971.
(3) The declines in bond yields and Treasury bill rates following
the President's message occurred against a background of relatively taut
money market conditions. In the period immediately following the July 27
Committee meeting, when the outcome of the Treasury's August refinancing
operations was still unknown, the Desk sought to maintain fairly steady money
market conditions as characterized by a Federal funds rate of about 5-1/2 per
the
cent or slightly less. Early in August, it became clear that/refinancing
operations would turn out successfully, and market conditions in general
tended to strengthen. With growth in the monetary aggregates remaining
substantial, the Desk became a more reluctant supplier of reserves, and the
Federal funds rate has since averaged around 5-5/8 per cent, even though
other short-term rates declined following the President's address. In the
face of foreign exchange market uncertainties, banks have generally pursued
rather cautious reserve management policies, particularly on the Friday
preceding the Camp David meetings when member bank borrowings bulged to
nearly $1.7 billion. Borrowings dropped off following the President's speech,
but nevertheless, averaged $1.2 billion in the statement week ending August
million. Over the earlier weeks of the inter-meeting period, member bank
borrowing ranged from $550 to $750 million, and net borrowed reserves from
about $300 to $550 million.
(4) The narrowly defined money supply increased substantially
in July, although at a pace somewhat below the 12 per cent annual rate
indicated in the July 27 path (as shown in the table below). On the basis
of incomplete data the average level in August is about ^as^ projected, but the
annual growth rate is somewhat above path because of the shortfall in July.
Growth in the other monetary aggregates in July and apparently also [in early]
August was reasonably close to expectations, although the credit proxy
edged somewhat above path in both months and M 2 did the same in August.
Recent Paths of the Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Actuals or
Current
Estimates
July 27
Path 1/
Actuals or
Current
Estimate
Adjusted Proxy
July 27 Actuals or
Path 1/ Current
A. Annual Rates of
Growth, per cent
Month
July
August 2/
B. Actual levels,
billions of $
Month
July
August 2/
Week ending
July 28
Aug. 4
Aug. 11
Aug. 18 p
p-- Preliminary.
July 27
Path 1/
(5) The need for reserves in July turned out to be even less than
indicated in the last blue book. Although growth of reservesin August appears
to be somewhat more rapid than the sharp increase projected, July and August
taken together show average reserve growth about on track with staff estimates.
The 17 per cent annual growth rate for total reservesin August reflected
mainly sharply increased Government deposits--arising from central bank
purchases of special Treasury certificates--along with some further growth
of private demand deposits. With average member bank borrowings leveling
off at about the level to which they had risen in July, nonborrowed reserves
appear to be growing in August at about the same rate as total reserves.
Reserve Aggregates
(Daily averages in millions of dollars, seasonally adjusted)
Bluebook
Path 1/
July 31,339
August pe/ 31,693
Annual Rate of
Increase (July
over June) 3.0
Annual Rate of
Increase (August
over July) 13.5
Week ending
August 4 31,634
August 11 31,624
August 18 p/ 31,786
Bluebook
Actual Path 1/
Bluebook
Actual Path 1/ Ac tual
(6) The following table summarizes developments in the major
financial aggregates for selected recent periods:
(March over (June over over
Sept.) March) June
Total Reserves 8.9 6.6 8.8
Nonborrowed Reserves 10.3 5.3 1.7
Concepts of Money
M1 (Currency plus demand
deposits 1/) 6.2 11.3 9.0
M2 (M1 plus time deposits
at commercial banks
other than large CD's) 13.7 12.6 7.7
M3 (M2 plus deposits at
thrift institutions) 14.6 14.7 n.a.
Bank Credit
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy adj.) 9.7 6.5 9.7
Loans and investments of
commercial banks 2/ 10.5 7.4 n.a.
Short-term market paper
(Actual $ change in billions)
Large CD's $ 6.1 $ 0.7 $1.4
Bank-related commercial
paper N.S.A. - 2.9 0.0 n.a.
Nonbank commercial paper - 0.4 - 0.9 n.a.
branches.
N.S.A. Not seasonally adjusted.
on total loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial
paper and thrift institutions--which are either end-of-month or
last Wednesday of month figures.
Prospective developments
(7) The President's new economic program seems likely to have
at given levels of interest rates.
the effect of reducing rates of growth in the aggregates/ First, as the
program strengthens confidence in economic and financial prospects, the
drop-off we had been anticipating earlier from the apparently very high
recent liquidity demands for money should be accentuated. Second, the
program should moderate inflationary expectations and reduce the inflation
premiums built into current levels of interest rates. Third, our projections
indicate that the program will result in slightly smaller increases of
nominal GNP over the third and fourth quarters due to an abrupt slowing in
the rate of price increase,
which implies that the transactions demand for money should also
be somewhat lower than otherwise. Finally, insofar as the program is
viewed by the market as reducing the need for further firming of monetary
policy, expectations of upward pressure on interest rates should be lessened.
(8) While the direction of these effects seems clear, their
magnitude is impossible to quantify with any precision. In addition, in the
very short run these effects may be masked by transitory increases in cash
holdings arising from greater investor activity in domestic securities
markets and from current disturbances in foreign exchange markets. As a
result, the problems of forming judgments regarding appropriate growth rates
for the monetary and credit aggregates and of estimating probable relations
among growth rates in such aggregates and money market conditions are even
more difficult than usual. Under such circumstances one option the Committee
may wish to consider is a neutralist approach in monetary policy for the
time being, in order to rock the financial boat as little as possible until
^the Committee^ can make a fuller evaluation of the responses to the new program.
(9) Two broad policy approaches are described below which pro-
bably define the limits within which most would consider a neutralist policy
to fall. Both, as it happens, might be characterized--in their own contexts--
as policies calling for minimum change. The first specifies the maintenance
of current money market conditions, a course which the staff believes would
imply some weakening after August in the growth rates of the aggregates
from those associated with the policy accepted at the last meeting. The
second would specify maintenance ̂of^ growth in M at the rate consistent with
the directive adopted at the last meeting, a course which in our view would
require an easing of money market conditions. The specifications given
for the second alternative (B) might also be employed with directive
language presented in a later section under the label of alternative C.
As noted in that section, C differs from B with respect to operating
techniques rather than objectives. Specifically, under C the Desk would
place main emphasis on bank reserves rather than on money market conditions
in making operating decisions.
(10) The text table that follows specifies: (1) the growth path
for M1 thought to be consistent with the unchanged Federal funds rate
assumption of alternative A; and (2) the funds rate thought to be needed
to achieve the 6 per cent annual growth rate in M1 (for the third and
fourth quarters combined) that was associated with the directive adopted at
the last meeting 1/ The table on the next page shows the paths for all of the
monetary aggregates under the two alternatives.
Federal funds rate
Member bank borrowings
Growth in M1
(SAAR)
Second half
Alternative A
$700-$900 million
Alternative B
$450-$650 million
(11) Staff projections in the last blue book--slightly modified
to take into account the 5-3/8-5-3/4 per cent range for the funds rate
approved at the July 27 meeting--indicated that M1 would grow at an annual
rate averaging around 7 per cent for August and September and around 4 per
cent for the fourth quarter. Now, however, it seems more likely that a
funds rate at the mid-point of that range would lead to M1 growth at about
a 5.0 per cent rate in September and only a 3.0 per cent rate in the fourth
quarter. To achieve M1 growth rates previously specified for the third
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly
Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
August
September
December
Alt. A Alt. B
M2
Alt. A Alt. B
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
August
September
Adjusted Credit Proxy
August
September
December
Alt. A
Alt. B
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
August
September
and fourth quarters--which averaged a little over 6 per cent--a reduction of
the funds rate target into a 4-1/2--5 per cent range would seem to be needed.
(12) As explained in the last blue book, the expectation that money
supply growth will taper off in the fourth quarter rests essentially on two
propositions: first, that liquidity demands will abate as economic recovery
helps to restore consumer confidence, and second that the lagged effects of
cumulative interest rate advances since last spring will continue to make
the high cost of holding cash more and more evident. Although interest
rates have recently turned down, past experience suggests that, even if
these declines are significantly extended, their effects on money demands
may not provide much offset to the cumulative effects of earlier rate
advances for some time. The smaller growth now expected in money supply
for the fourth quarter compared to the projection in the last blue book is
attributable chiefly to the already-noted possibilities for reduced money
demand stemming from the President's program.
(13) To the extent money demands are cut back--either because
curtailed price advances slow the growth of nominal GNP or because of a
reduction in liquidity demands--the growth rate in M1 needed to support
the expansion in economic activity previously expected is, of course, also
smaller. For this reason, if the staff presumptions about the possible effects
of the President's program are correct, the 8 per cent annual growth rate for
M1 suggested for the last half of the year in the recent chart show would be
more than sufficient to support the rate ^of^ economic expansion envisaged in
that presentation. However, given the current highly uncertain status of
financial and economic relationships, it is difficult to be sure what rate
of growth in M 1 is appropriate or how much confidence one can place in
projections based largely on past experience.
(14) Under alternative A, rates of growth in the other monetary
aggregates are projected to slow significantly after August. The degree of
expected slackening is considerably smaller than for M1, however, reflecting
both the probability of somewhat stronger bank credit demands and increased
success in competing for consumer-type deposits in an environment of lower
market interest rates. Also Government deposits are assumed to remain at
higher than normal levels, as the Treasury hedges against the possibility
of a sudden cash-in of special Treasury certificates by foreign central banks.
Under alternative A banks would probably have to press more actively to obtain
CD funds than under alternative B in order to offset the slower growth in demand
accounts. Under alternative B, growth rates for both M2 and the credit proxy
show little change from the third to fourth quarters on the assumption that
the lower interest rates realized under ^that^ alternative would be associated
with a greater improvement in time deposit performance.
(15) Holding the Federal funds rate close to the recently pre-
vailing rate would be likely to act as a brake on further declines in other
interest rates. In short-term markets, the heavy foreign central bank demands
which have so strongly intensified recent downward pressures on Treasury bill
rates should soon abate. In these circumstances, a reversal in bill rates
can be expected, and that reversal could be particularly sharp if the Federal
funds rate is held unchanged and dealer financing costs therefore remain
relatively high. Such a development would tend to be reflected in interest
rate expectations in longer-term markets as well, where underlying supply-
demand relationships might otherwise maintain downward pressure on rates.
(16) While the market probably has already discounted some re-
duction in the Federal funds rate, sizable downward movement--say, to the
lower end of the range specified in alternative B--would undoubtedly be
interpreted by the market as a significant policy move. This would encourage
further yield declines in both short- and long-term markets. It is possible
that such a move could carry rates to unsustainably low levels, but, on the
other hand, it is still unclear whether the decline in market yields to date
has fully discounted the changed outlook on inflation.
(17) Alternative C, as noted earlier, differs from B only with
respect to the indicated operating techniques. This alternative is provided
in the event the FOMC may wish to move in the direction recommended by the
Committee on the Directive. If the public appetite for demand as against
time deposits proves different from that assumed in the alternative B
specifications, for example, the Committee might nevertheless wish to provide
only the quantity of reserves consistent with those projections. In that
event, the market would have to adjust for any resultant reserve excess or
deficiency. This would imply the possibility of significantly larger
changes in money market conditions, however, ̂ and^ the Committee may wish to set
outside limits of acceptable variation in the Federal funds rate--perhaps
a band of plus or minus one percentage point around the 4-3/4 per cent
midpoint of the funds rate range specified under alternative B.
(18) If the Committee adopts alternative C it may want to instruct
the Manager to make his operating decisions on the basis of available
evidence regarding the relationship between the actual supply of reserves
and the supply considered to be best calculated to promote growth in the
monetary and credit aggregates at the desired rates. In addition, the
Manager might be given leeway to adjust the target paths for total and non-
borrowed reserves to take account of deviations in U.S. Government deposits
and ̂in deposit^ distribution between reserve city and country banks from original pro-
jections. The Manager might also be advised that in making day-to-day
operating decisions he should refer particularly to information on non-
borrowed reserves, but should also take into account data on member bank
borrowings for what they indicate about both the behavior of total reserves
and the degree of tension in the banking system. Similarly, he might be
instructed to use information on the cost of reserves--as reflected primarily
in the Federal funds rate--as a supplementary and early indicator of the
effective supply of reserves in the market.
(19) Shown in the table below are monthly and weekly aggregates
reserve paths consistent with alternative C. The indicated percentage growth
rates for reserves are far above those projected for M1 and M2 chiefly
because of the use of reserves to support sharply increased levels of certain
types of deposits (mainly Government deposits) not included in M1 and M2 .
Total and Nonborrowed Reserve Paths--alternative C
(Daily averages in millions of dollars, seasonally adjusted)
Total Reserves Nonborrowed Reserves
August
September
December
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
August
September
Weekly Paths
Total Reserves Nonborrowed Reserves
Seasonally
Adjusted 1/
Not Seasonally
Adjusted
Seasonally
Adjusted 1/
Not Seasonally
Adjusted
August 25
(20) Total reserves for both August and September would be expected to
increase at around a 17.0 per cent annual rate of growth. In the fourth
quarter the rate of increase would be reduced to about half the August-
September rate. Nonborrowed reserves after declining sharply in July--re-
flecting the over $300 million increase in member bank borrowings--are
expected to track very closely to total reserves on the assumption that
borrowings will show no appreciable further increase on average in August.
In September, however, borrowings are projected to average sharply lower
than in August, so that nonborrowed reserves would have to increase at a very
rapid pace if targeted rates of growth in M1 and M2 are to be achieved. If
the decline in borrowings needed to achieve the alternative B paths is some-
what overstated, the growth in nonborrowed reserve could be commensurately
Possible directive language
(21) This section presents three possible alternatives for the
second paragraph of the directive corresponding to the approaches to policy
and operating techniques outlined in paragraph ( 9) above.
(22) Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible use
if the Committee decides to call for maintaining about the prevailing money
market conditions, subject to a proviso clause.
"To implement this policy, [DEL: taking account of the current
Treasury financing and of developments in capital markets, the
Committee seeks to achieve more moderate growth in monetary
aggregates overt he months ahead.] System open market operations
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a
view to MAINTAINING ABOUT THE PREVAILING [DEL: achieving bank reserve and]
money market conditions; [DEL: consistent with these objectives] PROVIDED
THAT MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS SHALL BE MODIFIED IF IT APPEARS THAT
THE MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES ARE DEVIATING SIGNIFICANTLY
FROM THE GROWTH PATHS EXPECTED."
If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the money
market conditions notedfor alternative A in paragraph (10) as a description
of "prevailing" conditions, and for purposes of the proviso clause to adopt
the growth paths for the monetary and credit aggregates discussed earlier
in connection with alternative A as the "expected" paths. The proviso
clause has been formulated in two-way terms--guarding against shortfalls
as well as excesses relative to the expected paths--on the assumption that
the Committee would not want to see the aggregates grow at less than the
indicated rates, which for the months beyond August are below those associated
with the directive the Committee adopted at its preceding meeting. If the
Committee favors a money market orientation for its primary instruction but
would prefer to see the aggregates grow at rates somewhat above those
projected under unchanged money market conditions, it might modify the
alternative A language to call for operations with a view to "attaining
somewhat less firm money market conditions" and associate with the revised
language the money market and aggregate specifications described above in
connection with alternative B.
(23) Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible use
if the Committee decides (a) to formulate its primary instruction in terms
of desired growth rates in the monetary and credit aggregates, and (b) to
adopt as targets growth rates similar to those associated with the directive
adopted at the previous meeting, as discussed above in connection with
alternative B.
"To implement this policy, [DEL: taking account of the current
Treasury financing and of developments in capital markets,] the
Committee seeks to PROMOTE [DEL: achieve more] moderate growth in mone-
tary AND CREDIT aggregates over the months ahead. System open
market operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall
be conducted with a view to achieving bank reserve and money
market conditions consistent with THAT [DEL: those] objectives."
If the Committee favors an aggregate orientation for its primary instruction
but would prefer to see the aggregates grow at rates somewhat below those
discussed in connection with this alternative, it could adopt the language
of alternative B (or C) but associate with such language the growth rates
discussed in connection with alternative A.
(24) Alternative C. This language is proposed for possible 
use
if the Committee decides to seek the objectives discussed above in connec-
tion with alternative B, but would prefer to have the Desk shift emphasis
from money market conditions to bank reserves in implementing policy.
"To implement this policy, [DEL: taking account of the current
Treasury financing and of developments in capital markets,] the
Committee seeks to PROMOTE [DEL: achieve more] moderate growth in
monetary AND CREDIT aggregates over the months ahead. System
open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee
shall be conducted with a view to achieving bank reserve [DEL: and
money market] conditions consistent with THAT [DEL: these] objectives;
PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT OPERATIONS SHALL BE MODIFIED IF NECESSARY
TO AVOID EXCESSIVE FLUCTUATIONS IN MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS."
A proviso clause designed to guard against excessive fluctuation in money
market conditions is suggested in this alternative for reasons discussed
in paragraph (17). As will be noted, the primary instructions of this
alternative differs from the language of alternative B only in the
deletion of the words "and money market" from the phrase "with a view to
achieving bank reserve and money market conditions."
Alternative Weekly Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
August 25
M 1
Alt. A Alt. B
M2
Alt. A Alt. B
Credit Prosy
Alt. A Alt. B
Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B
STRICTTY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
8/24/71
MONETARY AGGREGATES
MONEY SUPPLY M1 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
I 1 I ! i ;-
MONEY SUPPLY M2
- Actual
- Currently Projected
--- Wkly Path, Indicated
at FOMC Meeting 7/27/71,
7- Longer Run Path
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
8/20/71
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
355
I I IJ J
I 1 a
J A
-- Actual
-- Currently Projected
--- Wkly. Path, Indicated
at FOMC Meeting (7/27/71)
.. Longer Run Path
Table 1-A
PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
August 20, 1971
I eb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Apr.
Nay
june
July
Augp
Tlly 7
34
Billions of Dollars
Annual Percentage Rates of Change-Quarterly and Monthly
27.3
13.5
Weekly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
Annual rates of change other than those for the past are
NOTES: Data shown in parenthesis are current projections.
pe - Partially estimated,
(258.9)
--- ' - *
rounded to the nearest half per cent.
(3.6)
- & ~-.I. - a i - -
FR 712-K
Rev2/16/71
