Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
December 10, 1971
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) The narrowly defined money stock grew a little in November, from
the (upward) revised level for October. Thus, data now available show that
M1 , instead of continuing to edge lower in both October and November as expected,
grew in both months at about a 0.5 per cent annual rate. The October level of
M2 was also revised upward. While M2 ran increasingly above path during
November, its growth rate for the month, because of the higher October base,
Recent Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
M1 M2 Adjusted Proxy
Nov. 16 Nov. 16 Nov. 16
Path Actual Path Actual Path Actual
Annual Rates of
Growth, per cent
Levels, billions
of $
p - Preliminary
r - Money stock measures have been revised, beginning in September 1971, to reflect
(1) the formation of new banking institutions doing primarily an international
business, and (2) certain developments related to the widening of the CHIPS
clearing system for international transactions to include agencies of foreign
banks. These revisions raised the level of the money supply in Sept. and Oct.,
but had virtually no net effect after the first few days of November.
December 10, 1971
was no faster than projected. In the case of the credit proxy--for which there
was no revision in the October base--November growth accelerated to more than
a 12 per cent annual rate, roughly double the rate anticipated. In the two
most recent statement weeks, all three aggregates have widened the spread above
their November 16 paths, although data for the week ending December 8 are, of
course, still partly estimated.
(2) Immediately after the last Committee meeting, money market con-
ditions were generally near the upper end of the range specified as consistent
with the policy directive adopted at the meeting. But as M1 continued to show
virtually no growth, the Account Management gradually lowered its Federal funds
rate target. In the first statement week following the meeting the funds rate
averaged 4.86 per cent; by the most recent week the average was down to 4.59 per
cent; and most recent trading has been around 4-3/8--4-1/2 per cent. A cut in
the discount rate by 1/4 point to 4-1/2 per cent at four Federal Reserve Banks
was announced after the close of the market today.
(3) The funds rate fluctuated fairly widely around this declining
trend partly because shortfalls in projections of other reserve factors some-
times resulted in a smaller availability of reserves than anticipated. This
was particularly so in the statement week prior to Thanksgiving when a $400
million clerical error on vault cash compounded the effects of persistent short-
falls in other factors. Average member bank borrowing also varied rather widely
over the period, running up to $700 million in the statement week ending
December 1, when borrowing aggregating $2.4 billion was carried into the
Thanksgiving holiday period, and dropping to only $60 million in the latest
statement week. Net reserve positions of banks also showed rather sizable changes
ranging from average net borrowed reserves of $344 million to net free reserves
of $54 million in the latest week.
(4) Short-term interest rates have changed little on balance or in
some cases declined somewhat since the last Committee meeting. Treasury bill
rates fluctuated widely during the period, rising as much as 30 basis points
in the latter part of November. This back-up was concentrated in
the Thanksgiving week when successive weekly, monthly, and tax bill auctions
added substantially to bill market supplies at a time when money market con-
ditions were temporarily tight. Since then--with foreign central bank buying
strong--bill yields have dropped sharply, moving the rate on the 3-month maturity
back to the 4.10 per cent level prevailing at the time of the last meeting.
(5) Bond yields also advanced--from 10 to 30 basis points--in the
latter part of November. This weakness was attributable essentially to the
congested state of dealer inventories, following the large November Treasury
refinancing and sizable continued capital market borrowing by corporations and
particularly State and local governments. In the face of deepening market un-
certainties regarding the likely consequence of the apparent stalemate in
international monetary negotiations, dealers became restive about their large
positions and pressed to reduce their exposure. In the Government market this
process was facilitated by System purchases of about $850 million coupon issues.
Thereafter, reports of progress in international negotiations, together with
reduced dealer inventories, led to some rate declines.
(6) As shown in the table on page'5,the supply of nonborrowed
reserves dropped well below the expected path during the week of November 24.
Even though required reserves were also below path to meet their needs banks
reduced excess reserves and substantially increased borrowings from the Federal
Reserve. On the other hand, in the two most recent statement weeks, nonborrowed
reserves were above path. They were considerably above path in the week ending
December 8, permitting banks to reduce borrowings substantially even though
required reserves were also above path.
(7) The text table on page 6 shows changes in major financial
aggregates for selected recent periods.
Reserve Aggregates: November 16 Paths vs. Actual
(Seasonally unadjusted, in millions of dollars)
Actual less
Nov. 16 November 16
Actual Path Path
November 24
Total Reserves 30,759 30,935 (30,902) -176 (-143)
Nonborrowed Reserves 30,220 30,635 (30,602) -415 (-382)
Required Reserves 30,564 30,685 (30,652) -121 (- 88)
Excess 195 250 - 55
Borrowing 539 300 +239
December 1
Total Reserves 31,239 30,793 (30,776) +446 (+463)
Nonborrowed Reserves 30,538 30,493 (30,476) + 45 (+ 62)
Required Reserves 30,681 30,543 (30,526) +138 (+155)
Excess 558 250 +308
Borrowing 701 300 +401
December 8
Fourth and
First Qtrs.
combined
(March over
Sept.)
Second
Quarter
(June over
March )
Third
Quarter
(Sept. over
June )
Latest 2
Months
(Nov. over
Sept.)
Total Reserves
Nonborrowed Reserves
Concepts of Money
M1 (Currency plus demand
deposits 1/)
M2 (M1 plus time deposits
at commercial banks
other than large CD's)
M3 (M2 plus deposits at
thrift institutions)
Bank Credit
Total member bank deposits
(Bank Credit proxy adj.)
Loans and investments of
Commercial banks 2/
Short-term market paper
(Actual $ change in billions)
Large CD's
Nonbank commercial paper
Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
Based on month-end figures. Includes loans
branches.
sold to affiliates and
Not Seasonally Adjusted.
Not available.
All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data
on total loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial
paper, and thrift institutions--which are either end-of-month or
last Wednesday of month figures.
$ 6.8
- 0.4
$ 1.3
$ 2.3
- 0.1
N.S.A.
N. A.
NOTE:
$ 0.6
n. a.
Prospective developments
(8) Current international financial negotiations make forecasts
of interest rates and monetary aggregates, and their interrelationships,
much more uncertain than usual. There is a potential for very large reflows
of funds if participants come to believe that little further is to be gained
from keeping funds abroad. However, the timing and nature of any international
agreement, and the strength and speed of market reaction, are very conjectural.
Estimates of the reaction range from a reflow of funds immediately following
a settlement in the order of $10 billion (out of a potential of $15 billion
or more) to a gradual reflow over a period of months.
(9) Because of these major uncertainties as to the timing, magnitude,
and effect of reflows of funds from abroad, we have not built a specific
pattern of reflows related to an international settlement into our projected
relationships of monetary aggregates and interest rates. When they occur,
such reflows are likely to have mainly transitory effects raising both short-
term interest rates, particularly bill rates, and the money supply. Under
current circumstances bill rates could rise as much as 50 basis points if there
were a very sizable reflow within a relatively short period, but we would
expect most of such a rate increase to be worked off over time as the
repatriated funds percolate through financial markets either as loan repayments
or as investments. Other short-term rates might decline some as a result of
the reflows, and the spread of other rates over bill rates would be likely to
narrow. With respect to money supply, the amount by which it may be augmented
by the return flow is most difficult to foretell, depending as it does on the
speed with which those who repatriate funds are willing or able to shift into
domestic interest earning assets or to repay debt. We would not expect any
very significant effect, even transitorily, on the domestic money supply unless
the return flow were large and concentrated.
(10) Apart from return flows related to an international settlement,
there are questions with respect to the normal year-end pull-back of funds
from abroad to comply with OFDI regulations. These regulations have been amended
this year to give companies the choice of complying by either the end of
January or the end of February as well as the end of December. We have assumed
that this will lower the January average level of M1 by the equivalent of about
equivalent increase in the growth rate from January to February. (There may,
of course, be a similar problem at the end of January and the end of February,
but we will attempt to make allowance for it after end-of-year experience.)
(11) Against this background, three alternative sets of
specifications are summarized below. (It might be noted that the growth rates
would be considered as mid-points of ranges--about 1-1/2 percentage points on
either side for monthly changes.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Fed. funds rate 4-1/2--5-1/8 4--4-5/8 3-1/2--4-1/8
Member bank borrowings 150--400 75--200 25--100
Growth in (SAAR):
M1 M2 M1 M2 M1 M2
The more detailed monthly and quarterly paths for all the monetary aggregates
are shown in the table on the next page (with weekly figures and more detail
on aggregate reserves shown in the tables on pp.16 and 17).
(12) With M1 strengthening in recent weeks relative to earlier
expectations, it now appears as if the December average level of the money
supply will be about 4-1/2 per cent above November, given the money market
conditions of either A or B. Money growth would be slightly less under A
than B, but after rounding the difference in rates of growth and levels does
not show up until January. Under alternative C the growth rate in December
might be about 5 per cent.
(13) The growth rate of M1 is expected to slow in January, except
under alternative C. The assumption of a smaller than usual OFDI-related
reflow at year-end temporarily depresses the level of M1 in January and its
rate of growth relative to December. If the reflow turns out to be larger
than assumed M1 growth would, of course, be greater in January. Over the
longer-run, as any temporary distortions of year-end seasonal patterns are
worked out, we would expect M 1 for the first quarter of next year to grow at
a 6 per cent annual rate under A, a 7 per cent rate under B, and an 8 per cent
rate under C. It should be remembered that we have not worked into the monthly
or weekly figures any allowance for reflows arising from an international
(14) If the Committee were to retain a 6 per cent first quarter
rate of growth in M1 as one of its targets, it is the staff's best judgment
at this point that associated money market conditions would be tighter than
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly
Paths of Key-Monetary Aggregates
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
December
January
February
March
Year 1971
Adjusted Credit Proxy Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
December
January
February
March
Alt. A
- 4.0
10.0
- 2.5
11.5
- 1.0
12.5
- 9.5
7.0
- 8.0
8.5
those prevailing most recently, with the funds rate, for example, moving up in
a 4-1/2--5-1/8 per cent range. The funds rate is now below the mid-point of
the range the staff earlier thought consistent with a 6 per cent first quarter
growth rate. Moreover, transactions demands in the period ahead now appear
likely to be somewhat stronger than earlier assumed. With a 7 per cent first
quarter growth rate, the funds rate may fluctuate in a 4--4-5/8 per cent range,
while at an 8 per cent growth rate we would expect the funds rate to drop
steadily to an average level somewhat below 4 per cent.
(15) The Treasury bill market between now and the next meeting of
the Committee might have to absorb as much as $2-1/2 billion of new bills issued
for cash if the Treasury decides to cushion itself against the risk of
liquidation of special issues by foreign central banks. At the same time
foreign demands for bills, which recently have been very heavy, may be reduced
somewhat. While these developments would tend to raise bill rates, the
effect could be offset by the usual seasonal abatement of short-term market
pressures after mid-December and any expectational effects from today's
discount rate action. Thus, if day-to-day money market conditions are maintained
around those most recently prevailing, the 3-month bill rate may be in a 3-7/8--
and up under alternative A.
(16) In long-term credit markets, fundamental forces working to hold
interest rates down appear strongest in the corporate and mortgage markets.
The corporate calendar appears to be moderating, and in the mortgage market
credit availability appears ample relative to demand. Even under alternative A,
interest rates in these two markets might not show any significant rise. The
rather large forward calendar of municipal issues and still sizable dealer
holdings of U.S. Government coupon issues make these two markets particularly
sensitive to any reversal of the easing trend in the money market. On the other
hand, if this easing trend were to be extended further, all bond markets
would certainly strengthen.
(17) The recent sizable expansion in the bank credit proxy is not
expected to continue into the early months of next year. The rate of growth
in time deposits other than large CD's is expected to decelerate from its
rapid recent pace, though remaining--under any of the three alternatives--above
the relatively low third quarter pace. And, with business loan demands expected
to be modest at best, banks are not likely to be very aggressive bidders for
CD's. CD interest rates are likely to decline in line with any over-all
reduction in the short-term rate structure, and it is possible that banks
may also, under such circumstances, begin to reduce interest rates on consumer-
type time and savings deposits. Moreover, U.S. Government deposits available
to banks to finance loans and investments are estimated to drop sharply on
balance from December to February.
Possible directive language
(18) Alternative A. If the Committee wishes to formulate the
directive in terms of money market conditions subject to a proviso clause,
for purposes of the proviso clause it could employ the growth rates of
either alternative A or B--e.g., 6 or 7 per cent, respectively, for M1
in the first quarter. If the Committee favors the alternative A growth
rates, it might adopt the following language.
"To implement this policy, [DEL: the Committee seeks to promote
somewhat greater growth in monetary and credit aggregates over
the months ahead.] System open market operations until the next
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to
[DEL: achieving bank reserve and] MAINTAINING ABOUT THE money market
conditions THAT HAVE PREVAILED ON AVERAGE SINCE THE PRECEDING
MEETING; [DEL: consistent with that objective] PROVIDED THAT OPERATIONS
SHALL BE MODIFIED IF IT APPEARS THAT THE MONETARY AND CREDIT
AGGREGATES ARE DEVIATING SIGNIFICANTLY FROM THE GROWTH PATHS
The primary instruction calls for maintaining "about the money market con-
ditions that have prevailed on average since the preceding meeting" because
the mid-points of the ranges for money market conditions noted in paragraph
(11) for the alternative A growth rates are closer to the average level of
money market conditions since the November 16 meeting than they are to
easier conditions recently prevailing. If the Committee would prefer to
have the aggregates grow along the alternative B paths, it might modify
the above language to call for "maintaining money market conditions consis-
tent with the recent reduction in Federal Reserve Bank discount rates".
(19) Alternative B. The following language is proposed for
possible use if the Committee decides to continue to formulate the primary
instruction in terms of aggregates, and to seek the growth rates over the
months ahead discussed earlier in connection with alternative B-including
first-quarter rates of 7 and 8-1/2 per cent for M1 and M2, respectively. This
s the same language as that in the directive adopted at the November
meeting except that the reference to "credit" aggregates is deleted. The
deletion is proposed because the credit proxy is not expected to grow more
rapidly on balance in the months ahead than in the fourth quarter.
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to promote
somewhat greater growth in monetary [DEL: and credit] aggregates over
the months ahead. System open market operations until the next
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to achiev-
ing bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with that
If the Committe favors an aggregate-oriented directive but would like to
have the aggregates grow at the alternative A rates, it might modify the
above language to indicate that it "seeks to promote moderate growth in
monetary and credit aggregates over the months ahead."
(20) Alternative C. This language differs from that of alterna-
tive B only in the omission of the word "somewhat" before "greater growth
in monetary aggregates." It is proposed for possible use if the Committee
decides to pursue the more aggressive easing course contemplated by the
specifications given earlier for alternative C.
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to promote
[DEL: somewhat] greater growth in monetary [DEL: and credit] aggregates over
the months ahead. System open market operations until the next
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to
achieving bank reserve and money market conditions consistent
with that objective."
Alternative Weekly Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
December 15
22
29
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
December 15
22
29
Total and Nonborrowed Reserve Paths
(Daily average in millions of dollars, seasonally adjusted)
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Nonborrowed Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
December
January
February
March
- 1.0
4.5
Weekly Paths -- Seasonally Adjusted
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Nonborrowed Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
December 15
22
29
January 5
12
19
Weekly Paths -- Not Seasonally Adjusted
December 15
22
29
January 5
12
19
Alt. A
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
- 9.5
7.0
- 1.0
5.5
- 8.0
8.5
- 0.5
7.0
- 8.5
4.5
- 7.0
6.0
- 5.5
7.5
Table 1-A
PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
December 10, 1971
U.S. Gov't. Deposits Total Time & Time Deposits other Nondeposit SourcesSavings Deposits than large CD's Large Negotiable CD's of Funds
Period 1 Path as of 2 Actuals & 3 Path as of 4 Actuals & 5 Path as of 6 Actuals & 7 Path as of 8 Actuals & Path as of 10 Actuals &
Nov. 16 Current Proj. Nov. 16 Current Proj. Nov. 16 Current Proj. Nov. 16 Current Proj. Nov. 16 Current Proj.
Monthly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
Annual Percentage Rates of Change--Quarterly and Monthly
(235.5)
32.2
33.0
Sept.
Oct.
Dec. 1
8 pe
Weekly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
Data shown in parenthesis are current projections.
FR 712-K
Rev 2/16/71are rounded to the nearest half percent.
(Dollar amounts
