Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
March 5, 1971
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Following shortfalls in January, the key monetary aggregates
in February all appear to have exceeded their targeted growth paths, although
deposit data in the week ending March 3 are still partly estimated. The
change from January to February was particularly dramatic in the narrowly
defined money supply which is now estimated to have grown in February at
an annual rate of 14 per cent. As a result, over the longer period since
September, M1 now appears to have grown at slightly more than a 5 per cent
annual rate, with the February acceleration recapturing much of the fourth
quarter and January shortfall.
Recent Rates of Growth in Key Monetary Aggregates
(Per cent Annual Rates of Change)
January February
Bluebook Bluebook Latest
Path Actual Path Fstim;tes
(2) Following the February 9 Committee meeting, a substantial downward
revision for the week ending February 3 and preliminary estimates for the week
ended February 10 and 17 indicated that both narrow and broad measures of the
money supply were averaging well below the Blue Book path adopted by the
Committee, But data received in the past two weeks indicated that deposit
measures were climbing back to well above path--as shown in the detailed table
below--with the bulk of the pick-up appearing in the revised data for the
March 5, 1971.
statement week ending February 17. Since not all of the bulge in that holiday
week has been reversed in subsequent weeks, it would appear that some of the
stronger money supply performance recently has reflected the February accel-
eration of business loan activity at banks and other demands associated with
the first quarter strengthening of economic activity.
Recent Paths of the Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Adjusted
M1  M2  Credit Proxy
Bluebook Bluebook Bluebook
Paths Actual Paths Actuals Paths Actuals
(3) In the week ending February 17, the Federal funds rate averaged
a relatively high 4.14 per cent, as banks and the System both tended to under-
estimate reserve needs over the novel four day Lincoln-Washington's Birthday
weekend. As the next statement week began, with available deposit data suggesting
that the monetary aggregates had fallen well below path, the Desk lowered the
Federal funds target to 3-1/2 per cent as specified. Thereafter, although
fluctuating rather widely from day-to-day, the funds rate averaged just under
the net reserve position of banks has been only slightly negative on average, and
average borrowings have been minimal (after allowance for special emergency
(4) The further reduction of the Federal funds rate was accompanied
by sizable additional declines in other short-term market rates. For example,
the 3-month Treasury bill was most recently quoted at 3.34 per cent, down 30
basis points from its level at the time of the last Committee meeting, and over
the same period most other short-term rates have declined by 30 to 50 basis
points. Downward pressures on bill rates have also strongly reflected heavy
sustained volume of foreign official purchases. Partly in an effort to
minimize downward pressures on bill rates, the Treasury offered a $1.2 billion
"strip" of 3- to 6-month bills on February 18, and the Desk has met some of the
foreign demand through direct bill sales from System account. Also, in its
own reserve supplying operations, the Desk has minimized outright acquisitions
of bills in the market, placing greater stress on repurchase agreements with
dealers and on purchases of coupon issues.
(5) In contrast with the recent declines of short-term rates,
yields in corporate and municipal security markets have turned sharply upward
since the last meeting of the Committee. Rate advances have been largest in
the corporate bond market, where changed interest rate expectations have been
accompanied by a very large volume of offerings and a rapid build-up in
the new issue calendar. In the market for Treasury securities--where System
purchases of coupon issues have totaled nearly $620 million since the last
meeting--yields on intermediate maturities have declined significantly, while
those on longer maturities have increased somewhat.
(6) The table on the next page summarizes seasonally adjusted
annual rates of change in major financial aggregates for selected periods.
Third
Quarter
(Sept. over
June)
Fourth
Quarter
(Dec. over
Sept. )
Last 2 months
(Feb. over
Last 5 months
(Feb. over
Total Reserves
Nonborrowed Reserves
Concepts of Money
M1 (Currency plus demand
deposits 1/)
M2 (M1 plus time deposits
at commercial banks
other than large
CD's)
M3 (M2 plus deposits at
thrift institutions)
Bank Credit
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy adj.)
Loans and investments of
commercial banks 2/
Short-term market paper
(actual $ change)
Large CD's
Bank-related commercial
paper N.S.A.
Nonbank commercial paper
$ 8.5
- 3.0
$ 4.3
$ 1.4
$ 5.7
N.S.A.--Not seasonally adjusted.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on
total loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper and
thrift institutions--which are either end-of-month or last Wednesday
of month figures.
Prospective developments
(7) Assuming that existing money market conditions--typified by
a Federal funds rate around 3-1/2 per cent--are maintained, the staff would
now expect the narrow money supply (M1) to grow at about a 6 per cent annual
rate in March and a 7 per cent rate over the first quarter. Although such a
first quarter growth rate would be more rapid than the 6 per cent path for
M1 adopted at the previous FOMC meeting, it would, if realized, just about
make up for shortfalls relative to Committee targets earlier in the winter.
For the fourth and first quarters combined, the growth rate of M 1 would be at
about a 5-1/4 per cent annual rate. The table below shows the path of M 1--and
also M2 --now expected to be consistent with a 3-1/2 per cent Federal funds
rate, compared with the path adopted at the February 9 meeting (seasonally
adjusted figures in $ bill.):
M1 M2
Hat a of Current Path as ot Current
Feb. 9 Path Feb. 9 Path
First quarter growth rate
(March over December) 6% 7% 15-1/2% 16%
(8) Growth in other time and savings deposits has been about as
rapid as expected, while bank issuance of large negotiable CD's have been
running ahead of expectations. Offering rates on CD's have been dropping,
though in recent weeks not quite as rapidly as declines in Treasury bill rates.
The expansion in large CD's since the first of the year makes it likely that
bank credit may grow slightly more rapidly than earlier expected in the first
quarter. The following table shows the current estimate for the adjusted
credit proxy and total reserves, assuming a 3-1/2 per cent Federal funds rate,
as compared with the February 9 paths (seasonally adjusted figures in $ bill.).
Adj. Credit Proxy Total Reserves
Path as of Current Path as of Current
Feb. 9 Path Feb. 9 Path
First quarter growth rate
(March over December) 10-1/2% 12% 11% 13-1/2%
(9) Attainment cf a 6 per cen growth rate for M1 over the first
quarter would require growth to fall of to 3 per cent in March. If the staff
projections of money demand are correct, this would seem to necessitate a
marked tightening of the money market in the last three weeks of March. Since
the Committee expressed itself as willing to accept an overshoot for M1 in the
first quarter, the paths presented in the following paragraphs for FOMC con-
sideration do not include a 3 per cent M1 growth target for March. Of
course, the growth rate in M1 could well diverge from current
anticipations either as a result of revisions of bank deposit data or
because the behavior of banks and the public over March works out quite
differently from staff expectations. 1/
(10) The table on the next page shows three alternative monthly
paths extending throughout the second quarter for the major monetary aggregates.
Alternative A assumes a Federal funds rate maintained at 3-1/2 per cent--that
is, it assumes current money market conditions. Thus, it is an extension
through June of the current paths described in the preceding paragraphs.
While it is particularly difficult at this juncture to judge the implications
for succeeding months of the recent sharp rise in the monetary aggregates, it
is our best current judgment that the extension of these paths would lead to
annual rates of growth in the second quarter of 9 per cent for M1, 14-1/2 per
cent for M2, 11 per cent for the adjusted credit proxy, and 10 per cent for
total reserves. The other two sets of paths presented are designed to indicate
alternatives for the Committee that call for slower growth rates in the
aggregates than now seem probable under unchanged money market conditions.
Alternative B, for instance, shows a 7 per cent annual rate of growth for M1
over the second quarter and alternative C a 6 per cent rate of increase. A
fourth alternative designed to focus on an objective of achieving somewhat
easier over-all credit market conditions is presented in paragraphs (18) and
(11) Under all of the alternatives growth in money supply--whether
M1 or M2--would be expected to slow over coming months from the unusually rapid
February rates of increase. However, as indicated in the preceding paragraph,
under alternative A, M1 would be expected to grow more rapidly in the second
quarter than in the first. With short-term interest rates persisting around
current levels, the willingness of the public to hold cash seems likely to
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally Adjusted, Billions of Dollars)
M1 M2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
March
April
May
June
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
March
April
May
June
increase, given transactions needs associated with staff GNP projections,
an opportunity cost of holding money lower on average in the second quarter
than in the first, and the probablity that expectations of rising interest
rates (and falling capital values) would become more pervasive in an expanding
economic situation. Growth in M2 would be expected to moderate from the first
quarter pace, even under alternative A, however, as the initial asset ad-
justment by the public to the sharp drop of late 1970 and early 1971 in market
rates relative to time deposit offering rates runs it course.
(12) The demand for bank credit is expected to be fairly strong
over the coming months under any of the alternatives. Growth in outstanding
business loans at banks may not be as rapid as in February, but it is likely to
be fairly sizable, sustained as the second quarter progresses by some switching
of borrowers from relatively high cost capital market financing to relatively
low cost bank loans. In consequence, banks may not be as active in the market
for State and local government securities as they had been in the latter part
of 1970 and early 1971. They are likely to continue seeking CD funds on a
modest scale under prevailing market conditions and to reduce Euro-dollar
borrowings at about the recent pace. If money market conditions tighten--as
may be required under alternatives B and C--expectations of rising short-
term interest rates will give banks an added incentive to issue CD's in the
near-term, especially longer-term CD's, offsetting in part expected slower growth
under these conditions in demand and other time deposits.
(13) An effort to move onto growth paths for aggregates in the
second quarter slower than shown for alternative A--given staff assumptions
as to the strength of economic recovery and attendent credit demands--seems
likely to require a rise in the Federal funds rate from current levels during
the next four weeks. The money market conditions now estimated to be con-
sistent with alternative A through C are shown in the table below, using the
second quarter annual rate of growth in M1 as a convenient index of the col-
lection of monetary aggregates. Difference in money market conditions of these
dimensions would be expected to have only relatively minor effects on growth
rates for the aggregates in March.
Federal Funds Member Bank Net M1
Rate Borrowings Reserves
Alternative A 3-1/2 250-350 + 50 to -150 9%
Alternative B 3-3/4--4-1/4 400-500 -150 to -300 7%
Alternative C 4-1/4--4-3/4 500-600 -250 to -400 6%
(14) Weekly paths for key monetary aggregates are shown in the
table on the next page.
(15) Treasury financing plans will be an influence on interest rates
over the next few weeks. A total of around $5 billion of new securities could
be announced between now and the next meeting of the Committee, but the exact
timing of announcements is quite uncertain. depending in part on the progress
of debt ceiling legislation. The cash is likely to be raised through bills
and also possibly a short note, with the latter announced, if at all, in late
March or early April.
(16) This additional supply in the short-term area may be no
more than a modest offset to downward pressure on short rates from maturing
Alternative Weekly Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, in billions of dollars)
Alt. A Alt. B
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. C
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
p -- Preliminary.
e -- Estimated from partial data.
tax bills, from continued foreign demand for bills, from reinvestment of the
proceeds of the extremely large volume of long-term corporate bond offerings,
and from paydowns of Federal agency debt. Thus, it is possible that bill
rates will decline somewhat further, though maintenance of a Federal funds
rate around 3-1/2 per cent would dampen further rate declines. If the Federal
funds rate is moved up, bill rates are likely to rise. How rapidly the bill
rate moves up would depend for the most part on the attitudes of market
participants--how soon they come to believe a rise in the funds rate would
stick and whether they come to think that it would presage a further rise.
Under alternative B money market specifications, a 3-month bill rate in a
(17) If short-term rates do not rise over the next few weeks, the
staff would expect long-term market yields to work down, given the present
wide spread of long over short rates, once headway is made in absorbing the
exceptionally large volume of corporate bonds in the immediate offing. In the
corporate and municipal bond market the recent rise in yields has probably
reflected some discounting of potential future rate increases. Thus, a rise in
short-rates of about the magnitude indicated for alternative B might not be
accompanied by any appreciable rise in long rates over the second quarter as a
whole, although an initial market reaction would be likely; money market
tightening of the degree contemplated under alternative C might well bring a
more lasting long-term rate advance.
(18) It is recognized that the Committee could regard the second
quarter projections of the aggregatesasproblematical at this juncture and could
be more concerned over the policy implications of the recent firming that has
taken place in bond markets. If in these circumstances the Committee would
wish to promote somewhat easier over-all credit conditions, including near-
term declines in long-term rates, it could consider a policy alternative--
such as Alternative D--that would call for some further easing of money
market conditions. A Federal funds rate consistently around 3--3-1/4 per
cent would encourage lower dealer loan rates and would lead to a further drop
in short-term market rates and perhaps the prime rate. The 3-month bill rate
might fluctuate around 3 per cent. Such developments would tend in time to
bring long-term rates down, as a widened spread of long- over short-term rates
provided greater encouragement to private borrowers to take advantage of the
lower short-term financing rates. Indications of a continuing easing trend
in monetary policy would also make dealers more willing holders of, and under-
writers more aggressive bidders for, long-term debt.
(19) As nearly as can be judged, the expected effect on
monetary aggregates of a policy consistent with the money market specif-
ications of alternative D would be as shown in the table below.
Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates--
Monthly and Quarterly (alternative D)
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Concepts of Money
M1 M 2
March
April
May
June
Adj. Credit
Proxy
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
March
April
May
June
Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates--
Weekly (Alternative D)
February 2 4 p
p--Preliminary.
e--Estimated from partial data.
Total
Reserves
Possible directive language
(20) This section presents possible language for the second
paragraph of the directive for the four alternative policy courses dis-
cussed above.
(21) Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides to retain the structure of the present
directive--involving a primary instruction concerned with money market
conditions and long-term rates, and a proviso clause relating to the
"To implement this policy, System open market operations
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted
with a view to maintaining prevailing money market conditions
while accommodating ANY [DEL: additional] downward movements in long-
term rates; provided that money market conditions shall [DEL: promptly]
be MODIFIED [DEL: eased somewhat further] if it appears that the
monetary AND CREDIT aggregates are DEVIATING SIGNIFICANTLY
FROM [DEL: falling short of] the growth paths [DEL: desired] EXPECTED."
As will be noted, the primary instruction in alternative A is identical
to that of the present directive, except that it is proposed--in view of
the recent increases in long-term rates--to call for accommodating "any"
rather than "additional" downward movements in such rates. Certain
changes are proposed in the proviso clause. These include: (a) making
it a two-way clause, on the assumption that, in light of the recent
stronger performance of the aggregates, the Committee would wish the
Desk to react to sizable deviations in either direction; and (b) referring
to "credit" as well as "monetary" aggregates, in order to explicitly include
the bank credit proxy among the aggregates to be considered by the Manager.
If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the money
market conditions set forth in the first line of the table in paragraph (13)
above as a description of "prevailing" conditions, and for purposes of the
proviso clause, to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in
connection with alternative A as the "expected" paths.
(22) Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides (a) to formulate its primary instruction in
terms of desired growth rates for the aggregates, and (b) to adopt as targets
the growth rates (including a 7 per cent second-quarter rise in M1) dis-
cussed earlier in connection with alternative B.
"To implement this policy, THE COMMITTEE SEEKS TO PROMOTE
SUSTAINED GROWTH IN MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES OVER THE
MONTHS AHEAD. System open market operations until the next
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to
maintaining [DEL: prevailing] BANK RESERVES AND money market condi-
tions CONSISTENT WITH THAT OBJECTIVE [DEL: while accommodating
additional downward movements in long-term rates, provided
that money market conditions shall promptly be eased somewhat
further if it appears that the monetary aggregates are falling
short of the growth path desired]."
The phrase "sustained growth" is suggested as a description of the Committee's
objective for the aggregates because the second-quarter growth rate for
M1 shown for this alternative is the same as the rate now expected for
the first quarter.
(23) Alternative C. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides to adopt as targets the growth rates for the
aggregates (including a 6 per cent second-quarter rise in M ) discussed
earlier in connection with alternative C.
"To implement this policy, THE COMMITTEE SEEKS TO PROMOTE
MODERATE GROWTH IN MONETARY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES OVER THE
MONTHS AHEAD. System open market operations until the next
meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with a view to
maintaining [DEL: prevailing] BANK RESERVES AND money market condi-
tions CONSISTENT WITH THAT OBJECTIVE [DEL: while accommodating
additional downard movements in long-term rates, provided
that money market conditions shall promptly be eased somewhat
further if it appears that the monetary aggregates are falling
short of the growth path desired]."
This language differs from alternative B only in that the word "moderate"
rather than "sustained" is suggested to describe the lower target growth
rates for the aggregates.
(24) Alternative D. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides to place primary emphasis on achieving more
accommodative credit market conditions at this time.
"To implement this policy, System open market operations
until the next meeting of the Committee shall be conducted with
a view to [DEL: maintaining prevailing money market] ATTAINING SOMEWHAT
EASIER conditions [DEL: while accommodating additional downward
movements in long-term rates] IN MONEY AND CREDIT MARKETS;
provided that [DEL: money market conditions shall promptly be
eased somewhat furhter] OPERATIONS SHALL BE MODIFIED if it
appears that the monetary AND CREDIT aggregates are [DEL: falling
short of] DEVIATING SIGNIFICANTLY FROM the growth paths
[DEL: desired] EXPECTED."
If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the
money market conditions described in paragraph (18) above as a descrip-
tion of the somewhat easier conditions to be attained. Paragraph (18)
discusses the probable consequences of such money market conditions for
credit market conditions generally, and paragraph (19) sets forth the
staff expectations for growth rates in the aggregates under this alter-
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
NARROW MONEY SUPPLY M1 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
I I I
BROADER MONEY SUPPLY M2
N D J F
'70 '71
- Actual
--- Currently Projected
--- Wkly Path, Indicated
at FOMC Meeting (2/9/71)
.- Longer Run Path
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
3/5/71
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
"- I I I I I
TOTAL RESERVES
'70 71
- Actual
- Currently Projected
--- Wkly Path, Indicated
at FOMC Meetng(2/9/71)
Z- Longer Run Path
INTEREST BEARING SOURCES OF BANK FUNDS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
TOTAL TIME AND
SAVINGS DEPOSITS -210
TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS
OTHER THAN CD'S
NONDEPOSIT SOURCES
I n ' - 10
'CHART 2 3/5/71
Table 1-A
PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
March 5, 1971
Mar. 
3
pe
10
Annual Percentage Rates of Change--Quarterly and Monthl
Weekly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
are rounded to the nearest half per cent.
FR 712-K
Rev2/16/71
