Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR) September 17, 1971.
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
September 17, 1971.
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Growth in M1 slowed sharply in August, both in relation
to the rapid expansion actually experienced in July and in relation to
the increase projected for August at the time of the last Committee
meeting. Growth of M2 and the adjusted credit proxy also fell short of
projections in August. Data for the first two weeks in September--with
the second week still partly estimated--indicate that rates of expansion
for the two money supply aggregates have continued to fall substantially
short of expectations, whereas the proxy has moved somewhat above path.
Recent Paths of the Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
M M
1 2 Adjusted Proxy
Aug. 24 Aug. 24 Aug. 24
Path Actuals Path Actuals Path Actuals
Annual Rates of
Growth, per cent
July
August
Levels, billions
of $
Week ending
Aug. 25
Sept. 1
Sept. 8
Sept. 15p
p/ Partly estimated.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
(2) The slower August growth in M1 and M2 largely reflected a
substantial weakness in private demand deposits at reserve city banks
which may well have been associated in part with dollar outflows through
foreign exchange transactions. (This conclusion is supported by the demand
deposit ownership survey for August, which showed a sharp drop in that
month in business demand balances.) With a major portion of the resultant
dollar accumulations by foreign central banks being invested in special
U.S. Treasury securities (which increased by $5.3 billion in August), U.S.
Government deposits expanded, offsetting much of the slowdown in private
demand deposits.
(3) Immediately following the last FOMC meeting, Desk operations
were directed toward attaining money market conditions that included a
Federal funds rate in the neighborhood of 5-1/2--5-5/8 per cent. In early
September, incoming deposit data showed that actual growth in key aggre-
gates was falling short of projections, and the Desk became somewhat more
accommodative in reserve provision. Unusual pressures developed in the
money market during the Labor Day week, however, resulting from cautious
bank reserve management over the 3-day week-end and possibly related to
augmented Federal fund demands related to interest arbitrage between the
domestic and Euro-dollar markets. Despite sizable reserve supplying
operations on the part of the Desk, the average Federal funds rate was
about 5-3/4 per cent in the Labor Day week. Most recently, with the
aggregates showing further weakness, the Federal funds rate has dropped,
and the Desk is now aiming at a rate in a 5-1/4--5-1/2 per cent range.
(4) Over the past three statement weeks, the Desk has supplied
more nonborrowed reserves than were indicated by the reserve paths
consistent with the monetary aggregate targets adopted at the last meeting,
as shown in the table on the next page. This occurred despite a slight
reduction in required reserves on balance. With the greater provision in
nonborrowed reserves, member banks' net borrowed reserve position was less
taut than projected--with excess reserves somewhat higher than projected
and borrowings at the discount window considerably lower. Total reserves
turned out to be somewhat above path on balance. Compared to a reserve
path adjusted for the unanticipated reductions in reserves required against
U.S. Government deposits (as shown by the numbers in parentheses in the
table), the attained levels of total and nonborrowed reserves are even
higher relative to path.
(5) In securities markets, the initial exuberance following
announcement of the new economic program faded somewhat in early
September. Treasury bill rates, wnich had previously declined sharply as
a result of neavy foreign official demands, reversed course in early
September as foreign demands abated and as earlier market expectations of
an easing in tne Federal funds rate failed to materialize. Most recently,
as the money market has turned more comfortable, bill rates have stabilized
with the latest bid on the 3-month bill a little under 4-3/4 per cent. Note
and bond yields rose after early September, partly reflecting the develop-
ment of a wait-and-see attitude among investors regarding phase II of the
President's economic program. The adjustment was largest in the corporate
bond sector where a build-up in the forward calendar of new issues and an
overhang of dealer inventories created by over-aggressive pricing of earlier
Reserve Aggregates: August 24 Paths vs. Actual
(Seasonally unadjusted, in millions of dollars)
Actual
Statement August 24 minus
Week ending Actual Path Aug. 24
path
September 1
September 8
Total reserves 30,869 30,915 (30,807) - 46 (62)
Nonborrowed reserves 30,104 30,115 (30,007) - 11 (97)
Required reserves 30,645 30,690 (30,502) - 45 (63)
Excess 224 225 - 1
Borrowings 765 800 - 35
September 15
unanticipatedNOTE: Figures in parenthesis reflect adjustment of the path for
changes in U.S. Government deposits.
offerings had substantially weakened the technical position of the
market. The market atmosphere improved following comments by the
President at his press conference on Thursday which were taken to
presage a relatively tough phase II wage-price program.
Recent Interest Rates
on Market Securities
Rate Levels (Per cent per annum)
August Subsequent September
(6) The following table summarizes developments in the major
financial aggregates for selected recent periods:
(March over (June over over
Sept.) March) June
Total Reserves 8.9 6.6 7.6
Nonborrowed Reserves 10.3 5.3 1.5
Concepts of Money
M 1 (Currency plus demand
deposits 1/) 6.2 11.3 6.6
M2 (M1 plus time deposits
at commercial banks
other than large CD's) 13.7 12.6 6.0
M3 (M2 plus deposits at
thrift institutions) 14.6 14.8 8.7
Bank Credit
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy adj.) 9.7 6.5 9.4
Loans and investments of
commercial banks 2/ 10.5 7.4 10.3
Shcrt-term market paper
(Actual $ change in billions)
Large CD's $ 6.1 $ 0.7 $ 1.8
Bank-related commercial
paper N.S.A. - 2.9 0.0 n.a.
Nonbank commercial paper - 0.4 - 0.9 n.a.
branches.
N.S.A. Not seasonally adjusted.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data
on total loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial
paper and thrift institutions--which are either end-of-month or
last Wednesday of month figures.
Prospective developments
(7) Financial relationships are still bedevilled by uncertainties
related to how the new economic program will evolve; in particular, concern
focuses on phase II of wage-price policies and the outcome of international
negotiations on foreign exchange rates and related matters. A disappointing
follow-through for phase II would probably reverse the recent improvement in
market and public psychology and lead to substantial upward pressures on
interest rates. We have assumed, however, a generally effective follow-
through. In the international sphere the timing of the return-flow of the
sizable speculative outflow of dollar funds is a major uncertainty. We have
assumed no significant return at least between now and year-end.
(8) Two alternative sets of operating specifications for Committee
consideration are summarized in the text table below. The specifications in
the first column can be drawn upon for the policy directives A or B, as
explained in the section on possible directive language beginning on page 12.
The table on the next page shows monthly paths for the spectrum of monetary
aggregates, while two tables attached at the end of the text contain weekly
paths for the monetary aggregates and more detail on aggregate reserves
thought to be consistent with the two paths.
Alt. A (or B) Alt. C
Federal funds rate 5--5-5/8% 4-1/2--5%
Member bank borrowings $400-$700 million $200-$400 million
Growth in M 1 (SAAR)
September 1-1/2% 1-1/2%
October 4-1/2 5-1/2
3rd Qtr. 5 5
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly
Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2
Alt. A(B) Alt. C Alt. A(B) Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
Adjusted Credit Proxy Total Reserve
Alt. A(B) Alt. C Alt. A(B) Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
(9) As compared with the first seven months of the year, the
growth in M1 is expected to continue at a sharply reduced rate between
now and year-end--particularly if money market conditions do not ease
significantly from around prevailing levels--as the lagged effects on
domestic cash demands of earlier higher short-term interest rates take
hold and as precautionary demands for cash are reduced further in the
wake of the President's program. Under alternative A--which contemplates
a Federal funds rate in a 5--5-5/8 per cent range--the annual rate of growth
in M1 is likely to be only about one or two per cent in September and around
currently anticipated from September to October mainly in consequence of an
expected drop in U.S. Government deposits from their unusually high mid-
September level. Under alternative C, money supply growth would be expected
to be a little more rapid in the fourth quarter than under alternative A.
In the first quarter of next year, growth in M1 would be expected to be
more rapid under either alternative, as transactions demands for cash--which
would rise along with projected nominal GNP growth in the fourth quarter
-- strengthen further. The pick-up could be quite modest under alternative
A, however, while under alternative C the cumulative impact of lower interest
rates could lead to a return to growth rates of around 6 per cent or so.
(10) With respect to interest rates, if the Federal funds rate
range
stays in a 5-1/4--5-1/2 per cent bill rates might back up somewhat further
over the next several weeks and exert upward pressure on other short-term
rates. This would be especially likely if the Treasury decides--as we have
assumed it will--to anticipate some of its later cash needs by adding about
$3--$4 billion to the bill supply in October. On the other hand some partly
offsetting downward pressure on bill rates might be generated if the Treasury
were to contemplate, as an alternative or a supplement, a financing strategy
which involved considerable debt lengthening. Long-term interest rates are
likely to be very sensitive to the trend of market expectations as to the
effectiveness of phase II policies. Over the near-term, the heavy volume
of new corporate issues, particularly if accompanied by sizable Treasury
debt lengthening operations, could exert some upward rate pressures.
(11) An appreciable decline in the Federal funds rates--for
example, consistently into a 5--5-1/4 per cent range or lower--would con-
firm market hopes that the recent weakness in money supply will be followed
by an easing in money market conditions. Both long- and short-term rates
would be expected to decline under those circumstances, with declines quite
marked if and as the Federal funds rate moves down to trade consistently
below 5 per cent.
(12) Growth in time and savings deposits other than large CD's
is expected to accelerate from recent low rates to about a 9-1/2 per cent
annual rate in September, given experience in the first two weeks of the
month, but, under alternative A, to drop back to a 7-1/2 per cent rate in
the fourth quarter. The lower growth rate is anticipated in view of
strengthened consumer spending and the liklihood that market interest
rates will not drop enough to provide much in the way of incentive for
savers to add sharply to time deposit funds. A somewhat more rapid growth
in such deposits would be anticipated under alternative C, given the marked
decline in market interest rates that would be expected.
(13) Under any of the alternatives presented, funds available to
banks from U.S. Government deposits, private demand deposits, and time
deposits other than large CD's taken together are likely to grow much less
rapidly on balance in September and the fourth quarter than they had in the
spring and summer. As a result, banks may be led to bid actively for large
CD's should business and other loan demands be strong, as would be expected
if economic recovery proceeds at the accelerated rate indicated in the staff
GNP projection. Under alternative A, the adjusted bank credit proxy is
expected to grow at an 8 per cent annual rate in September and 4-1/2 per
cent in the fourth quarter. Under alternative C, the growth rate in the
bank credit proxy in the fourth quarter is expected to be around 6-1/2 per
cent, as banks in a period of declining interest rates add to investments
for purposes of obtaining high yields or capital gains.
Possible directive language
(14) Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible use
if the Committee decides to seek, or permit, the growth rates for the
aggregates over the months ahead discussed earlier in connection with
alternative A, including rates for M 1 of 1-1/2 and 3-1/2 per cent in
September and the fourth quarter, respectively. The money market and
reserve conditions believed likely to be consistent with such growth rates
are noted in paragraph (8).
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to
achieve [DEL: more] moderate growth in monetary and credit
aggregates over the months ahead. System open market
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall
be conducted with a view to achieving bank reserve and
money market conditions consistent with that objective."
This language differs from that of the directive adopted at the August 24
meeting only in the deletion of the word "more" from the phrase "to
achieve more moderate growth . . ." It is assumed that the Committee would
not want to continue to call for 'more moderate growth" in light of the
August experience, when M 1 and M 2 grew at rates of about 3 and 5 per cent,
(15) Alternative B. The language of B differs from that of A
in two respects. First, the words "over the months ahead" are omitted
following the reference to growth in the aggregates. This modification
is proposed for consideration if the Committee does not wish to accept as
aggregate targets the comparatively low growth rates of alternative A for
a period longer than the weeks immediately ahead. Secondly, a clause
reading "taking account of developments in capital markets" is added at
the end of the first sentence. This change is suggested for consideration
if the Committee decides to instruct the Manager to give considerable
weight to the objective of avoiding excessive pressures in capital markets,
recognizing that this might require some adaptation in reserve supplying
operations. Either of these modifications might, of course, be made without
the other.
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to
achieve [DEL: more] moderate growth in monetary and credit
aggregates [DEL: over the months ahead], TAKING ACCOUNT OF
DEVELOPMENTS IN CAPITAL MARKETS. System open market
operations until the next meeting of the Committee shall
be conducted with a view to achieving bank reserve and money
market conditions consistent with that objective."
(16) Alternative C. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides to seek somewhat more rapid growth rates
in the aggregates than called for under alternative A. The money market
and reserve conditions believed likely to prove consistent with those
growth rates are noted in paragraph (8).
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to
PROMOTE [DEL: achieve more] moderate growth in monetary and credit
aggregates over the months ahead. System open market opera-
tions until the next meeting of the Committee shall be con-
ducted with a view to achieving bank reserve and money market
conditions consistent with that objective."
This directive does not include the phrase "taking account of developments
in capital markets" since the prompt and substantial easing of the money
market contemplated is likely to minimize the risk of adverse capital
market developments, particularly in a period when the monetary aggregates
are weak.
Alternative Weekly Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Alt. A(B)
Alt. C
Alt. A(B)
Alt. C
Credit Proxy
Alt. A(B) Alt. C
Total Reserves
Alt. A(B) Alt. C
September 22
29
October 6
13
20
Total and Nonborrowed Reserve Paths
(Daily averages in millions of dollars, seasonally adjusted)
Total Reserves
Alt. A(B)
Nonborrowed Reserves
Alt. C
Alt. A(B)
Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
September
October
November
December
Weekly Paths--Seasonally Adjusted
Total Reserves
Alt. A(B)
October 6
13
20
Alt. C
Nonborrowed Reserves
Alt. A(B)
Weekly Paths--Not Seasonally Adjusted
Total Reserves
Alt. A(B)
October 6
13
20
Alt. C
Nonborrowed Reserves
Alt. A(B)
September
October
November
December
Alt. C
Alt. C.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
NARROW MONEY SUPPLY M1
I 1 I I I I I I I I I I I
BROADER MONEY SUPPLY
- Actual
- Currently Projected
--- Wkly. Path, Indicated
at FOMC Meetmg (8E24j71)
_Z Longer Run Path
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
9/17/71
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY
TOTAL RESERVES
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
r -355
SI 1 I I
JA J i I A S
A M J J A S
- Actua
-- Currently Projected
--- Wkly. Path, Indicated
at FOMC Meeting (~/24/71)
I 'Longer Run Path
Table 1-A
PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
Monthly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
September 17, 1971
July
Aug.
Sept.
July
Aug.
Sept.
Sept. 1
8
( 6.2)
258.2
259.8
Annual Percentage Rates of Change--Quarterly and Monthly
27.3
13.5
Weekly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
4.1
.1 .
pe - Parially estimated.
NOTES: Annual rates of change other thah those for the past
Data shown in parenthesis are current projections.
( 9.5)
are rounded to the nearest half per cent.
FR 712-K
Rev2/16/71
(Dollar amounts
Sept. 1
8
15
