Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR) June 25, 1971.
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Recent data indicate that growth rates of the monetary
aggregates in June and the second quarter have not changed much from the
staff projections presented in the Blue Book three weeks ago, although
figures for June are complete only through mid-month.
Growth Rates in Key Monetary Aggregates 1/
(Per cent annual rates of changes)
Specified at Previous Currently
FOMC Meeting Estimated
June 2nd Quarter June 2nd Quarter
among the various monetary aggregates.
The small downward revisions in second-quarter growth rates for M1 and M2
reflect both a slight revision of data for May and some deceleration in these
aggregates relative to Blue Book path in June. Data for the
week of June 23, when most of this deceleration seems to occur, however,
are still partially estimated. The bank credit proxy, which shows the
largest downward revision, has been running substantially below Blue Book
path throughout June.
June 25, 1971.
Recent Paths of the Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Adjusted
M1 M2 Credit Proxy
Bluebook Bluebook Bluebook
Path Actual Path Actual Path Actual
pe--partly estimated
(2) Since the last meeting of the Committee the Federal funds
rate has worked gradually higher, moving up from 4-3/4 per cent to around
bill most recently quoted around 4.90 per cent. Longer-term yields have
also risen on balance, with the largest rise of about 1/2 a percentage
point in the municipal market.
(3) Several medium-sized commercial banks increased their
prime loan rates during the inter-meeting interval, but thus far major
money market banks have not followed this move. In addition, the Treasury
announced a cash financing package on June 16 consisting of a $2-1/4
billion short-term note issue auctioned on June 22 and a $1-3/4 billion
September tax anticipation issue for auction on June 30. The Treasury
also increased the size of its weekly Treasury bill offering by $100
million; such increases may be continued in the future. The Treasury
financing package was well received by the markets. It may obviate the need
for further market borrowing by the Treasury until July or early August,
assuming that Germany sells $2 to $3 billion of its holdings of U.S. Treasury
bills, as planned, and transfers the proceeds to the Treasury in exchange
for special securities of longer-maturity,
(4) Member bank borrowings at the Federal Reserve Banks during
the last four statement weeks have averaged about $450 million, considerably
above their May average of $212 million. Excess reserves have remained
roughly unchanged at an average level of $200 million. The increase in
member bank borrowing partly reflects the emergence of a positive spread
of the Federal funds rate over the discount rate. Recent reports indicate
that borrowing has been undertaken largely by banks that are not continuously
in debt to the Federal Reserve.
(5) The table on the next page summarizes seasonally adjusted
annual rates of change in major financial aggregates for selected periods.
Fourth
Quarter
(Dec. over
Sept.)
First
Quarter
(March over
Dec.)
Combined
(March over
Second
Quarter
(June over
March)p e/
Total Reserves
Nonborrowed Reserves
Concepts of Money
M1 (Currency plus demand
deposits 1/)
M2 (M1 plus time deposits
at commercial banks
other than large CD's)
M3 (M2 plus deposits at
thrift institutions)
Bank Credit
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy adj.)
Loans and investments of
commercial banks 2/
Short-term market paper
(actual $ change in billions)
Large CD's
Bank-related commercial
paper N.S.A.
Nonbank commercial paper
$ 4.3
- 2.3
$ 1.8
- 0.7
- 1.9
$ 6.1
- 2.9
- 0.4
$ 0.1
- 0.3
N.S.A. Not seasonally adjusted.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on
total loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper and
thrift institutions--which are either end-of-month or last Wednesday
of month figures.
Prospective developments
(6) Three possible policy alternatives showing different relation-
ships among money market conditions, bill rates, and monetary aggregates
are summarized in the table below. More detailed information and monthly
paths for the full range of aggregates are shown in the table on the next
page. 1/ It should be noted that the wide borrowing ranges, particularly
for alternatives B and C, allow for a possible increase in borrowings from
one bank which has special problems.
Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Federal funds rate 4-7/8--5-1/8% 5--5-1/2% 5-1/2--6%
Member bank borrowings $350-500 million $450-700 million $650-850 million
Growth in M1:
(7) For seasonal reasons--including Treasury cash borrowing require-
ments and the ending of reinvestment demand that normally appears in the last
half of June as mid-year tax bills mature--the 3-month bill rate is expected
to rise in July from its recent level. Sales of bills for foreign accounts
may also put upward pressure on rates. The bill rate would be expected to
rise more if the Federal funds rate and associated day-to-day dealer financing
costs go up. If the Federal funds rate moves rapidly to or above 5-1/2 per
cent, expectational factors may well push the bill rate above the funds rate.
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly
Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
Alt. A
June
July
August
September
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A
Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
June
July
August
September
Adjusted Credit Proxy Total Reserves
Alt. A
June
July
August
September
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A
Alt. B Alt. C
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
June
July
August
September
(8) Alternative A maintains money market conditions in a range
around the average level of recent weeks; in the last few business days the
Desk has been aiming at a rate around the upper end of that range. The
alternative A money market conditions would seem most likely to be
associated with around a 10 per cent annual rate of growth in M1 over the
third quarter. Alternatives B and C provide for more scope to vary money
market conditions in an effort to reduce rates of growth in the monetary
aggregates. Because of the lagged relationship between tighter money market
conditions and money demand, however, such slower growth rates would not
be expected to develop in any significant way until later in the summer. In
the fourth quarter we would expect a further marked slowing in growth rates
of M1 as lagged reactions to earlier high interest rates continue and as
the apparently sizable precautionary demand for cash of the past few months
is worked off. Indeed, under alternative C, little or no growth in M 1 would
be expected in the fourth quarter; and alternative B, if maintained, might
provide a growth rate of only modest proportions.
(9) Growth in M2 is likely to slow more in the third quarter
than growth in M1. We would expect the higher level of market interest
rates to moderate net savings inflows somewhat; and the AT&T preferred
stock offering will be a factor adding to withdrawals from banks (and
other savings institutions) during the mid-year reinvestment period. Of
course, to the extent money market conditions tighten further (as under
alternatives B and C) and this is communicated to the broader structure of
market yields, relatively more slowing of expansion in consumer-type time
and savings deposits at banks and in M 2 would be expected.
(10) In contrast to the behavior of M 1 and M2 , the bank credit proxy
is expected to grow more rapidly over the third quarter than in the second,
with July and August the period of greatest growth. Banks are likely to
be adding to their U.S. Government security holdings on average as they help
underwrite and also add to portfolio more permanently, part of the expected
large Treasury cash borrowings. In contrast, banks' Government security
holdings had declined somewhat on balance during the second quarter (apart
from acquisitions of the newly auctioned 6 per cent Treasury note for pay-
ment at the end of June). Part of the anticipated acceleration of bank
credit growth would be financed by an increase in U.S. Government deposits,
which are now projected to rise by about $2 billion from June to August,
following a decline of nearly $1-1/2 billion from April to June. In
addition, banks are not expected to run off nondeposit sources further,
and may add modestly to outstanding large CD's. If money market conditions
tighten, as assumed under alternatives B and C, we would anticipate somewhat
more rapid growth in CD's and greater use of Euro-dollar borrowings as banks
make an effort to compensate, at least in part, for smaller inflows of funds
through private demand and consumer-type time deposits.
(11) With the corporate calendar tending to moderate, corporate
bond yields could decline under the conditions of alternative A, especially
if there were no general rise in the prime rate, or if the rise was limited
to only 1/4 of a percentage point. Any significant drop in corporate rates
would tend to moderate upward pressures in the municipal and mortgage markets.
Alternative B money market conditions(particularly if the funds rate moves
to the upper end of the range) would reduce the likelihood of any rally
in the corporate bond market over the near-term, and could cause such
yields to back up somewhat, at least for a time. The higher Federal funds
rate would also probably lead to increased yields on U.S. Government
securities as the cost to banks and dealers of participating in the forth-
coming Treasury financings rises. Under alternative C, substantial across-
the-board increases in long-term interest rates would be highly likely. A
rise in the Federal funds rate of the size specified would be viewed by the
market as a marked tightening in monetary policy. It would seem to signal
a rise in the discount rate, would bring the viability of even a 6 per cent
bank prime rate under question, and would represent a sizable movement
toward the point where the remaining Regulation Q ceilings on longer
maturity CD's would begin to bite.
Possible directive language
(12) This section presents possible language for the second
paragraph of the directive corresponding to the three alternative policy
courses discussed above.
(13) Alternative A. The following language is proposed for
possible use if the Committee decides to call for preserving about the
same money market conditions to which the credit markets have adjusted in
recent weeks, subject to a proviso clause.
"To implement this policy, [DEL: the Committee seeks to
moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead,
taking account of developments in capital markets.] System
open market operations until the next meeting of the Committee
shall be conducted with a view to MAINTAINING PREVAILING
[DEL: achiveing bank reserve and] money market conditions; [DEL: consistent
with those objectives] PROVIDED THAT SOMEWHAT FIRMER CONDITIONS
SHALL BE SOUGHT IF IT APPEARS THAT THE MONETARY AND CREDIT
AGGREGATES ARE SIGNIFICANTLY EXCEEDING THE GROWTH PATHS EXPECTED
AND IF CAPITAL MARKETS ARE NOT UNDER EXCESSIVE PRESSURE."
If the Committee adopts this alternative, it may wish to consider the
money market conditions noted for alternative A in paragraph (6) as a
description of "prevailing" conditions, and for purposes of the proviso
clause to adopt the aggregate growth paths discussed earlier in connec-
tion with alternative A as the "expected" paths. The proviso clause has
been formulated in one-way terms, guarding against excesses but not
shortfalls, on the assumption that the Committee would not want money
market conditions to be eased in the coming period if the aggregates
should fall short of the indicated paths. The proposed language con-
templates that firming actions under the proviso clause would be
taken only "if capital markets are not under excessive pressure."
(14) Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides to continue to formulate its primary
instruction in terms of objectives for the monetary aggregates, sub-
ject to any constraints that might be imposed by developments in
capital markets.
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to
moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months
ahead, taking account of developments in capital markets.
System open market operations until the next meeting of
the Committee shall be conducted with a view to achiev-
ing bank reserve and money market conditions consistent
with those objectives."
Although this language is identical to that adopted at the June 8 meeting,
it is not regarded as a "no change" directive in the sense of calling for
no further policy action. Rather it calls for holding to the course of
continued orderly firming of bank reserve and money market conditions,
insofar as that might be necessary to maintain downward pressure on the
growth rates of the monetary aggregates. The money market specifications
mentioned earlier in connection with this alternative--including the pro-
posed 5 to 5-1/2 per cent range for the Federal funds rate--would give
the Manager more flexibility to firm market conditions than he would
have under alternative A. If the Committee adopts alternative B it
could choose to instruct the Manager to move gradually toward the
upper end of the indicated range for the funds rate even if the mone-
tary aggregates are growing at the rates specified earlier in connec-
tion with alternative B, so long as it appears that such action would not
be unduly disturbing to the capital markets.
(15) Alternative C. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides to strive for the more substantial modera-
tion of growth in the monetary aggregates discussed earlier in connec-
tion with alternative C.
"To implement this policy, [DEL: the Committee seeks to
moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months
ahead, taking account of developments in capital markets.]
System open market operations until the next meeting of
the Committee shall be conducted with a view to achiev-
ing bank reserve and money market conditions consistent
with [DEL: those objectives] SUBSTANTIAL MODERATION OF GROWTH IN
MONETARY AGGREGATES OVER THE MONTHS AHEAD."
Alternative Weekly Paths of Key Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted, billions of dollars)
M1 M2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
June 30
July 7
Alt. A
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. B Alt. C
Total Reserves
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A
June 30
July 7
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
NARROW MONEY SUPPLY M1 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
BROADER MONEY SUPPLY M22
-- Actual
-- Currently Projected
--- Wkly Path, Indicated
at FOMC Meeting (6/8/71)
-Zi Longer Run Path
r 4 t ] -L-
M J
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL(FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
--I
I I 1 I
TOTAL RESERVES
I 1 4 I /
F M A
- Actual
-- Currently Proec4ed
--- Wkly. Path, Indicated
at FOMC Meeting 16//71)
-Z- Longer Run Path
INTEREST BEARING SOURCES OF BANK FUNDS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
TOTAL TIME AND
SAVINGS DEPOSITS
- 240
- 30
CDE'S
NONDEPOSIT SOURCES
Table 1-A
PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
June 25, 1971
Apr.
May
Jue
Apr
May
Tune
June 2
9
Monthly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
Annual Percentage Rates of Change-Quarterly and MonthlI
1.4
.1 1 L I_ I I_ I I I
are rounded to the nearest half per cent.
FR 712-K
Rev2/16/71
