Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
April 14, 1972(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Seasonally adjusted total reserves available to support private
nonbank deposits (RPD) expanded somewhat less rapidly in March than targeted,
as shown in attached Table 1. However, RPD in April appears to be growing
more than anticipated, and for the two months combined the growth rate seems
likely to be at an annual rate of about 13-1/2 per cent. This compares with
an adjusted 10-1/2--14-1/2 per cent target range. Originally, the Committee
had set the target range at 9-13 per cent, but for comparability the range
should be adjusted upward by 1-1/2 percentage points to allow for corrections
in the distribution of reserves between private and interbank deposits
necessitated by the introduction of the new PEPS system for clearing inter-
national transfers. 1/
(2) In March measures of the money stock and the adjusted credit
proxy expanded somewhat more than expectedas shown in attached Table 2. A
slowing in the rate of growth is anticipated for April, although partial data
for the early part of the month suggest that all three of the money and credit
aggregates are running somewhat ahead of rates for the month indicated in
pattern II at the last meeting.
April 14, 1972
(3) At the time of the last Committee meeting, Federal funds were
trading around 3-7/8 per cent, below the level thought likely to emerge in
achieving the desired RPD growth rate. As the intermeeting period progressed,
the funds rate edged steadily higher from 3.91 to 4.18 per cent, with recent
daily trading most frequently around 4-1/4 per cent. With the money market
tightening and with increasing evidence of strengthening economic activity,
other interest rates also rose during the period--generally by 20-40 basis
points on private short-term market instruments and by 10-30 basis points
in bond markets. The 3-month bill rate, however, was virtually unchanged
over the period, as demand for very short maturities expanded in the face of
anticipated interest rate increases.
(4) The following table compares seasonally adjusted annual rates
of change in major financial aggregates for recent periods,
Fourth and
Fourth First
Quarter First Quarter Quarters
Sept.) Dec.) Sept.)
Total Reserves
Nonborrowed Reserves
Reserves available to support
private nonbank deposits
Concepts of Money
M1 (currenty plus demand
deposits 1/)
M2 (M1 plus time deposits at
commercial banks other
than large CD's)
M (M plus deposits at thrift
3 2 institutions)
Bank Credit
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy adj.)
Loans and investments of
commercial banks 2/
Short-term market paper
(Actual $ change in billions)
Large CD's
Nonbank commercial paper
$ 7.9
Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
Based on month-end figures. Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
Prospective developments
(5) Of the two patterns summarized below, pattern I incorporates
essentially the same second quarter growth rates for monetary aggregates
adopted at the last Committee meeting. Pattern II shows somewhat slower
rates of growth in the monetary aggregates. (The patterns in detail are
shown on the next page.)
Pattern I Pattern II
Federal funds rate 3-3/4--4-3/4 4-1/2--5-1/2
Member bank borrowings 50--200 150--400
Growth in M1 (SAAR)
April 8% 8%
May 9% 8%
June 5-1/2% 4%
2nd Q. 7-1/2% 7%
(6) Rates of expansion in reserves available to support
nonbank deposits consistent with the two patterns are as follows:
Pattern I Pattern II
April 11 10
May 8-1/2 6-1/2
April-May 9-1/2 8
The reserve path shown here for pattern I represents a logical contin-
uation of the path adopted at the last Committee meeting. The April
increase in these reserves would put the average level of such reserves
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly Patterns
for Key Monetary Aggregates
Apr.
May
June
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Total Reserves
I II
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
Apr.
May
June
somewhat above the mid-point of the earlier range (after technical adjust-
ment) but below the upper end, The rate of increase in RPD is targeted to
decelerate over the two months May and June. And the rate of growth for
the second quarter as a whole leads to a June level of RPD that is slightly
above the mid-point of the earlier adjusted path because recent experience
has suggested a somewhat greater bank demand for excess reserves.
(7) If the Committee instructs the Manager to achieve the
pattern I reserve path and aggregates, the staff expects that the Federal
funds rate would remain near or slightly above the 4-1/4 per cent mid-point
of the 3-3/4--4-3/4 per cent range associated with this pattern. However,
if such a funds rate prevails through the second quarter, we would also
expect growth in the aggregates, particularly M1, to remain generally strong
in the third quarter. For M1, it appears likely that such a posture would
lead to third quarter growth on the order of 8-1/2 per cent, assuming that
transactions demands will accelerate along with projected GNP.
(8) Attainment of pattern II reserve objectives in the second
quarter would probably lead to a funds rate moving up to an average of
around 5--5-1/4 per cent fairly promptly, at or slightly above the mid-point
of the 4-1/2--5-1/2 per cent range shown for the pattern. This would be
associated not only with some slowing in M1 growth in the second quarter,
but would encourage a lower third quarter growth rate of M1, perhaps on the
order of 6-1/2 per cent, annual rate.
(9) Short-term markets are likely to have to absorb continua-
tion of the recent stronger business loan performance and greater than season-
al Treasury cash requirements (though much lower than earlier anticipated by
the market). Nevertheless, given the aggregates of pattern I, any further rise
in short-term interest rates might be minor, since it does not now seem
probable that the funds rate would need to rise to the top end of the range
shown in paragraph (5). However, the 3-month bill rate, which has been
running low relative to the Federal funds and other short-term rates, may
show a noticeable increase. Under pattern II, with a rising Federal funds
rate, short-term rates would be expected to adjust upward substantially.
Such a rate rise would be reinforced by spreading expectations of a discount
rate increase.
(10) The long-term bond market appears to have adjusted in
good part to the recent rise in short rates. On balance, no more than a
moderate further rise in long rates seems likely so long as the Federal funds
rate stays around its recent 4-1/4 per cent level. Security dealer positions
are light, and corporate bond offerings are not expected to be heavy. The
Treasury refunding to be announced on April 26 is comparatively small. There
apparently will be no need to raise new cash at that time, and the public
holds only $2-1/2 billion of the issues maturing in mid-May.
(11) A rise in the funds rate toward the upper end of the
pattern I range, and certainly into the pattern II range, would be very
likely, however, to spark further significant increases in long-term rates.
As market rates generally rose further, this would, moreover, begin to be
reflected in rising primary mortgage market rates. The secondary mortgage
market has already shown signs of caution, and a further general rise in
short- and long-term market rates would be likely to reduce inflows to
savings institutions and to induce diversified lenders to shift some funds
away from mortgages.
(12) The anticipated behavior of M2 and the credit proxy over
the second quarter is little different from what was presented to the
Committee four weeks ago. Growth in time deposits other than large CD's is
expected to be significantly slower in the second quarter than in the first
in both patterns I and II, and the slowdown is greater in response to the
higher short-term market rates expected in pattern II. Reflecting slower
growth in time deposits, as well as a substantial drop in U. S. Government
deposits, the bank credit proxy should expand at a much more moderate rate
in both patterns. However, as market rates rise, especially under pattern
II, major money market banks can be expected to raise interest rates offer-
ed on time deposits, both large and small, to keep deposit inflows from
slowing markedly further in what appears to be a period of developing loan
Proposed directive
(13) This section presents three alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive. All continue the same language
with respect to reserves and money market conditions contained in the
directives of the last three meetings, and all include a qualifying instruc-
tion to the Manager to take account of the forthcoming Treasury refunding,
the terms of which are expected to be announced on April 26, as noted in
paragraph (10). It is proposed to delete the reference to international
developments on the assumption that the Committee will not consider it
necessary to take specific account of those developments in the currently
quieter environment surrounding the exchange markets.
(14) Alternative A.
"To implement this policy, while taking account of
[DEL: international development and possible] THE FORTHCOMING
Treasury financing, the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions that will support
moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months
Alternative A language is proposed for possible use if the
Committee wishes to adopt essentially the same second-quarter growth rates
for the monetary aggregates that were adopted at the meeting on March 21.
The pattern of specifications for this alternative is described in para-
graph (5).
(15) Alternative B.
"To implement this policy, while taking account of
[DEL: international developments and possible] CAPITAL MARKET
DEVELOPMENTS AND THE FORTHCOMING Treasury financing, the
Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market
conditions that will support moderate growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead."
The language of alternative B differs from that of alternative A
in that it includes a reference to developments in capital markets. It is
proposed for possible use in the event that members of the Committee wish to
provide some safeguard against the risk of a significant near-term rise in
interest rates, particularly long-term rates. The pattern of specifications
for this alternative could be the same as that for alternative A, but the phrase
"taking account of capital market developments" could be construed as in-
structing the Manager to be more liberal in providing reserves and more
cautious in allowing the Federal funds rate to move upward if significant
increases in long-term interest rates appear to be in process.
(16) Alternative C. This language differs from that of alternative
A in the inclusion of the word "more" before "moderate growth in monetary
aggregates." It is proposed for possible use if the Committee decides to
pursue the more restrictive course contemplated by the specifications given
earlier for pattern II.
"To implement this policy, while taking account of
[DEL: international developments and possible] THE FORTHCOMING
Treasury financing, the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions that will support
MORE moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the
months ahead."
BACKGROUND TO TECHNICAL CORRECTION OF RPD PATH
The correction affects the measured distribution of reserves held
behind private nonbank demand deposits (RPD) and net interbank deposits. The
target after correction represents what the staff would have presented at the
time of the March 21 FOMC meeting as consistant with pattern II aggregates if
the timing and extent to which foreign banking institutions were moving onto
PEPS had been known. The change in effect reduces the multiplier between
available reserves for private nonbank deposits and currently measured M 1.
The correction was necessary because of the accounting effect of the
recent transfer (on February 7 and March 13) to the PEPS system for clearing
international transactions of several foreign banking institutions which had
not yet been incorporated into our banking statistics. The staff did not
know the magnitude and exact timing of this transfer at the time of the
last FOMC meeting. As these foreign institutions joined PEPS, the effect
was to lower both cash items and net interbank deposits on the books of
member banks. In staff calculations of the distribution of reserves, this
would mean that reserves against net interbank deposits would decline and
required reserves against private demand deposits at member banks (gross demand
deposits less the now lower cash items) would rise by an equivalent amount,
thereby increasing the measured reserves available series. As noted above,
if the timing and extent of transfer had been known at the time of the last
FOMC meeting, the staff would have allowed for the effect in construction of
the reserve path presented at that meeting.
Incorporation of these institutions into the banking statistics
will, when we make our next annual revision, raise the measured level of the
money supply (unless offset, of course, by other benchmark changes). But the
data for the institutions that we have gathered indicates that there will be
virtually no effect on rates of change in money supply. In the annual
revision, a gradually decreasing level will be carried back over a number
of years.
Bank Reserves April 14, 1972
Reserves Available for Private Nonbank Deposits Aggregate Reserves Required Reserves
Seasonally Adjusted Not Seasonally Adjusted Seasonally Adjusted
Target and Actual Target and Actual Time U.S. Gov't.
Associated and Associated and Total Nonborrowed Private and and
Period Patterns / Proieted Patterns I/ Projected Reserves Reserves Demand Nondeposits Interbank
Annual Rates of Change
Quar terly:
1971--3rd Otr.
Mar. 1
8
Apr. 5
12
(11.0)
(13.5)
(26.0)
(21.5)
(25.5)
(20.0)
(4.0)
( 9.0)
introduction of the new PEPS system for clearing international transfers. These corrections, worked out in conjunction with the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, are purely technical. The adjusted target represents what the staff would have presented at the time of the March 21 FOMC
meeting as consistent with Pattern II aggregates and money market conditions if the timing and extent to which foreign banking institutions were
moving onto PEPS had been known. The amount of correction is plus 1-1/2 percentage points at an annual rate for the March-April period. Thus,
the adjusted target indicates a 12-1/2 percent annual rate (mid-point of the range) for the two-month period, as compared with 11 percent in the
original target.
• ..........••• ..... .•• .... ••
.•• .... ••••••,•.•.o•.•••o,.,,.
..... • ••o••°•.•••• .... ••°,...•••• • •••o•• o• °•...•oo• •
...... • °•.°•••••o.°••••oo,..°
.,..o. ...°•.°.°o°. .••oo oo
...••°••.°o°••°•.•°o.•...o,••°
...................... , ..... •.•,•.•.••,•°..°•••o,•,.••°•..•
°••••°..•,•°•.,•o•° .... •.°.•
• °,••°°.•,•°o....•°• ....... •o.•o•,....,•.••,.,•.•°.• 6.°.•o.: ::: : :: :: ::::: :
: ::
°,°•• .... ••°••.o°•°•....•,.•..••...•°.•°•o.••°•.°o•••.o.•°.•
••,,....o.••••..••°•,...o,•.•°
o°••••,•°•• ...... ••°••..•
• •••.°•.o••°• .... °• .... •o•••
• ,•••°•...•• ••.o°.°, ... °•.•••
• .••°•••••.••,• ... •.°.•••:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::!
• °°••°••.•. .... •...... o....... •••°••••••..°••• ......
°•°•.•••••,o••••••oo•••o•.•,.,.••••°• .......................
•••••o°••...••••••°.••••.•••.,....ei.....H...••i....o°..•.•
o••..o••••••.•.•••.o o...••••o
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
. I'
Annual Growth Rates
in Pattern II 1/
M1
M2
Credit Proxy
(Adj.)
Mar.
11.0
10.5
