Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR) February 11, 1972
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) In January, the seasonally unadjusted level of total reserves
at member banks averaged close to the upper end of the target range adopted
by the Committee at the last meeting. The target range was a 20--25 per cent
increase in total reserves seasonally adjusted. Since that meeting, new
seasonal factors have become available for the total reserves series--the end
process of the annual revision of deposits and related series--and the season-
ally adjusted series has been revised accordingly going back to 1959. While
the old, unrevised seasonally adjusted series shows an annual rate of growth
in total reserves from December to January of about 28 per cent, the new
series shows a growth rate for the same period of about 21 per cent. As
measured by the new series, however, the average growth rate for December
and January combined is about the same as in the old series. The appendix
table on page 12 provides a comparison of the old and new series for the past
(2) While reserves came out close to expectations in January, the
mix of deposits was different from staff anticipations. Growth in the narrowly-
defined money stock for January, at a 3-1/2 per cent annual rate, was short of
expectations, as the table shows, but growth of bank time and savings deposits
other than large CD's greatly exceeded our estimates. This latter increase
seems to have reflected in part business and institutional interest in such
accounts, given existing rate relationships. With time deposits very strong,
expansion in both the broader money supply and the bank credit proxy was more
rapid than projected at the time of the last meeting.
February 11, 1972CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
January over December Changes in
Money and Credit Aggregates
Range of Targets I
and II Presented
at Last Meeting Actual
(Annual percentage rates of change)
M1 6--8 3-1/2
M2 9-1/2--11 14
Credit Proxy 7--8-1/2 10
Time and savings
other than large CD's 13--14 24-1/2
Total Reserves 26-1/2--27 1/ 28 l/
(3) Over the full inter-meeting period, the Federal funds rate
declined by about a half percentage point, from nearly 3.75 per cent to
about 3.25 per cent. With the narrowly-defined money supply growing less
rapidly than expected and with a sizable Treasury financing in the market,
the Desk did not move aggressively to hold growth of total reserves within
the 20-25 per cent range. The easing of money market conditions was reflect-
ed in net declines of most other short-term rates, including further cuts in
the prime rate. Most recently, the 3-month Treasury bill has been trading
around 3 per cent, down about 15 basis points over the period. But the
market has continued to anticipate future short-term rate increases as the
Treasury finances the large deficit. Such expectations, together with reports
of sizable continuing forward calendars of new corporate and municipal bonds
and to some extent the debt extension involved in the Treasury's recent
refinancing, contributed to a general 25--35 basis points yield advance in
bond markets.
(4) The following table compares seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change in major financial aggregates in January and in selected
earlier periods.
Fourth
Quarter Jan.
Sept.) Dec.
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term market paper
(actual $ change in billions)
Large CD's $ 14.5 $ 7.9 $ 1.8 -0.2
Nonbank commercial paper - 2.1 - 1.4 1.6 N.A.
N.A. - Not available.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data
on total loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial
paper, and thrift institutions--which are either end-of-month or
last Wednesday of month figures.
Prospective relationships among aggregates and interest rates
(5) The table below summarizes three alternative patterns of
prospective relationships among monetary aggregates and money market con-
ditions that the staff believes to be consistent. The anticipated behavior
of monetary aggregates is indexed in the summary table by data on M1,
but the patterns for all of the key aggregates--M1, M2, the adjusted credit
proxy, and total reserves--are shown in the table on the following page.
The lower portions of the ranges shown for money market indicators under
pattern II are representative of recently prevailing conditions.
Pattern I Pattern II Pattern III
Federal funds rate 2--3 3--4 4--5
Member bank borrowings 25 25--200 200--350
Growth in M 1 (SAAR):
February
March
(6) For M 1 all three patterns involve a more rapid growth in
February and March than in recent months, and growth in the second quarter
larger than in the first quarter. There are three reasons for this expectation:
(a) the lagged impact of recent short-term interest rate declines will be
raising the demand for cash; (b) cash balances have been worked down to more
normal levels relative to income following their sharp increase over the
Alternative Monthly and Quarterly Pattern
for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2
I II
II III
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
Adjusted Credit Proxy Total Reserves
I II
II III
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
Feb.
Mar.
Feb.
Mar.
first seven months of last year so that the overhang of such liquidity will
no longer be exerting a drag on net money demand; (c) transactions demands
for cash are expected to be enlarged, with nominal GNP projected to expand
at about a 10-1/2 per cent annual rate in the first half of this year as
compared with a 6-1/2 per cent rate in the second half of last year.
Finally, it might be noted that in the short run a sharp drop projected
for U.S. Government deposits at commercial banks in February may temporarily
boost M 1 growth in that month.
(7) While demand for, and expansion in, M 1 is expected to increase
substantially, growth in M 2 is likely to decelerate from the January rate,
particularly after February. The extremely rapid rise of time deposits
other than large CD's of the last two months is not expected to persist
over the months ahead. The favorable spread between interest rates on
time and savings accounts and short-term market rates is likely to
narrow; the degree to which this occurs as a result of rising market or
falling institutional rates will depend in part on whether open market
policy tends toward patterns I, II, or III. With business loan demand
expected to remain quite moderate, cuts in interest rates on passbook
savings accounts and time certificates are likely to become more widespread.
Such cuts would probably snowball if the Federal funds and Treasury bill
rates were to move down into the range associated with pattern I, and be
held back--and in some cases rescinded if they had already occurred--if
market rates moved into the range of pattern III.
(8) The adjusted credit proxy is expected to grow much more
slowly in February than in January mainly because of a projected sharp
drop in U.S. Government deposits. But this will probably be only a temporary
dip, and the rate of increase in bank credit should be sizable in ensuing
months. Growth will not be as large as in the 3-month November-January
period, when it was at a 12 per cent annual rate on average, because of
the slowing that is expected in expansion of time and savings deposits.
Nonetheless, bank credit is likely to be available in ample enough supply
for banks to help support large contra-seasonal Treasury net cash borrow-
ing between now and the end of April and a continued sizable flow of new
municipal securities. At what level of interest rates such support will
be forthcoming will depend in part on the strength of business credit
demands and on changes in money market conditions, which represent the
cost of day-to-day liquidity to banks.
(9) Pattern I implies a substantial enough easing in money market
conditions so that both short- and long-term market interest rates would
be likely to decline from current levels in the short run between now and
the next meeting of the Committee. The actual decline that develops in
short-term rates might be limited by expectations of an early reversal,
however, assuming economic news is favorable. The range of money market
conditions indicated for pattern II encompasses a Federal funds rate high
enough--the range is 3 to 4 per cent--to leave room for a turn-around in
short rates. Even if the funds rate were to remain in the bottom half of
the range, which would be about the prevailing rate, the bill rate could
begin to rise in reflection of increased Treasury borrowing. And, of course,
pattern III would lead to a sharp reversal in short-term rates.
(10) It is not clear how much short-term rates can increase
without entailing a rise in longer-term rates. The 3-month bill rate at
the moment appears low relative to other bill and short-term market rates,
so that it might rise 20--25 basis points over the near-term with very
little effect on either other short- or long-term rates. A substantially
larger rise could well involve feedback effects on the whole rate structure.
A sizable volume of corporate and municipal issues is currently pressing on
the market, and there is some--though relatively small--volume of new
Treasury coupon issues overhanging the market. Over the longer-run, the
staff still anticipates a significant moderation in the volume of corporate
bond offerings; if this develops, it would likely contribute over time, to
limiting the upward effect on long rates of short-term rate increases.
(11) The total reserves that are likely to be associated with the
monetary aggregates and interest rates shown in patterns I, II, and III are
summarized in the table on page 5. 1/ The figures indicate that in pattern
II, for example, total reserves--following a sharp rise in January--are
likely to decline somewhat in February, show little net change in March,
and rise sharply in April. This pattern reflects, among other things.
swings in U.S. Government deposits and net interbank deposits. Against
private nonbank deposits alone, reserves in January expanded at about a
indicated to increase at 5-1/2 per cent and 10 per cent rates, respectively.
Proposed directive
(12) This section presents two alternative formulations for the
second paragraph of the directive (labeled "A" and "B") which are intended
to be--though they do not necessarily have to be--associated with differing
degrees of emphasis in operating procedures between money market conditions
and reserves. Each of the two formulations shows three alternative adjec-
tives qualifying "growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead."
These adjectives can be taken, if the Committee so wishes, to represent
alternative target rates of growth. To provide a possible quantitative
interpretation of these adjectives, they are numbered I, II, and III to
correspond with the three aggregate patterns described in the preceding
(13) As will be noted in both A and B, it is proposed to delete
the reference to the Treasury financing, and also to international develop-
ments. The latter deletion is suggested on the assumption that the Committee
will no longer consider it necessary to make explicit provision for the
contingency that sudden large reflows from abroad will pose major problems
for open market operations, given the passage of time since the Smithsonian
agreement and the absence to date of market churning as a consequence of
(14) Alternative A. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides that the Desk should focus primarily on money
market conditions as the day-to-day control variable, giving only as much
weight to bank reserves as was customary in most of 1971. This formulation
could also be used, with appropriate interpretation, to call for about the
same relative emphasis on aggregate reserves and money market conditions as
was decided upon at the January FOMC meeting.
"To implement this policy, [DEL: while taking account of international
developments and the forthcoming Treasury financing,] the Committee
seeks to ACHIEVE [DEL: promote the degree of ease in] bank reserve and
(I - greater )
money market conditions [DEL: essential to] THAT WILL SUPPORT(II - AMPLE )
(III- MODERATE)
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead."
The money market conditions the staff expects to be consistent with each
of the three alternative targets for operations are noted in paragraph (5)
(15) Alternative B. This language is proposed for possible
use if the Committee decides that the Desk should place primary emphasis on
bank reserves as the control variable, subject to a proviso constraining
the range of fluctuations in money market conditions. Under this alternative
money market conditions would, of course, be expected to fluctuate more
widely than under A, with the extent of fluctuation depending on the speci-
fic interpretation the Committee attached to the proviso clause.
"To implement this policy, [DEL: while taking account of inter-
national developments and the forthcoming Treasury financing,]
SYSTEM OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS UNTIL THE NEXT MEETING OF the
Committee [DEL: seeks to promote the degree of ease in] SHALL BE CON-
DUCTED WITH A VIEW TO SUPPLYING bank reserves [DEL: and money market
(I - greater )
conditions essential to] AT A RATE CONSISTENT WITH (II - AMPLE )
(III- MODERATE)
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead, PROVIDED THAT
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS DO NOT FLUCTUATE OVER AN UNDULY WIDE RANGE."
(16) If the Committee were to adopt alternative B it could base
reserve operating targets on the levels and growth rates for reserves shown
earlier to be consistent with either patterns I, II, or III. The Committee
may also wish to allow, in operations, for the effects on reserve levels of
unanticipated changes in U.S. Government deposits, net interbank deposits,
and perhaps large CD's. The effect of anticipated changes in such deposits
was discussed in paragraph (11).
(17) For the proviso clause in alternative B, the Committee may
wish to consider a range of fluctuation for the Federal funds rate as large
as 2 percentage points, as recommended by the report of the Committee on the
Directive. If the Committee were to adopt as targets the aggregates of
pattern II, for example, this would mean widening the funds rate range from
more restrictive on either the up or down side, or both, depending on the
extent to which the Committee may wish to emphasize interest rates relative
to aggregate objectives.
Comparison of Annual Rates of Growth--
Reserve Aggregates
Total Reserves Nonborrowed Reserves
Old Series Revised Series Old Series Revised Series
Quarterly -- I
II
Monthly--January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
CREDIT PR
TOTAL RESERVES
FtUNREVISED SERIES
CHART A STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL IFR)CHART 1A 2/11/722/11/72
MONETARY AGGREGATES
OXY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
(2/9/
I l I J. 1 I
\ 32
31 20% growth
A S 0 N D J
'71 '72
Table 1
BANK RESERVES
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
February 11, 1972
Seasonally Adjusted Not Seasonally Adjusted
Periodorrowed Nonborroed
Total Required Nonborrowed Total Required Nonborrowed Excess Borrowing
Feb. Projected
Feb. 2
9
(1) (2)
(REVISED SERIES)
(31,674) (31,472)
,nnual Percentage Rates
Weekly Pattern in
(3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
and Month
of Change--Quarterly
Millions of
LJ -~ _________________ 1 4 1.
the nearest half percent.
I/ Aggregate reserve series have been revised to reflect new seasonal factors and current reserve
requirement percentages.
Table 2
MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Actuals and current projections, seasonally adjusted)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
February 11, 1972
Narrow Broad Adjusted U.S. Total Time deposits Nondeposit
Period Money Money Credit Gov't. Time and other Negotiable Sources of
Supply (M) Supply (Mg) Proxy Depposits Savings than CD's CD's Funds
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
in Billions of Dollars
Annual Percentage Rates of Change--Quarterly and
Feb. 2
Weekly Patteri
Partially estimated
n in Billions
of Dollars
Data shdwn if parentheses are current projections.
Annual rates of change other than those for the past are
Monthly Pattern
... ~- _1i. -l ~ 33.4 I
rounded to the nearest half per cent.
s
--- ---
