Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
ALTERNATIVE OPERATING PARAGRAPHS
FOR THE DIRECTIVE,
AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
January 7, 1972
Recent developments
(1) Since the last meeting of the Committee money market con-
ditions have been eased substantially as growth in M1 continued to fall
below desired rates, as shown in the attached Table 1. Meanwhile growth
of M 2 and the bank credit proxy was somewhat more rapid than anticipated
as banks obtained more time and savings and U.S. Government deposits than
(2) In the two weeks immediately after the mid-December meeting,
given preliminary evidence of weakness in M1, reserves were provided through
open market operations to reduce the funds rate to around 3-7/8--4 per cent
from the 4-1/4--4-5/8 per cent range of the previous two weeks. In recent
days open market operations have become more aggressive, and the System
Account Manager has been aiming at a Federal funds rate around 3-5/8 per
cent, the minimum level discussed by the Committee at its last meeting.
Since mid-December, the 3-month Treasury bill rate has dropped about 70
basis points, most recently trading around 3.35 per cent; and other short-
term rates, as well as bank prime rates, have also been reduced. With the
general lowering of the short-term rate structure, System repurchase agree-
ments have been made at 3-5/8 and 3-3/4 per cent, following suspension on
December 23 of previous operating rules constraining the rate on these
(3) Over the three weeks ending January 5 nonborrowed reserves
of member banks (not seasonally adjusted) rose $1.7 billion, as shown in
the last column of the table below, reflecting about $2 billion of System
reserve supplying operations. About half of the provision of nonborrowed
reserves represented normal seasonal needs. In addition, more reserves
than earlier anticipated were absorbed by U.S. Government deposits, interbank
deposits, and large CD's. Thus, despite a December seasonally adjusted
increase in total reserves of 6 per cent--only slightly below expectations
at the time of the last Committee meeting--achievement of the Committee's
M 1 target would have required a still greater provision of reserves.
Member Bank Reserves
(Not seasonally adjusted, in million of dollars)
Averages for weeks of Dec. 22, 29
and January 5 combined
Bluebook
targets 1/
Difference:
actual less
Actual Cuc=cla-
tive changes
for 3 weeks end-
ing January 5
Reserves supplied:
Nonborrowed reserves
Borrowing
Total reserves
Reserves absorbed by:
Excess reserves
Required--related
to deposits 2
weeks earlier
U. S. Gov't deposits
Interbank deposits
Large CD's
M2- type deposits
M1- type deposits
to be consistent wi t h
(4) The following table shows changes in major financial aggregates
for selected recent periods.
Sept.) March) Sept.)
Total Reserves 8.9 8.6 -0.8
Nonborrowed Reserves 10.3 8.1 3.1
Concepts of Money
M1 (Currency plus demand
deposits 1/) 6.5 7.2 1.1
M2 (M1 plus time deposits
at commercial banks
other than large CD's) 13.6 8.5 7.9
M3 (M2 plus deposits at
thrift institutions) 14.5 11.2 9.5
Bank Credit
Total member bank deposits
(Bank credit proxy adj.) 9.4 8.1 9.5
Loans and investments of
Commercial banks 2/ 10.7 10.2 8.7
Short-term market paper
(Actual $ change in billions)
Large CD's $ 6.8 $ 3.6 $ 2.3
Nonbank commercial paper - 0.4 - 1.0 n.a.
and branches.
N.A. - Not available.
Proposed directives
(5) Possible targets for the aggregates are shown in the table
on the following page. These targets include a 6 per cent annual rate of
growth for M1 in both January and February (target I) and an 8 per cent
rate in both months (target II). The first of these, if realized, would
produce M1 growth for the three-month interval December-February of about
about 6 per cent. It has to be recognized that month-to-month M1 figures
are variable and not subject to tight control, so that fluctuations around
an average rate of growth are a reasonable expectation.
(6) Presented below for Committee consideration are two alterna-
tives for the second paragraph of the directive which differ with respect
to the kinds of operating procedures they imply but not necessarily with
respect to the monetary aggregate targets (whether I or II) the Committee
may wish to adopt. As noted below, the language of alternative A is quite
similar to that adopted by the Committee on December 14. Alternative B, on
the other hand, places primary stress on bank reserves as the operating
target variable, with a money market conditions constraint in a proviso
clause. The choice of operating procedure depends in part on the Committee's
relative confidence in reserves or money market conditions as bearing a more
dependable relationship to bank deposit behavior.
(7) The language proposed for alternative A is as follows:
"To implement this policy, the Committee seeks to promote
the degree of ease in bank reserve and money market conditions
essential to greater growth in monetary aggregates [DEL: over the
months ahead, while taking account of international develop-
Possible Targets For Monetary Aggregates
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
Credit Proxy Total Reserves
Per Cent Annual Rates of Growth
December
January
February
This language differs from that adopted at the last meeting (as amended
on December 20) by omitting references to the "months ahead" and to
international developments, and it would be associated with different
money market specifications. Omission of the reference to "months
ahead" is suggested if the Committee wishes to emphasize prompt attain-
ment of a desired rate of growth for M1 the aggregate hitherto lagging.
The reference to international developments is omitted because reflows
of funds from abroad have not been showing signs of becoming a disturbing
influence on monetary policy. To the extent that pressures from this
source do in fact develop, it is thought that past Committee discussion
gives the Manager sufficient flexibility to cope with them.
(8) If the Committee were to adopt the language of alternative
A, it may wish to consider instructing the Manager to ease the Federal funds
rate from the prevailing 3-5/8 per cent to the neighborhood of 3-1/4 per
cent in the first week following the meeting and to the neighborhood of 3
per cent in the second week, unless a sudden surge of M1 growth were to
appear. The purpose of such an instruction would be to stimulate more
growth in M1 than has been apparent in the data thus far available. If
such an approach were successful in moving M1 onto the path specified by the
Committee as desired, the staff believes that the odds are that the funds
rate would need to be raised in the ensuing weeks in order to keep growth
in M1 around the target rate, particularly if a 6 per cent target path for
M1 is adopted but also perhaps under an 8 per cent target.
(9) The proposed language for alternative B follows:
"To implement this policy, [DEL: the Committee seeks to
promote the degree of ease in bank reserve and money market
conditions essential to] SYSTEM OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS UNTIL
THE NEXT MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE SHALL BE CONDUCTED WITH A
VIEW TO SUPPLYING THE BANK RESERVES NEEDED TO SUPPORT greater
growth in monetary aggregates; [DEL: over the months ahead, while
taking account of international developments] PROVIDED THAT
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS DO NOT FLUCTUATE OVER AN UNDULY WIDE
If the Committee were to take this course in its operating instructions,
the Manager would be guided initially in his reserve supplying operations
by a target path for reserves thought to be consistent with whatever aggre-
gate targets the Committee adopts. The estimates for total reserves,
seasonally adjusted and rounded, consistent with the proposed targets I and
II are shown in the table; and detailed weekly and monthly seasonally un-
adjusted figures have been prepared for use if this alternative procedure
is adopted.
(10) Operating on an aggregate reserve target would represent
a departure from past Committee practice. With primary emphasis on a
reserve target, the Manager would be guided in the amount of reserves he
supplies during a week by the difference between the reserve target and
the sum of other factors affecting reserves, and not primarily by the
behavior of the Federal funds rate. The reserve target would, however,
have to be adjusted week by week to take account of changes in the deposit
mix--such as unexpected developments with respect to Treasury deposits,
interbank deposits, and perhaps CD's--and also shifts in the demand for
excess reserves. Such adjustments would tend to reduce the potential for
day-to-day money market fluctuations, but money market conditions would
still likely be more volatile than under present procedures. Since it
will take time for the market and banks to adjust to the new procedures,
with transitional uncertainties reflected in, for example, greater bank demand
for excess reserves, reserve targets for the period immediately ahead
would have to be flexible enough to allow for a potential enlargement of
excess reserves.
(11) Since effects on money market conditions would be a
secondary consideration in the Manager's operations under alternative B,
the Committee need not prejudge the direction of the funds rate, as would
be the case under alternative A. Depending on developments affecting the
demand for money, the funds rate under this procedure might rise or fall
from currently prevailing levels, and the rate movements could be sub-
stantial. Therefore, the Committee might wish to place a lower and upper
limit on the funds rate, perhaps 2 and 5 per cent. These limits could
apply to the weekly average, with somewhat more intra-weekly volatility
permitted. In the period ahead--given past shortfalls in M1 and the
announcement by the Treasury in late January of its mid-February refunding
--the Committee might wish to instruct the Manager within the context of
this directive to err on the side of ease, that is, to show greater resis-
tance to interest rate increases than to declines.
Table l-A
PATHS OF KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
STRICTLY CONFIDENTAL (FR)
January 7, 1972
U .S. Govt. Deposits Total Time & Time Deposits other e N ia C Nondeposit Sources
U.S.Govt. Deposits Savings Deposits than largeCD's are Negotiable CDs of Funds
Monthly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Dec. 1
8
Annual Percentage Rates of Change-Quarterly and Monthly
Weekly Pattern In Billions of Dollars
5.5
5.0
I- ___ __ __ L- __ _ _ _ _I _ _ _ _ _I._ _ _
nre rmniihd to the neClre t lin 1 per cent.
FR 712
e(v 2 / 1 6/7
