Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
September 14, 1973
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) September 14, 1973
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) RPD's now appear to be growing around the mid-point of the
Committee's August-September range of tolerance, but M1 appears to be well
below and M2 is near the bottom of their respective ranges, as the table
shows. In August the narrowly defined money supply experienced a small
contraction instead of expanding slightly as projected, and growth of M2
at a 6-1/2 per cent annual rate was also substantially short of expecta-
tions. The smaller shortfall from target for M2 as compared with M1
reflects the continuing expansion in consumer-type time deposits, particu-
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD
in August-September Target Period
Ranges of Latest
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates Tolerance Estimates
(Growth at SAAR in per cent)
RPD 11--13 12.2
M1 -- 4 - 0.7
M2  6-3/4--9-3/4 6.7
Memo: Statement
week ave.
Fed funds rate
(per cent per annum) 10--11 9/12 10.74
larly the 4-year wild card accounts. The fact that RPD's are growing around
the mid-point of their range of tolerance, even though the money supply
aggregates are low, stems from the Committee's decision to reduce (by two
per centage points) the whole range of tolerance for RPD's relative to
that shown in the Bluebook for alternative B, while dropping (by just one
per centage point) only the low ends of the ranges for M1 and M2 .
(2) Early in the intermeeting period RPD's and the money supply
aggregates all appeared to be expanding at annual rates close to or above
the upper limits of the Committee's August-September ranges of tolerance.
By the end of August, although growth of M1 and M2 appeared to be slipping
to annual rates close to or below the low ends of their ranges, RPD's
continued to grow at a rate near the top of theirs. In view of the emphasis
on RPD's at the last meeting, the Account Manager adopted a reserve supplying
strategy early in the period under which the Federal funds rate was expected
to move up toward the top of the Committee's 10-11 per cent rate range. Later,
however, RPD growth moved down into the Committee's range of tolerance, and
the monetary aggregates weakened further. Accordingly, the Desk did not
continue to press for progressively firmer conditions of reserve availability.
The Federal funds rate has averaged around 10-3/4 per cent since late August.
(3) Yields on intermediate and long-term securities trended down-
ward during most of the intermeeting period, substantially extending the
market rally begun before the last meeting, as market participants began
to believe that the maximum degree of monetary restraint had been reached.
Declines ranged to around 30 basis points on both municipal and Treasury
issues, and to about 35 basis points on new corporate bonds. A further
increase in the prime rate to 9-3/4 per cent on August 27, had little
dampening impact on this downtrend. At the same time, the general market
improvement facilitated sale of a $2 billion Treasury note on August 24 and
of a sizable volume of new Federal agency issues during late August and early
September. Most recently, however, the bond market rally has ended, and
some yields have risen, as the money market continued taut and the Board took
action on September 7 raising marginal reserve requirements on large CD's.
In the last two days, a number of banks raised the prime rate to 10 per cent.
(4) In contrast to bond yields, rates on home mortgages continued
to rise during the intermeeting period. The increase in FNMA auction yields
amounted to 32 basis points. Continued upward pressure on mortgage rates is
hardly surprising in view of the large further attrition in savings accounts
at non-bank thrift institutions during August, and the resulting continuing
low volume of new mortgage commitments.
(5) Currently, most short rates are close to or at new highs,
The only short rates that showed significant declines within the intermeeting
period were those on Treasury bills and Federal agency securities, and even
these declines proved to be temporary. The 90-day Treasury bill rate, for
example, dropped below 8.50 per cent shortly after the last meeting, then
rose to a new high of more than 9 per cent and most recently has traded
around 8.80 per cent. Over the full intermeeting period, private short-term
rates have posted further advances ranging generally from 1/8 to 1/4 of a
percentage point.
(6) The table on the next page shows (in percentage annual rates
of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various recent time
Dec. '73 Aug. '73 Aug. '73 Aug. '73 Aug.'73
over over over over over
Dec. '69 Aug. '72 Feb. '73 May '73 July'73
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term market paper
(Monthly ave. change in
billions)
Prospective developments
(7) Given the recent weakness in money supply and the continued
high level of interest rates, it now appears that the long-run target path
for M1 initially adopted by the Committee last March and reaffirmed at recent
meetings cannot be attained by the end of this year without an abrupt and
very large decline in interest rates. If current money market conditions
are maintained over the next several months, the staff would expect M 1 growth
in the fourth quarter to be around 2-1/2 per cent at an annual rate. Such
a growth rate would lead to a level of M1 that is some $2.5 billion below
the December level implicit in the 5-1/4 per cent long-run path line adopted
by the Committee. This path, extended to March 1974, is shown in the chart
on the following page.
(8) The assumption of unchanged money market conditions is
incorporated in the specifications presented here as alternative C. This
alternative includes a growth rate for M1 over the fourth and first quarters
combined of about 3 per cent. The levels of M1 that would be reached in the
final months of each of these quarters under this alternative are shown on
the chart by the dots labelled "C". As will be noted from the chart, the
shortfall from path would be expected to widen further in the first quarter.
Specifications for this and other alternatives are summarized in the following
table and spelled out more fully in the table on page 6a.
MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATH
RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF
*8d^ " 9
*A
- "'
J F M A M J J A S O N 0 J F M A
Alt. A
Targets (4th & 1st qtrs.
combined)
M
1
Credit proxy
Associated ranges for
September-October 1973
Federal funds rate range
(inter-meeting period)
Alt, B
Alt. C.
(9) Alternative A specifications include a 6-month growth rate for
M I of 6 per cent, the rate required to reach the longer-run 5-1/4 per cent path
by March. This pattern is illustrated by the dots labelled "A" on the chart.
To compensate for the cumulative restraining impact on money supply of recent
high interest rates, this alternative implies a decline in the Federal funds
rate, with an initial drop over the next few weeks to a level possibly as low
as 8-1/2--9 per cent. Given the lagged relationship between money demand and
interest rates, the longer that shortfalls in monetary aggregates continue, the
sharper the decline in interest rates that would be needed to bring the
aggregates back on path within any specific period. Accordingly, significant
delays in permitting greater reserve availability would increase the risk
Alternative Longer-Run Targets for Key Monetary Aggregates
Months:
Sept.
Oct.
Quarters:
1973 3rd Q.
Months:
Sept.
Oct.
Alt. A
Alt. B
Adjusted Credit
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. C
Proxy
Alt. C
Alt. A
Alt. B
Rates of Growth
Alt. C
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
- 0.5
Alt. A
Alt. A
Alt. B
RPD
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. d
that a return to the 5-1/4 per cent path by the end of the first quarter would
require easing to a degree that might lead to a subsequent unduly sharp expansion
in money.
(10) Alternative B falls in between A and C in terms of growth in
the aggregates. It also implies a smaller drop in interest rates than does
alternative A. The 6-month growth rate for M1 under this alternative is
around 4-1/2 per cent at an annual rate. Thus, like C, it would represent
a path that falls short of the Committee's previous long-run target, but
of course the shortfall is less.
(11) The short-run September-October growth rate in RPD's is
very large under these alternatives, ranging around 16 per cent at an annual
rate. About half of this rapid growth rate is attributable to expected
behavior of CD's and non-deposit sources of funds (including about 3-1/2
percentage points that reflect the impact of the two marginal reserve actions).
Only about 2 percentage points of the growth reflects expected expansion in
private demand deposits, as only a slight increase is indicated for M1 in
September-October, while 4-1/2 percentage points are accounted for by
expansion in time and savings deposits other than large CD's.
If the Committee were to decide to permit money market conditions
to ease significantly over the next few weeks--e.g. a Fed funds rate below
strongly influenced. A substantial decline in short-term interest rates
would probably be set in motion. And long-term rates would also drop, though
perhaps not as much as short rates, in view of the still wide spread of
short- over long-rates and given the downward adjustment that has already
taken place in long rates in recent weeks. If, on the other hand, money
market conditions remained about unchanged from those recently prevailing,
short-term rates could be expected to advance somewhat further as seasonal
pressures build up during the fall. Long-term rates would probably also
regain part of their recent declines.
(13) Given the money market conditions of alternative C--indicated
by a Federal funds rate in a 10 to 11 per cent range--growth in consumer-type
time and savings deposits at banks would be expected to slow noticeably as
the realignment of consumer financial asset holdings to the new rate structure
tapers. M2 under alternative C may be expected to rise at about a 5-1/2 per
cent annual rate in the September-October period. The market interest rates
decline envisaged under alternative A and B would lead to greater growth in
consumer-type time deposits than under C and hence to somewhat greater growth
in M2 . Nonbank thrift institutions are expected to remain under pressure in
the months ahead, assuming no change in money market conditions, but the
pressures would moderate a little once the most interest-sensitive depositors
have shifted out. The position of thrift institutions would ease, of course,
as market interest rates decline under alternatives A and B.
(14) Business loan demand at banks is expected to continue relatively
strong over the months ahead, accmpanied by bank demand for money market funds.
However, bank issuance of CD's should be tempered by the new marginal reserve
requirement, although some bank demand will shift toward Euro-dollars and
inter-bank loans. And bank credit growth is expected to moderate over the
coming months from the exceptionally rapid August pace.
Proposed directive language
(15) Presented below are three alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to cor-
respond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in the
preceding section. For all three alternatives it is proposed to delete
the word "immediately" from the phrase "over the months immediately
ahead" to avoid any implication that the Committee seeks to achieve
the aggregate growth rates described within a very few months. As
will be noted, alternatives A and C refer to growth rates in the
aggregates "thus far this year." For the period through August, these
are as follows: M1, 5 per cent; M2 , 7-1/2 per cent; and the bank
credit proxy, 14 per cent.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of
international and domestic financial market developments
[DEL: and the forthcoming Treasury financing], the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions
consistent with SOMEWHAT MORE RAPID [DEL: slower] growth in mone-
tary aggregates over the months [DEL: immediately] ahead than has
occurred on average thus far this year.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of
international and domestic financial market developments
[DEL: an the forthcoming Treasury financing], the Committee seeks
to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions con-
sistent with [DEL: slower] MODERATE growth in monetary aggregates
over the months [DEL: immediately] ahead [DEL: than has occurred on
average thus far this year].
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of
international and domestic financial market developments
[DEL: and the forthcoming Treasury financing], the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions
consistent with slower growth in monetary aggregates over
the months [DEL: immediately] ahead than has occurred on average
thus far this year.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
SEPTEMBER 14,1973
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
SEPTEMBER 14 1973
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
SEPTEMBER 14, 1973
