Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
February 8, 1973
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) February 8, 1973
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) RPD and the money supply aggregates all appear to be growing
at slower than expected annual rates during the January-February target
period--well below the upper limits of the Committee's ranges of
tollerance--as shown in the table below;
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD
In January-February Period
(SAAR in percentage points)
Ranges of
Tolerance
Current
Estimates
RPD 4-1/2--10-1/2 7.0
Ml 3 --7-1/2 4.0
M 2  4 --9 6.5
Memo:
Federal funds federl f s 6.35 (week ending 1/31)
rate 5-3/4--6-3/8 6.21 .(week ending 2/7)
(2) The narrowly defined money supply showed no growth on
average in January, partly reflecting a drop in State and local
government deposits following a contra-seasonal rise in December when
revenue sharing payments first began. It does not appear that dollar
outflows abroad had much effect on recent M1 behavior. Large outflows
began only in early February, and the fragmentary data available for
the first week of that month give no evidence of sizable shifts directly
out of cash into foreign assets. When the erratic December-January move-
ments in Mh are averaged together, they show an annual growth rate for
the two months combined of about 6-1/2 per cent, about the same as the
average rate for the past six months.
(3) In the discussion at the last Committee meeting, it
was noted that the upper limits of the ranges of tolerance adopted for
growth rates in RPD and monetary aggregates were below those most likely
to be associated with the then prevailing Federal funds rate of 5-5/8--
action to slow growth in the aggregates would need to take place in the
early part of the inter-meeting period, so that resulting upward adjust-
ments in short-term rates would be largely completed before the
January 31 announcement of terms on the Treasury refinancing. Finally,
the Committee indicated a willingness to tolerate substantially slower
expansion in RPD and the monetary aggregates if growth rates at given
interest levels fell short of expectations. Given these guidelines, the
Desk acted early in the inter-meeting period to tighten up on the pro-
vision of reserves through open market operations.
(4) The tightening effects of Desk action were quickly
reflected in the Federal funds rate which advanced to a little over 6
per cent in the statement week immediately following the meeting, and
then into a 6-1/4--6-3/8 per cent range over the two succeeding weeks.
After the start of the "even-keel" period, Desk reserve strategy was to
achieve relative stability in money market conditions, with the Federal
funds rate continuing to range generally between 6-1/4 and 6-3/8 per
cent. Since the last meeting of the Committee, member bank borrowings
have averaged about $1,2 billion.
(5) The terms of the Treasury refinancing were initially
well received, but between the announcement date and opening of books
the market atmosphere surrounding the operation deteriorated. This
seems to have been due partly to an initial assumption by market parti-
cipants that the Federal funds rate and dealer financing costs would
stabilize during the "even-keel" period at levels below those which
actually developed. Also, with the dollar under attack in foreign ex-
change markets, and rumors of a general rise in the bank prime rate,
market expectations of future interest rate advances strengthened signif-
icantly (apart from expectation of a temporary decline in the bill rate
as a result of foreign official demand for bills). Attrition in the
rights exchange for new 3-1/2 year notes amounted to just under 50 per
cent of public holdings of maturing issues. And in the cash auction,
market professionals received an unexpectedly large 70 per cent of the
new 6-3/4 year note. Most recently, the tone of the Treasury coupon
market has improved and the new issues have risen in price.
(6) The Treasury bill market has been greatly strengthened
by the heavy speculative outflows of dollars. Foreign central banks
receiving dollars have made, or are about to make, sizable acquisitions
of Treasury debt, partly in the bill market but mainly from the Treasury
in the form of special non-marketable certificates. In fact, foreign
purchases of special Treasury certificates appear large enough to cover
all of the Treasury's prospective March need for cash. This abrupt turn-
around in the bill market outlook has been strongly reflected in bill yields.
For example, the rate on 3-month bills, which had earlier reached a high
around 5-3/4 per cent--some 50 basis points above the level prevailing at
the last meeting--has most recently retraced most of this advance and is
currently trading around 5.45 per cent.
(7) Rates on other short-term market instruments have shown
only little tendency to decline with the down-turn in bill yields.
Advances in such markets since the last meeting generally range to about
have remained on the moderate side since the last meeting, and increases
in yields have been limiteo in most cases to about 15 basis points. The
roll-back of the prime rate increase at three banks in response to CID
inquiries, and the abandonment of its rate formula:by the last of the
"floating" banks, helped to moderate upward rate pressures in these
(8) The table on the following page compares recent changes
in money and credit aggregates (seasonally adjusted annual raues) with
those for selected earlier periods.
Average
for 1970
and 1971
Year
1972
Past 6
Months
Past 2
Months
Past
Month
Dec. '71 Dec. '72 Jan. '73 Jan. '73 Jan. '73
over over over over over
Dec. '69 Dec. '71 July '72 Nov. '72 Dec. '72
Total reserves
Nonborrowed reserves
Reserves available to
support private non-
bank deposits
Concepts of Money
M1 (currency plus
demand deposits) 1/
M2 (M1 plus time
deposits at
commercial banks
other than large
CD's)
M3 (M2 plus deposits
at th:ift
institutions)
Bank Credit
Total member bank
deposits (bank credit
proxy adj.)
Loans and investments
of commercial
banks 2/
Short-term market paper
(Actual $ change in
billions)
Large CD's
Nonbank commercial
paper
Prospective developments
(9) Transaction demands for money will be expanding in the
first half of 1973, given the projected rise in nominal GNP of almost
market interest rates will likely be acting to retard demand for money
between now and mid-year. Thus, the financial relationships tabulated
in the next paragraph for Committee consideration suggest that the longer-
run target path that encompasses a 5--6 per cent annual rate of growth for
ML might be attained with little change from current money market conditions
(alternative B). Moving down into a 4--5 per cent growth rate range for M1
would likely involve a tightening of the money market over the next few
weeks (alternative C), and moving up to a 6--7 per cent rate would probably
entail an easing (alternative A).
(10) The three alternatives are presented below in summary
form (with figures for aggregates representing seasonally adjusted annual
rates of growth). More detailed monthly and quarterly figures are shoan
in the table on page 7.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Longer-run targets
(represented by growth
rates for first half of
1973)
M1 6-7 5--6 4--5
M2  7--8 6-7 5--6
Credit Proxy 8--9 7--8 6--7
RPD 8--9 7--8 6-7
Associated ranges for
Feb.-Mar. 1973
Nonborrowed RPD 3-1/2--5-1/2 -4-1/2 to -2-1/2 -10 to -8
RPD 3-5 1-1/2--3-1/2 1/2--2-1/2
MI 8--10 7--9 6--8
M2 7-1/2---9-1/2 6-1/2--8-1/2 5--7
Federal funds rate 5-1/2--6-1/4 5-7/8--6-5/8 6-1/8--6-7/8
Alternative Longer-Run Targets
for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. C
M 2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Rates of Growth
Adjusted Credit Proxy,
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Quarters: 1973 1st. Q
2nd. 0
Months:
Feb.
Mar.
STotal Reserves
Alt..A Alt. B Alt. C
Jan.
Feb.
ha r.
Rates of Growth
Quarters: 1973
Months:
Feb.
Mar.
let. Q
2nd. Q
RPD
Alt. B
Alt. A
Alt. C
_ --
(11) The Federal funds rate range shown for alternative B
represents a range around the prevailing 6-1/4--6-3/8 per cent. The
range for alternative C is meant to indicate, however, that the staff
would expect the funds rate to move up from prevailing levels to close
to the top of the range shown between now and the next Committee meeting,
as reserve growth is constrained. Consequently, in alternative A, a movement
of the funds rate down through the range shown would be anticipated.
(12) Growth in H1 in February-March is shown at a 7--9 per
cent annual rate in alternative B and at close to those rates in the other
alternatives. These growth rates are more rapid than the longer-run
targets. Given prevailing interest rates, money balances are expected
to pick up temporarily in February and March partly because of larger
than normal payments of tax refunds. With the bulge in Ml growth in the
period ahead, and taking account of the January weakness, expansion in the
first quarter would be around 5--6 per cent. In the second quarter, as
the refunds are phased out, continuation of an M1 growth rate in this range
seems likely at around current money market conditions, given the restrictive
effect on money demand still being exerted by relatively high interest rates,
(13) At the moment the 3-month bill is moving well below its
normal relationship to other market rates because of foreign official demand
for Treasury securities generated by large dollar outflow -Given the
prevailing Federal funds ra-e range, the 3-month Treasury 'zll rate would
be likely to move back to around 5-3/4 per cent as and when market purchases
by foreign official institutions come to an end. A bill rate around 5-3/4
per cent would still be low relative to the funds rate, reflecting the
concentration of demand in the Treasury area resulting from the inter-
national flows. The dollar outflows, while difficult to trace as to their
source, probably came out of investments in domestic securities generally
or bank loan proceeds, but there may also have been some temporary drawdown
of existing cash balances. To the extent there is smaller volume of funds
seeking investment in private short-term markets, short-term rates in
those markets may continue under some upward pressures, particularly as
further strong business loan demands on banks lead to aggressive bidding
for CD funds.
(14) Between now and the next Committee meeting, it is possible
that the Treasury may not have to raise any net new cash, assuming they
sell about $4-1/2 billion of special non-marketable securities to foreign
official recipients of the recent dollar outflow. The mid-February
refunding will be in the process of distribution during the period, but
even-keel considerations should be minimal since the settlement date is
on February 15, shortly after the Committee meeting. If the recent
improved market atmosphere continues, distribution of the long note may be
readily accomplished.
(15) A tightening of the money market, such as might accompany
alternative C, would probably lead to substantial upward adjustments in
both short- and long-term interest rates. Under these circumstances the
viability of the current discount rate and of CID efforts to defer
increases in the prime loan rate would come more clearly into question.
And there could be some acceleration of capital market borrowing, as
corporations attempted to safeguard themselves against higher rates later
or more stringent institutional borrowing conditions. Mortgage market
conditions would also tend to tighten as interest rates reached the zone
where a significant diversion of savings flows from banks and other
savings institutions became increasingly probable.
(16) The analysis of the preceding paragraphs has assumed that
the dollar exchange crisis will soon abate. However, should it continue,
or intensify, there is the possibility that domestic psychology would be
affected as investors and businesses become increasingly uncertain about
how monetary policy will be adjusted and as to the nature of possible
changes in trade restrictions and exchange rate structure. Under those
circumstances a sizable increase in domestic demands for liquidity, in-
cluding possible cash balances, could develop on precautionary grounds.
Depending on the particular problems at the time, policy may wish to
consider accommodating such an increased precautionary demand rather than
permitting the sharp rise in the Federal funds rate that could develop if
the reserves necessary to support enlarged liquidity demands were not
being supplied.
Proposed directive
(17) Presented below are three alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive, which might be taken to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in
the preceding section. In all three alternatives, it is proposed to
delete the reference to Treasury financing because the current financ-
ing will be substantially completed by the date of the Committee's
meeting. Retention of the reference to credit market developments is
proposed only for alternative C, the only alternative that contemplates
a significant tightening of the money market. A reference to inter-
national developments is suggested for the three alternatives because
of the possibility that exchange market speculation, if continued,
could have disturbing effects on market psychology generally, alter
cash and liquidity demands, and/or distort the interest rate structure.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of
the- ortheeing-Treasry-f e g-and-pessibe-eredit-m ske
INTERNATIONAL developments, the Committee seeks to achieve
bank reserve and money market conditions that will support
ssteve growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead
than-oeeurred-iB-the-seeead-hasf-ef-Ist-year AT ABOUT THE
AVERAGE RATES OF THE PAST 6 MONTHS.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of the
fortheeming-Tesse y-fiBeig-d-ssiie-eredit-iark
INTERNATIONAL developments, the Committee seeks to achieve
bank reserve and money market conditions that will support slevew
MODERATE growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead thaa
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of the
fek4eeminag-T easury-Uiiaeig-and possible DOMESTIC credit
market AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS, the Committee seeks
to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions that
will support SOMEWHAT slower growth in monetary aggregates
over the months ahead than occurred iA-tke-seeeSd-hal-eI
last-yeas ON AVERAGE IN THE PAST 6 MONTHS.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (Fit)
February 9, 1973
Oct.
Nov.
Dec
Annual Rates .of Clange
19/2--1st Qtr.
Ueekly:
197 -- Nov. I
Feb. 7
Reserves.Available .for
Seasonally Adjusted
Actual
and
Pr vate Nonbank Deposite
Not Seasonallv Adiusted
Actual
and
Aggregate Reserve.
Total Nonborrowed
Seasonally Adjusted
- ____er Pr ected rrojeced 1 Reservyes . eerves I emand . Nondeoetls Interbank
(1)
30,890
30,973
29,496
28,862
(2)
30,609
30,830
29,529
29,211
MOTE: Dta showf th parehthesoa are current projectlons.
1/ At the FMC m eeting January 16, 1973 the Conmittee agreed on an RPD
(3)
33,327
33,832
31,883
31,309
(4)
32,870
33,295
31,297
30,063
range of 6-1/2 to 10-1/2 per cent.
Table 1
Bank Reserves
Reautred Raserve
Time
Private ind
U.S. Gov't.
and
(5)
21,289
21,263
19,553
18,883
(6)
9,411
9,473
9,600
9.739
(7)
2,438
2,859
2,387
2,447
I. iil.. iiii !
iiiJiig iiiiiiiiiiii
iisHiliiiiiiii :!.; 
;
I: ill tllllli 111
iiiiiiiiiiill 1 i!i
i d -
Table 2
Monetary Aggregates
(Actual and current projections, seasonally adjusted)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
February 9, 1973
Narrow Broad Adjusted II.S. Total Time deposits Nondeposit
Money Money Credit Govt. Time and other Negotiable Sources of
Supply (M ) Supply (M
(1) I (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Monthly Pattern in Billions of Dollars
Annual Percentage Rate of Chlllgt--qlarterly
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Feb. 7 pe
in Billions of
and Monthly
(7) (8)
(8.0)
(4.0)
Weekly Pattern
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
FEBRUARY 9, 1973
Table 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations 1/ Daily Average Reserve Effect 2/ A in reserve categories Trt
Bills Coupon Agency RP's3/ Total Open Market ember Other 4/ req. res. against available res. 5/ availables/
& Accept. Issues Issues Net - Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) reserves -
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
Feb. 7 -561 -- - - 2,493 -3,055 -1,020p - 80p 364p 1llp -847p
14
21
28
January 16, 1973 FOMC meeting. Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with the mid-points of
target ranges that were adopted during the month.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
February 9, 1973
Table 4
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK RESERVES
Millions of Dollars
U.S. Govt. Security Other Securityber Bank Reserve Po ons
Period Dealer Position Dealer Positions r Bank Rerve Fogition
Bills Coupon Issues Corporate Municipal xcess Borrowings Net Free Basic Reserve Deficit
Bond Bonds Reserves a Reserves 8 MNm York I 3N ytbdr
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
*3,606
*3,527
*3.118
* 720
* 652
* 687
* 659
* 642
- 957
-*,415
-4,647
-5,476
-5,445
Goverment Security dealer trading positions are on a coamitment basis. Trading positions, which exclude Treasury bills financed by repurchase
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings available for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions
are debt issues stilt in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is exces reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserve
less net Federal funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which
are Friday figures.
* STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL ** Includes $132 million of Washington Metropolitan Transit Authority bonds.
"------- Y I -
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
FEBRUARY 9, 1973
Table 5
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Per cent
Short-term Long-term
90-119 day 90-119 day w ssue U.SMuncpl ov't. FNMA Auction
Periods Federal Funds Treasury bills Commercial CD's New iueunip (10-Yr. Constant90-day 1-year Paper Prime-NYC Aa Utility Bond Buyer Maturity Yields
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
end of the statement week. Column 9 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceding the end of the statement week. The PNMA auction yield is
the implicit yield in weekly or hi-weekly auction for short-term forward commitments for Government underwritten mortgages.
