Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
May 17, 1974
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 17, 1974
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 increased at an annual rate of 8.3 per cent in April.
Growth appears to be moderating in May, and M1 is indicated to expand
at a 6.5 per cent annual rate over the April-May period, slightly
below the upper end of the Committee's range of tolerance. Growth
in M2 also appears to be slowing over April and May, to a rate slightly
below the mid-point of its range of tolerance, reflecting somewhat
more moderate expansion of time deposits (other than large CD's) than
projected at the time of the April Committee meeting.1/ Deposit in-
flows at nonbank thrift institutions have slowed markedly. Estimates
for April show no growth, seasonally adjusted, at mutual savings banks
and only a 4 per cent rate of growth at S&L's; data for recent weeks
suggest the possibility of an even weaker performance in May.
Reserve and Monetary
(Growth at SAAR in
M
2
Memo:
Federa:
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
in April-May Target Period
Aggregates Range of
>er cent) Tolerance
Sfunds rate 9 - ll
1 funds rate 9k 11
cent per annum)
Latest
Estimates
vg, for Statement
week ending
pril 17 10.36
Lay 15 11.46
(2) CD's and other non-deposit sources, however, expanded much
more rapidly than projected for the inter-meeting period, as bueiness
loan demands remained strong. Mainly as a result of this, estimated RPD
growth for the April-May period is far above the upper end of the Committee's
range of tolerance, as indicated in the table below.
Comparison of Projected Changes in RPD's by Use
April-May 1974
(In millions of dollars)
Projections as of
April 16, 1974 Current
FOMC meeting Projectio
Change in Total RPD's 1/ 561 1179
Change in Category of Use:
Private demand deposits
Time deposits other than large CD's
CD's and nondeposit funds
I/ Changes from March to May 1974.
(3) Following the April FOMC meeting, incoming deposit data
suggested that growth in both M 1 and M2 would exceed the upper end of
their ranges of tolerance. Accordingly, the Account Manager adopted a
more reluctant approach to the provision of reserves, expecting the
Federal funds rate to move up to around 10¾ per cent, the upper end of
its range. Money market pressures proved unexpectedly strong, however,
and Federal funds began to trade around 11 per cent toward the end of
the statement week ending April 24th. Given these conditions, and the action
to raise the discount rate to 8 per cent on April 24, Chairman Burns
recommended on that day raising the upper end of the tolerance range for
the Federal funds rate to 11 per cent. A majority of the Committee members
concurred in this recommendation.
(4) Subsequently, the Account Manager sought reserve conditions
consistent with an 11 per cent Federal funds rate. Unusually strong
money market pressures persisted, however, and the Federal funds rate
averaged above 11 per cent. In the past statement week the effective
rate has been consistently close to 11 per cent, although today it
eased to about 11.35 per cent. It appears that member banks have had
a strong preference to avoid borrowing at the discount window, opting
instead to pay a higher rate on Federal funds. Apart from special
borrowing by a problem bank, member bank borrowing over the past two
statement weeks averaged $1.6 billion, down from an average of almost
$2 billion in the previous three weeks.
(5) The Desk has been handicapped in attempting to counteract
these pressures by the technical state of the markets for Treasury and
Federal Agency securities. Dealer positions in U.S. Government securities
have been depleted throughout the period, reflecting the state of
expectations in the dealer community, sizable Desk purchases, and good
retail demand. Collateral for repurchase agreements has also been on
the scarce side. Moreover, dealers have withdrawn sizable amounts of
repurchase agreements before maturity because they have been making
considerable net sales of Treasury securities to the public.
(6) On May 17, Chairman Burns recommended that the Committee
take note of the difficulties faced by the Desk in the recent period.
Also, given the likelihood that the technical problems encountered might
persist over the next few days, the Chairman expressed the view that it
would be appropriate to change the ceiling guideline for the funds rate
from 11 to ll¼ per cent. A majority of Committee members concurred in the
Chairman's recommendations.
(7) After rising sharply early in the inter-meeting period,
interest rates on Treasury securities, particularly on Treasury bills,
have dropped considerably in recent days. The 3-month bill rate was
quoted 7.93 per cent at the close on Friday, as compared with an average
issuing rate of 9.02 per cent established in the auction of May 6. The
rally in the Treasury securities market has been generated not only by
the previously noted shortage of issues, but also by an apparent shift
of investor preferences toward securities of the highest quality, sparked
by news stories regarding the problems of the Franklin National Bank and
widespread rumors that some other banks and financial houses might also
be encountering difficulties.
(8) Private short-term rates have risen sharply since the
last Committee meeting. Banks have raised their prime rates from the
range. Yields on large CD's and commercial paper with 3-month maturity
dates have risen a percentage point or more to levels above 11 per cent.
Evidence of a move toward higher quality securities is also apparent in
these sectors of the credit markets. There are reports, for example, that
a number of investors have reduced the list of institutions whose
commercial paper, bankers' acceptances, and negotiable CD's they are
prepared to acquire. And there has been a marked widening of the yield
spread between issues of prime and lower grade borrowers in these markets.
(9) For its mid-May refunding operations, the Treasury
decided to pay down $1.6 billion of the $5.6 billion of maturing debt
and to refund the remainder by issuing three securities: $2.0 billion
of an 8¾, 25½ month note; $1.75 billion of an 8¾, 4¼ year note; and
$300 million of a 8.50 per cent, 25-year bond. Both notes were auctioned
at prices near par and currently are quoted above their auction averages.
The bond was auctioned at a substantial premium to provide a yield of
yield to 8.13 per cent, but most recently the price has fallen back to
about the auction average. Dealers have now distributed the bulk of
their awards of all three issues.
(10) The table on the next page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various recent
time periods; money supply figures are on a revised basis. Appendix
table III compares money supply growth rates computed on a quarterly-
average basis with those computed on a last-month-of-quarter basis.
Projected figures on the two bases are shown in appendix table IV for
the three alternatives presented in the next section.
Average Past Past Past
of Past Three Twelve Six Three Past
Calendar Years Months Months Months Month
Concepts of Money (revised series)
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Nonbank commercial paper .2 .6 .3 -.6 -.8
Prospective developments
(11) Alternative policy approaches are summarized below for
Committee consideration (with more detailed figures shown in the table
on P.8a).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Targets (2nd & 3rd qtrs.
combined)
M1  6¼ 5½ 4¾
M2  6½ 6 5
Credit proxy 14 12 10
Associated ranges for
May-June
RPD 18-20 16½-18½ 15½-17½
M1  5-7 4½-6½ 4-6
M2  5½-7½ 5-7 4-6
Federal funds rate range 10-12 11-13 12-14
(inter-meeting period)
(12) At its last meeting, the Committee established a 5½ per
cent annual rate of growth for M1 from March to September as its longer-
run target. Since then, the March level of M1 has been raised by
$1.3 billion, reflecting revisions for new year-end benchmark data (as
explained in the footnote on page 1). The 4¾ per cent annual rate of
growth for M1 in alternative C has been set to compensate for this
upward revision. As shown in the chart on the following page, such a
growth rate would achieve the M1 level in September that was implicit in
the longer-run path adopted by the Committee at its last meeting.
Alternative B continues a 5½ per cent growth rate for M1, but from the
MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATH
RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
REVISED SERIES .-- - 280
GROWTH
RATE OF GROWTH
DEC. '72 TO MAR. '74 6.4%
- 270
- 260
J A SJ A S 0 N D J F M A M
1973 1974
II I I I ~I
Alternative Longer-Run Targets for Key Monetary Aggregates
May
June
May
June
Alt. A
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B
Rates Of Growth
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A
Alt. C
Total Reserves
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A
Alt. A
M3
Alt. B
RPD
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. C
new March level. Alternative A contemplates a somewhat more rapid 6¼ per
cent growth rate in M 1 over the second and third quarters combined.
(13) A somewhat more rapid longer-run rate of growth in M1 than
adopted by the Committee at its last meeting, such as envisioned under
alternative A, appears necessary if money market conditions are not to
tighten further. Under alternative A, the staff would expect the Federal
funds rate to trade most frequently around 11-11¼ per cent.
(14) The funds rate has been subject to upward pressure, in
part because of a shift of bank borrowing preferences from the window to
the funds market. This pressure may moderate, however, if more normal
borrowing preferences come to prevail. We have assumed that member banks
will want to increase their borrowing (apart from special borrowing) to
about $2 billion per week on average under alternative A, given the roughly 3
percentage point spread of the Federal funds rate over the current 8 per
cent discount rate. Special borrowing by a problem bank may add another
$1 billion or so to borrowing levels.
(15) If funds were to trade mostly around 11 per cent over
the weeks ahead there probably would be some decline in other short-term
rates, and also in long rates, since market participants appear to have
adjusted to a funds rate somewhat above this level. Declines could be
fairly sizable, at least temporarily, if the market were to interpret
such a move as signaling a shift in policy direction. Moreover, the
shift in investor preferences toward high quality assets, and the
continued short market supply of Treasury bills, would tend to keep
Treasury rates low relative to other market rates--perhaps in a 7½--8½
per cent range in the case of the 3-month bill. The odds on bill rates
settling in the upper part of this range would increase if the Treasury
should choose to issue a bill strip of $1-1½ billion--a possibility that
has been under some discussion.
(16) With the money market conditions assumed under alternative
A, the staff would expect M1 growth in May-June to be in a 5-7 per cent
range. The mid-point of this range, if attained, would produce a 6¾ per
cent annual growth rate in the second quarter. Growth would be expected
to slow somewhat in the third quarter to about a 5¾ per cent rate, as
demand for money is further restrained by lagged impacts of the sharp
rise in short-term interest rates over the past few months.
(17) Growth in time and savings deposits at banks (other than
negotiable CD's at the large weekly reporting banks), and in deposits
at thrift institutions has been sharply curtailed by the attraction of
high market interest rates to savers. We would expect this tendency
to continue even under alternative A, so that M2 growth over the second and
third quarters would be expected to slow to around 6.5 per cent, and in
M3 to about 5.0 per cent--on the order of 4 percentage points below the
average annual rate of expansion in the fourth and first quarters.
(18) Restraining M1 growth to a 5½ per cent annual rate over
the second and third quarters--as under alternative B-- would be
expected to put somewhat more pressure on the money market, with the
Federal funds rate rising to around 12 per cent between now and the
next Committee meeting. The 3-month bill rate would likely move up into
an 8½--9½ per cent range over the next few weeks, and other market rates
would also adjust upward. This rise in rates would be needed to hold
the rise in money demands to a pace consistent with a 5½ per cent growth
rate for M1 in the second and third quarters, in view of the larger
increase in prices and nominal GNP. now projected. This relationship
between money growth and interest rates makes no allowance for the
possibility that liquidity preference may increase if confidence in
financial markets continues to weaken.
(19) To achieve the even greater restraint on monetary ex-
pansion called for under alternative C, the Federal funds rate would be
expected to rise to around 13 per cent over the next few weeks. The
time and savings deposits experience at banks and thrift institutions
would be expected to deteriorate further--with deposit flows at thrift
institutions probably negative as the Treasury bill rate adjusted
sharply upward, perhaps to near 10 per cent.
(20) Under alternative A, banks are expected to continue
borrowing fairly heavily through CD's, and to obtain funds in the Euro-
dollar market. We have projected a slower growth in CD's, though, in
the expectation that tighter lending terms by banks will work to moderate
loan growth. Moreover, it appears that less-than-prime banks are be-
ginning to encounter investor resistance to their CD's. If, as seems
quite possible, such resistance intensifies, CD growth could be substantially
less than projected, bank credit expansion could be constrained, and
strains in other financial markets (including the Euro-dollar market) could
be exacerbated.
(21) Under alternative C and possibly also B, sharply higher
interest rates would erode asset values and bring the adequacy of bank
liquidity into question. Banks outside major money centers might in some
cases be excluded altogether from raising funds in national money markets.
With the intensification of pressures on financial institutions and
financial markets, many institutional lenders would likely severely
restrict loan extensions. The mortgage market would come under great
pressure and some nonfinancial businesses would encounter serious liquidity
(22) A further significant rise in interest rates over the
next few months may need to be followed by a decline in late summer in
order to avoid unduly limiting monetary expansion in the final months of
the year. Alternative C has the greatest potential for such a pattern,
and might well bring about a severe wrenching of market conditions.
Proposed directive
(22) Presented below are three alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in
the preceding section. In all three alternatives, it is proposed to
delete the reference to Treasury financing because the quarterly refunding
announced on May 1 has been completed and the issues largely distributed.
Also, in view of the strong connection between U.S. financial markets, the
Euro-dollar market, and foreign exchange markets, it is proposed to say
". . .while taking account of financial market developments. . ."
without separate reference to "international" and "domestic" developments.
In alternative C, it is proposed to give special emphasis to that
phase--i.e.,". . .while taking careful account. . ."--in view of the
strong possibility of exaggerated market reactions to the sharp rise in
interest rates associated with open market operations designed to achieve
the specified rates of growth in the aggregates.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treacury financing and of internationl and domestic]
financial market developments, the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions [DEL: that would moderate] CONSISTENT
WITH MODERATE growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury financing and of international and domestic]
financial market developments, the Committee seeks to achieve
bank reserve and money market conditions that would moderate
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking CAREFUL account of
[DEL: the forthcoming Treasury financing and of international and domestic]
financial market developments, the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions that would moderate SLOW
APPRECIABLY THE growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
(23) In the event that the Committee wishes to couch the
operational paragraph of the directive in terms of money market conditions,
the specifications of alternative A might be associated with language
indicating that ". . .the Committee seeks to maintain about the pre-
vailing restrictive money market conditions, provided that the monetary
aggregates appear to be growing at rates within the specified ranges
of tolerance."
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
MAY 17, 1974BANK RESERVES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
II AGGREGATE RESERVES I REQUIRED RESERVES
RESERVES AVAILABLE FOR I------------ -------- -----------------
PRIVATE NOMBANK DEPOSITS II SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
II---------------------------------------------------- -------
- ---- ----------- TOTAL NONBORROWED I PRIVATE OTHER CD'S AND GOV'T AND
PERIO I SEAS ADJ I NON SEAS ADJ II RESERVES RESERVES I DEMAND TIME DEP NON DEP INTERBANK
I (1) I (2) 11 (3) (4) I (5) (6) (7) 18)
MONTHLY LEVELS-$MILLIONSI
ANNUAL RATES OF CHANGE
-------------- I
MONTHLY:
1974--FEB.
MAR.
APR.
MAY
WEEKLY LEVELS-$MILLIONS
MAY 1
8
( 22.3)
I 8,715)
( 2,261)
( 21.5)
( 27.61
I 15.51
( -3.6)
( 1.71
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
MONETARY AGGREGATES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED)
MAY 17, 1974
S MONEY SUPPLY I ADJUSTED II U.S. I TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS I NONDEPOSIT
I NARROW I BROAD I CREDIT II GOVT. I I OTHER I I SOURCES OF
PERIOD I (MI) I (M2) I PROXY II DEPOSITS I TOTAL I THAN CD S I CD S I FUNDS
(11 I (21 (31) I (41 i I 16) I 17) I 18)
I
MONTHLY LEVELS-tBILLIONSI
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
WEEKLY LEVELS-SBILL IONS
---------------- I
MAY 1
8 P
f 6.5)
( 6.8)
( 3.9)
( 6.2)
( 7.2)
r -- ,- - U I-- -- ---- lh - - ----- ~ -C-- ~ ~-- --- YL- ~-------
NOTE: DATA SHOIN IN PARENTHESES ARE CURRENT PROJECTIONS. P - PRELIMINARY
PE - PARTIALLY ESTIMATED
-LI - ---------- 1 ------- C------ ---- II---- ------- -- --- -- - - - - -- - - -- - - -- - - -- - -
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MAY 17, 1974
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
May 17, 1974
