Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
March 15, 1974
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Following the decline in January,M1 rose at a 13.4 per
cent annual rate in February and has expanded considerably further in early
March. M1 growth for the February-March target period thus appears to be
well in excess of the Committee's specified range of tolerance. For M2,
however, the expected growth rate for the February-March period remains
within its range of tolerance, as inflows into time deposits other than CD's,
after a large expansion in January, have been somewhat smaller than projected
recently. RPD's are expected to expand at a rate slightly above 6 per cent
over the two-month target period, close to the top of the range of tolerance.
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
in February March Target Period
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates Range of Latest
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance Estimates
RPD's 3½--6½ 6.1
M1 6½--9½ 11.8
M2 9 ½ --12½ 11.7
Memo:
Fed funds rate
(per cent per annum)
Avg. for Statement
week ending
Day of
March 14 9.14
March 15 9-3/8e
e- Estimate
March 15, 1974
(2) The large February increase in M1 , broadly based by region
and size of bank, occurred mainly during the three weeks ending February 20
and was associated with a very sharp, $4 billion, decline in U.S. Government
deposits. Changes in U.S. Government deposits often show little inverse
correlation with M1 after seasonal adjustment, but the unusually large size
of the change in Government deposits in the first three weeks of February
may have affected the level of private deposit holdings at least temporarily.
Subsequently, however, Government deposits have increased somewhat and M1
has continued to expand.
(3) As shown in the table below, growth in RPD in the current
February-March target period is now expected to be somewhat larger than that
at the time of the previous FOMC meeting (based on the midpoint of the
adopted range of tolerance). The upward revisions in the current estimate
are accounted for by the larger than expected growth in private demand deposits.
The other uses of RPD, in fact, are now estimated to have absorbed somewhat
fewer reserves than earlier estimated.
Comparison of Projected Changes in RPD's by Use
February-March 1974
(In millions of dollars)
Projections as of
February 20, 1974 Current
FOMC meeting Projection
Change in Total RPD's 1/ 277 334
Change in Category of Use:
Private demand deposits 2/ -181 -38
Time deposits other than
large CD's 134 143
CD's and nondeposit funds 239 201
Excess 85 28
1/ Changes from January to March 1974. Column 1 is consistent with mid-
point of Committee's range of tolerance for RPD growth.
2/ Due to the weekly distribution of deposits and the lagged reserve require-
ments, the absolute change in RPD's absorbed by required reserves against
demand deposits is estimated to be negative over the two months from
January to March.
(4) The Federal funds rate fluctuated around 9 per cent from the
February meeting of the Committee until early March. By early March, the
strong expansion in M1 and RPD would, under normal circumstances, have
triggered a move to more restriction in reserve-supplying operations with
the funds rate moving toward the 9½ per cent top of its range. However, by
that time there already had been a broad-based increase of around 25-50 basis
points in short-term market interest rates and 10-30 basis points in long-
term rates. In addition, financial markets were in a sensitive state with
U.S. Government security dealers and bond underwriters still holding
sizable positions of longer term issues. With these considerations in
mind, on March 1 the Chairman recommended and the Committee concurred
that Federal funds rate be maintained at around the prevailing 9 per cent
level for the time being. On March 11, with the aggregates continuing
strong, the instruction to the Desk was amended by the Committee to restore
the range of tolerance for the funds rate approved at the February meeting.
but with the Manager expected to proceed very cautiously in moving the funds
rate above the 9 per cent level. Most recently, with the aggregates still
strengthening, the Manager has been operating in the expectation that the
funds rate would move up to around the 9½ per cent upper limit.
(5) From the mid-February Committee meeting to date, bill rates
have increased by about 80 basis points, with the 3-month bill rate most
recently at 7.85 per cent. For commercial paper and CD's, rates increased
by 50 to 70 basis points. In the weeks preceding the mid-February meeting,
short-term rates had declined by about a percentage point. The recent
increases--based in part on a change in expectations about monetary policy
and partly influenced by mid-March tax rate pressures--have retraced most
of that decline. Member bank borrowing at the Federal Reserve has changed
little, averaging $1,050 million over the last three weeks.
(6) Yields in all sectors of the bond market have also been
under upward pressure in recent weeks, as marketings of corporate, municipal,
and U. S. Government issues were large. In the Treasury coupon sector,
intermediate term rates increased by about 40 basis points as U. S. Government
security dealers reduced by $1.3 billion their very large positions acquired
in the mid-February refunding; dealer positions are now of moderate proportions.
The Desk purchased $190 million of coupon issues on March 13. Treasury
borrowing during the period was confined to a $1.5 billion sale of additional
short tax bills in early March. Interest rates on mortgages have declined
only slightly further. A continued large inflow of funds to savings and
loan associations was partly used to build liquidity and to reduce borrowings.
Stock market prices have shown a substantial rebound.
(7) The table on the next page shows (in percentage annual rates
of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various recent time
periods. Appendix Table III compares money supply growth rates computed
on a quarterly-average basis with those computed on a last-month-of-quarter
Average of
Past 3 Past Past Past
-- over over over over
1973. Feb. '73 Aug. '73 Nov. '73 Jan. '74
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term market paper
(Monthly avg. change in
billions)
Prospective developments
(8) Three alternatives for Committee consideration are summarized
below (with more detailed figures shown in the table on p. 6a).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Targets (2nd & 3rd qtrs.
combined)
M1  6½ 5¼ 4¼
M2  9½ 7¾ 5¾
Credit proxy 6¼ 5½ 4½
Associated ranges for
March - April
RPD 5¾--7¾ 5-7 4½ -6½
M1 7--9 6½--8½ 6--8
M2  8½--10½ 7¾--9¾ 
7¼--9¼
Federal funds rate range 8½--9½ 9¼--10½ 9¾--11½
(inter-meeting period)
(9) Following the recent overshoot in M1 growth, both alternatives
B and C are designed to slow M1 growth and restore it to the 5¾ per cent
growth path adopted at previous meetings. Current estimates for M1 in
relation to the long-run growth path are shown in the chart on the following
page. Alternative B aims at a return of M1 to the path by September, whereas
alternative C moves it back more quickly by June (though it then falls
substantially below the path in the third quarter). Alternative A, which
is judged to be consistent with little change in money market conditions,
includes a growth rate for M1 over the next six months that remains above
the 5¾ per cent growth path.
MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATH
RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
Week of March 6, 1974
®4, o GROWTH- -. -5 % GROWTH
RATE OF GROWTH
DEC. '72 TO DEC. '73 5.7%
I ,....lp
SI I I I I I I I
J A S
J A S O N J F M A M
1973 1974
Alternative Longer-Run Targets
-6a-
for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt, C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M.3
Alt. A Alt. B
Months:
Mar.
Apr.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
Quarters:
1974 1st Q.
Months:
Mar.
Apr.
Adjusted Credit
Alt. A Alt. B
Proxy
Alt, C
Rates of Growth
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt, A
RPD
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. C
Alternative Lonzer-Run Tareets _ ___ ____
(10) Effectuation of Committee policy in the weeks immediately
ahead will be taking place at a time when short-term credit markets will
have to absorb a large Treasury financing--one that will probably raise
about $4 billion of new cash. It is likely that part of the funds will
be raised through tax bills and the remainder through short-term coupon
issues. This is a somewhat larger cash offering than the market is
expecting, and will probably itself exert some upward pressure on interest
rates. If the Federal funds rate is rising at the same time, general
upward rate pressures are likely to be intensified,
(11) In returning to the M1 growth path by September, alternative
B includes a growth rate for M1 over the second quarter of around 5¾ per
cent and during the third quarter of 5 per cent, averaging close to 5¾ per
cent for the six month period. Achievement of such growth rates is expected
by the staff to entail some further increase in interest rates as bank
reserves are held back relative to demand. Demands for money and for
supporting bank reserves over the next several months are expected to be
sustained by the transactions needs associated with growth in nominal GNP
projected at 5.7 and 7.8 per cent for the second and third quarters,
respectively. These growth rates do not include any upward impact from
lifting the embargo, and thus could underestimate money demand to some
extent, particularly by the third quarter. In early spring, there is also
likely to be some increase in private cash balances due to higher than
average income tax refunds. In moving gradually back to the 5¾ per cent
long run path, the staff would expect that reserve provision in the weeks
ahead would lead to a rise in the Federal funds rate to around 10 per cent
between now and mid-April and would be associated with M1 growth over
the March-April period in a 6 ½-- 8 ½ per cent annual rate range.
(12) If such a rise in the funds rate did develop, it seems
probable that there would be pronounced effects in other areas of the
financial market. The 3-month bill rate would likely move up to around
further upward. Net inflows of consumer-type time and savings deposits to
commercial banks might slow to around a 10 per cent annual rate, about the
same as in the summer of 1973. Net inflows of deposits at thrift institutions
would be expected to recede to about a 6--7 per cent annual rate, close to
the amount involved in interest crediting. This would be a somewhat better
performance than in the summer of 1973, and appears possible because of the
large amount of interest-sensitive money already drained from these
institutions and because the institutions last summer had not fully
adjusted their advertising and rate policies to the new rate ceilings that
became effective at the beginning of July.
(13) Under alternative C, the expected rise of interest rates
would be much sharper--with the funds rate moving up into the 10¼--11 per
cent area--in order to bring the money supply back to the long run path by
mid-year. If interest rates rose so sharply, though, a strong effect on
money demand would be likely by the third quarter, with money growth in
that quarter projected to fell below a 4 per cent annual rate (unless
reserves were provided at a rate that would permit money market conditions to
ease sharply by around mid-year). A rise in the funds rate to as high as
summer at thrift institutions. The mortgage commitment policies of
those institutions would again be under considerable restraint
and the viability of the current time and savings deposit ceiling
rate structure would probably come into question if high interest rate
levels- with the 3-month bill rate moving over 9 per cent--were sustained
for some time. There could well be significant feedback effects on GNP
of such developments by late summer, though more particularly by the fourth
(14) Under alternative A--which encompasses a 6½ per cent growth
rate for M1 over the next six months--the staff would expect that the
Federal funds rate would not rise from current levels and might, over time,
drop back somewhat. If the funds rate remains around 9¼--9½ per cent,
there may be some further upward rate adjustments in markets, particularly
as the forthcoming Treasury financing is absorbed. A somewhat lower funds
rate would moderate and, perhaps to some degree reverse, recent upward
rate pressures. Short-term rates, particularly bill rates, are likely to
be influenced by the strength of business loan demands and by the way in
which the recycling of oil money affects U.S. markets. Assuming business
loan growth is moderate, banks, under this alternative, would probably
not be a source of pressure on markets in view of the continued availability
of demand deposits and strong growth in time and savings deposits other than
large CD's. Under the circumstances, banks would have little interest
in issuing additional CD's or in borrowing from the Euro-dollar market,
unless rates in that market were to drop sharply with the receipt of Arab
oil money in volume.
(15) In long-term credit markets, corporate and municipal bond
volume is likely to remain large over the next few months, based on the
current schedule of offerings. Foreign borrowing in the U.S. capital market
remains quite modest thus far, although it could pick up as borrowers become
more familiar with opportunities in the U.S. market. Some further upward
yield adjustments in bond markets might develop under current money market
conditions, while yield adjustments are likely to be considerable under
alternative B and very marked under alternative C. Further increases in
bond yields, as well as a rise of short-term interest rates, would also be
reflected in a tightening of mortgage market conditions.
Proposed directive language
(16) Presented below are three alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in the
preceding section. As will be noted, alternatives A and C refer to growth
rates in the aggregates "over the past 3 months." For the 3 months through
February, these are as follows: M1, 5.7 per cent; M2, 9.5 per cent; and the
bank credit proxy, 6.3 per cent.
(17) Alternatives B and C include a reference to the prospective
Treasury financing to be announced early in the week of the FOMC meeting. As
that there would ordinarily be little, if any, even-keel constraint. The
reference is added parenthetically to the alternatives which contemplate a
further tightening of money market conditions in view of the highly sensitive
state of financial markets.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of inter-
national and domestic financial market developments, the Committee
seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent
with [DEL: moderate] MODERATELY GREATER growth in monetary aggregates over
the months ahead THAN HAS OCCURRED OVER THE PAST 3 MONTHS.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of inter-
national end domestic financial market developments (INCLUDING
THE PROSPECTIVE TREASURY FINANCING), the Committee seeks to achieve
bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with moderate
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of inter-
national and domestic financial market developments (INCLUDING
THE PROSPECTIVE TREASURY FINANCING), the Committee seeks to achieve
bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with [DEL: moderate]
SOMEWHAT LESS growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead
THAN HAS OCCURRED OVER THE PAST 3 MONTHS.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
3/15/74
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY
I L I _,I 1 _ i
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
490
- 450
- 410
! i _ i .. . -i 1
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MARCH 15, 1974
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MARCH 15, 1974
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MARCH 15, 1974
March 15, 1974
