Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 13, 1974
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 grew at about a 7 per cent annual rate in November,
and data for early December suggest that the growth rate in prospect
for November and December combined is about 6½ per cent. This would
be at the low end of the Committee's two-month range of tolerance. In
the case of M2 , the estimate for November and December combined shows a
growth rate of about 8½ per cent, somewhat above the low end of the range
of tolerance, as growth in consumer-type time and savings deposits at
banks has been strong. Bank credit expansion, as measured by the proxy,
has been modest. The outstanding volume of large CD's dropped in
November, but growth picked up in early December, partly in anticipation
of forthcoming maturities around the tax date.
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
in November-December Period
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates Range of
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance Lat
M1  6½-9½
M2  8-10½
RPD 2½-5½
Memo:
Federal funds rate
(per cent per annum)
8½-10 Avg
est Estimates
Avg. for statement
week ending
Nov. 20 9.34
(2) Evidence that the monetary aggregates were expanding at
annual rates near the low ends of the Committee's ranges of tolerance
became available shortly after the November FOMC meeting. The Desk
moved to a less restrictive reserve management posture, expecting the
Federal funds rate to move down to around 9¼ per cent from the 9-3/8--
however, the funds rate averaged 9.46 per cent as banks elected to hold
a very large amount of excess reserves over the Thanksgiving holiday.
In early December, the funds rate finally eased, averaging about 9 per
cent in the week ending December 4. With growth in the monetary aggregates
continuing near the low ends of the Committee's ranges of tolerance, and
with the discount rate reduced from 8 to 7¾ per cent on December 6, the
Desk has most recently been aiming at a Federal funds rate around 8¾ per
cent or a little below.
(3) Shifts in bank demands for excess reserves and borrowings
have complicated the task of monetary management in recent weeks. Member
bank borrowing at Reserve Banks rose to an average of about $1.4 billion
in the two statement weeks ending December 4, which bracketed the Thanksgiving
holiday. Excess reserves were large in both weeks, averaging about $500
million. In the statement week just ended, member bank borrowings
declined to an average of only $647 million and excess reserves were
negative, in part because banks had sizable carry-over reserve surpluses
from the previous week.
(4) Because market participants had widely anticipated a further
easing of money market conditions following the November Committee meeting,
the initial tendency for the Federal funds rate to level off at around 9½
per cent was reflected in a snap-back of short- and long-term market rates.
When the Federal funds rate resumed its decline, most other market rates
also began to move down again; the December 6 cut in the discount rate,
to 7¾ per cent, accelerated this process. Recently, rates on Treasury and Federal
agency securities have dropped below the levels prevailing at the time of
the last Committee meeting. but yields on private market instruments remain
somewhat higher, and those on municipal issues have continued to rise.
Weakness in the municipal sector has reflected the continuing lack of
demand from key investor groups.
(5) Savings flows to non-bank thrift institutions--like those
to banks--strengthened further in November and early December. At the
S and L's, November growth was around an 8½ per cent seasonally adjusted
annual rate and at the savings banks it was around 6½ per cent. At both
types of institutions the November performance was nearly as favorable
as in the same month a year ago, and roughly the same pattern of flows
appears to be continuing in early December. The combination of improved
savings flows and a limited supply of mortgages available for immediate
delivery has resulted in declining mortgage rates throughout the inter-
meeting period.
(6) The table on the following page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various
recent time periods. Appendix table IV compares money supply growth rates
Average Past Past Past
of Past Three Twelve Six Three Past
Calendar Years Months Months Months Month
Concepts of Money
M1 (currency plus demand
Bank Credit
Total member bank deposits
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Nonbank commercial paper -- .4 .7 .7 .9
loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institu-
tions--which are derived from either end-of-month or last Wednesday-of-month
figures. Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are
adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when
reserve requirements are changed.
computed on a quarterly-average basis with those computed on a last-month-
of-quarter basis. Projected figures on the two bases are shown in appendix
table V for the four alternatives presented in the next section.
Prospective developments
(7) Summarized below for Committee consideration are four
alternative sets of specifications for key monetary variables (with more
detailed data shown in the table on page 6a. The length of
the period to which the longer-run growth rates of the aggregates
apply (November '74-June '75) has been kept the same as in recent blue
books, but the period has been shifted forward to encompass the two
quarters ahead. Since money supply data for December are still based
mainly on projections, November has been taken as the base month and thus
the period is actually seven months. (In recent blue books August
had been used as the base for longer-run growth rates, which had
encompassed the fourth quarter of 1974 and the first quarter of 1975).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D
Longer-run growth rates
(Nov. '74-June '75)
M1  7¼ 6½ 6 5½
M2  11 9¾ 8½ 7½
Credit proxy 9 7½ 6 4½
Associated ranges of
tolerance for Dec.-Jan.
M1  5¼-7¼ 4¾-6¾ 4½-6½ 4¼-6¼
M2  7¾-9¾ 7¾-9¼ 7-9 6¾-8¾
RPD 9½-11½ 8½-10½ 8-10 7½-9½
Federal funds rate
(inter-meeting range) 6¼-8½ 7-9 7½-9¼ 8-9½
(8) The longer-run targets adopted by the Committee at its
last meeting involved an M1 growth of 5¾ per cent from August to March.
Expansion since August has fallen below this path. The following chart
Mar.
June
Alt. A
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. D
Alt. A Alt. B
Nov.
June
Alt. A
Alt. B
Alt. C Alt. D
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D
Alt. C
Alt. D
LONGER RUN GROWTH RATES OF MONEY SUPPLY
RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
A -1295
- -^
Growth Rates-Nov. '74 to June '75
To Point A 714%
To Point B 61/2%
To Point C 6%
To Point D 51/2%
A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J
1974 1975
shows the relationship to this path (extended to June) of the longer-run
growth rates for M1 contained in the four alternatives shown above.
(9) The 5½ per cent growth rate in M1 from November forward,
under alternative D, appears to be consistent with prevailing money
market conditions, as typified by a Federal funds rate around 8¾ per
cent. Under this alternative M1 may be expected to grow in a 4¼-6¼ per
cent annual rate range in the two month December-January period. This
alternative does not contemplate making up for recent shortfalls in M1
(10) Alternatives C and B involve growth rates of M1 of 6
and 6½ per cent, respectively, through the first half of next year.
Under alternative B the level of M1 by June is the same as that obtained
by extending the 5¾ per cent August-March growth path to June. This
alternative is consistent with the basic chart show projection, which
assumes the same catch-up in M1 growth and also assumes continuation of
the 5 per cent basic M1 growth path throughout the chart show projection
period (to mid-1976). Under alternative C, the catch-up period would
extend into the fall.
(11) Because of the further weakening in GNP growth, pro-
jected by the staff, some further decline in interest rates over the
next few months now appears to be required to achieve the monetary
aggregate objectives of either alternatives C or B. Between now and the
next Committee meeting, alternative C would appear to entail a Federal
funds rate of around 8-3/8 per cent, and alternative B around 8 per cent--
the mid-points of the ranges shown in paragraph (7). M1 growth in the
December-January period under both alternatives may be on the low side
of longer-run growth rates, but growth would be expected to increase
somewhat later on as a result of the lagged impact on money demand of
the further interest rate declines.
(12) Alternative A encompasses a higher 7¼ per cent annual rate
of growth in M1 between now and mid-year. The Federal funds rate under
this alternative would be likely to drop to the 7¼-7½ per cent area by
mid-January. The implications for economic activity and prices of moving
on to such a growth path for M1 will be analyzed in the chart show.
(13) Although demands in credit markets are in process of
moderation, they remain fairly strong in particular market sectors.
Corporate demands for long-term funds still appear to be quite substantial,
and business short-term borrowing may be sustained temporarily by involuntary
inventory accumulation. In the municipal market, demands also remain
sizable, while institutional investor interest appears to be very limited.
Moreover, larger than seasonal borrowing by the Treasury can be expected
during the winter. Against this background, it would appear that further
declines in interest rates over the next few weeks may be limited in the
absence of a noticeable further decline in the Federal funds rate, and
interest rates could back up some.
(14) A drop in the funds rate to aroung 8-3/8 per cent would
probably forestall tendencies for interest rates to back up, and would
likely lead to a modest renewal of rate declines. A drop in the funds
rate to around 8 per cent would have an appreciable downward effect on
short-term market rates, would trigger further declines in bank prime
loan rates, and would more noticeably ease long-term market conditions.
Market expectations of a further decline in the discount rate might
begin to develop, but they would become much more pronounced if the
funds rate were to drop as much as is implied under alternative A.
(14) Net inflows of time and savings deposits (other than
money market CD's) at banks are likely to continue to be relatively strong
under each of the alternatives presented, with growth highest, of course,
under the easiest alternative. The position of thrift institutions
probably also will continue to improve, even under alternative D.
However, it would probably require a further decline in market interest
rates, and an accompanying more rapid inflow of savings funds,to ensure
a significant liberalization in mortgage loan commitment policies by
thrift institutions.
(15) Banks are likely to moderate offerings of large CD's
in the period ahead, given the expected availability of funds from other
sources, reduced loan demands, and continued conservative bank invest-
ment and lending policies. Offerings could remain on the strong side,
however, until year-end if banks attempt to show a lengthening in their
liability structure in their December 31 statement by reducing reliance
on Federal funds. Should market interest rates begin to drop sharply,
banks might well step up CD offerings in order to acquire securities
in anticipation of capital gains.
Proposed directive
(16) Presented below are four alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in
the preceding section.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of
developments in domestic and international financial markets,
the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market
conditions consistent with MORE RAPID [DEL: moderate] growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of
developments in domestic and international financial markets,
the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market
conditions consistent with SOMEWHAT MORE RAPID [DEL: moderate] growth
in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of
developments in domestic and international financial markets,
the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market
conditions consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates
over the months ahead.
Alternative D
To implement this policy, while taking account of develop-
ments in domestic and international financial markets, the
Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market
conditions consistent with RELATIVELY SLOW [DEL: moderate] growth in
monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL(FR)
12/16/74
MONETARY AGGREGATES
NARROW MONEY SUPPLY M1
ER MONEY SUPPLY M2
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL(FR)
12/16/74
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
520
- 460
TOTAL RESERVES
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
DECEMBER 13, 1974BANK RESERVES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
II
RFSERVES AVAILABLE FOR I
PRIVATF NONBANK DEPOSITS I
SA I
I-----------------------------I
S SEAS ADJ I NON SEAS ADJ ii
AGGREGATE RESERVES I REQUIRED RESERVES
SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
TOTAL NONBORROWED I
RESERVES RESERVFS
PRIVATE OTHER CD'S AND GOV'T AND
DEMAND TIMF DEP NON DEP INTERBANK
MONTHLY LEVELS-$MILLIONSI
--- -------------- I
ANNUAL RATES OF CHANGE
MONTHLY:
1974--SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
WEEKLY LEVELS-SMILLIONS
----- ---------
DEC. 4
11
(3
(3
(1) I
II
I
II
II
II
II
I I
i!
II
II
i
II
I'
II
( 5.2)
(38135
(35
,000
,061
5,733)
;,998)
,899
,506
,462
,890 I
,197
,890
( 8.2
( 9,201)
( 9,1021
( 4,966)
( 4,734)
( 1,992)
( 2,215)
- - - -- - - - - -- - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -_ __ _ _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -_
--- -"-- ------------------------------------------'-------- - ------- '
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
DECEMBER 13, 1974MONETARY AGGREGATES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED)
PERIOD
PERIOD |
MONEY SUPPLY
NARROW I BROAD
(M1) I (M2 I
ADJUSTED II U.S.
CREDIT II GOVT.
PROXY II DEPOSITS I
TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS I NONDEPOSIT
I OTHER I I SOURCES OF
TOTAL I THAN CD S I CD S I FUNDS
MONTHLY LEVELS-tBILLTONSI
------------------ --- I
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH I
--- - - - -
QUARTERLY I
--------- I
WEEKLY LEVELS-SBILLIONS
--- ----- ------------
DEC. 4 P
11 PFI
(1) I
(283.3)
(284.71
( 5.6)
I
(6.8)
( 5.9)
( 6.4) I
( 9.7)
( 7.61
II
489.1
488.2
(491.5)
(494.11
I t
II
II
II
( 4.1)
It
It
I 6.1)
( 6.3)
(6.3)
II
II
II
II
(4.7)
( 2.6)
(5) I
t 7.61
(13.91
(12.1)
( 9.1)
( 7.6)
( 7.7)
------------------------------------------------------ -_
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
---- --- -- - ---- --- - - ---- -- -- ----- --- --------------------- ------ --------- ----- ------- ----- --̂ --- ----- -I
---- 11---1- 1-_- ------ ------ ------ ------------ -----̂---- ̂ --- ---- ------------̂ -- --------- -----II- --------
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
DECEMBER 13,1974
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
DECEMBER 13, 1974
