Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
September 6, 1974
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 grew at an annual rate of about 3.0 per cent in August,
somewhat above the very low July rate but short of the 4.7 per cent
indicated at the last Committee meeting. Fragmentary data for early
September suggest that a sizable shortfall is continuing. As a result,
M 1 growth for August and September combined now appears to be running at
only a 2.6 per cent annual rate, below the low end of the Committee's
range of tolerance, as shown in the table, while growth of M2 is close to
the low end of its range.
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
in Aug.-Sept. Period
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates Range of
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance Latest Estimates
M1 4¾-6¾ 2.6
M2  5½-7½ 
5.8
RPD's 7¾-9¾ 8.8
Memo:
Federal funds rate
(per cent per annum)
Aug. 21 12.31
Aug. 28 11.84
Sept. 4 11.64
(2) As evidence of weakness in the aggregates emerged, the
Account Management supplied reserves more readily, expecting the Federal
funds rate to move into the lower half of the Committee's 11½-12½ per cent
September 6, 1974
range of tolerance. The funds rate averaged 11.84 per cent and 11.64 per
cent, respectively, in the 2 full statement weeks since the last meeting.
Member banks showed a greater willingness to borrow in this period, and
borrowings (apart from Franklin) averaged $2.2 billion, up about $400 million
from the average in the previous four weeks.
(3) Net changes in short-term interest rates have been relatively
minor since the last Committee meeting, although quotes on both Treasury
bills and large bank CD's have moved over a rather wide range. Bill rates
rose sharply early in the period, with the bid quote on the 3-month issue
moving to a record 9¾ per cent, as the Treasury was in process of raising
a sizable amount of new cash through additions to the supply of bills.
Subsequently, with the Federal funds rate continuing to edge lower, bill
rates turned down again, and most recently, the 3-month issue has traded
around 9.25 per cent. Bank CD rates also moved up early in the inter-
meeting period when a number of institutions were seeking to expand CD
volume in anticipation of large September maturities, but since then they
have dropped to levels close to those prevailing at the time of the last
meeting. Announcement on September 4 of the Board action eliminating the
was interpreted by the market as evidence that monetary policy has become
slightly less restrictive.
(4) Long-term debt markets remained under pressure during
most of the inter-meeting period, with yields in most areas tending to
edge a little higher. Contributing to this pressure were large current
and prospective borrowings by Government sponsored agencies that support
housing. While some renewed problems developed in the placement and
distribution of new corporate and municipal security issues, the degree
of difficulty appears to be less than in early July. Mortgage rates
continued to rise, as deposit inflows to thrift institutions were severely
(5) The table on the following page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various recent
time periods. Appendix table III compares money supply growth rates
computed on a quarterly-average basis with those computed on a last-month-
of-quarter basis. Projected figures on the two bases are shown in appendix
table IV for the three alternatives presented in the next section.
Average Past Past Past
of Past Three Twelve Six Three Past
Calendar Years Months Months Months Month
1971 Aug. '74 Aug. '74 Aug. '74 Aug. '74
-- over over over over
1973 Aug. '73 Feb. '74 May '74 July '74
Reserves available to support
private nonbank deposits 8.8 10.4 15,7 12.8 10.9
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Nonbank commercial paper .2 .7 -.1 .5 1.5
Prospective developments
(6) Summarized below for Committee consideration are three
alternative policy courses, with more detail presented in the table on
the following page.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Targets (Balance of 1974
and 1st qtr. of 1975)
M1  6½ 5¾ 5¼
M2  8 7 6
Credit proxy 6¾ 5½ 4¾
Associated ranges of
tolerance for Sept.-Oct.
M1  3¾-5¾ 3¼-5¼ 2¾ -4¾
M2  5¾-7¾ 5-7 4½-6½
RPD 7¼-9¼ 6-8 5-7
Federal funds rate 9¼ -11¼ 10-12 10¾-12¾
(inter-meeting period)
(7) The alternative longer-run targets for growth rates in the
aggregates cover a seven-month period that encompasses the balance of
It was assumed that the Committee would wish to continue looking ahead
about two quarters in establishing its longer-run targets. However, at
this time, if the targeted growth rates covered only the fourth and first
quarters, they would be based on September levels that are almost wholly
projected and subject to very considerable error since there are virtually
no hard data yet available for that month. Since the August figures
would provide a more reliable base, the alternative longer-run targets
M1
Alt. A Alt. B
Aug. '74--Mar. '75
Quarters:
1974 3rd Q.
Months:
Sept.
Oct.
Aug. '74--Mar. '75
Quarters:
1974 3rd Q.
Months:
Sept.
Oct.
Adjusted Credit
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. C
Proxy
Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
.7.4 615.9 6
Rates of Growth
8.0 6.9
Alt A Alt. BAlt, A Alt. B
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Rates of Growth
6.2 5.2 4.3
Alt. A
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. C
are shown for a seven-month period including September. As may be seen
from the chart on the following page, the level of M1 in August reflects
a 5.2 per cent annual rate of growth thus far this year; since this is
reasonably consistent with recent Committee desires, the August level is
not unreasonable as a base for formulating longer-run targets.
(8) Alternative C involves a 5¼ per cent growth rate for
M1 over the target period and assumes money market conditions about
unchanged from those recently prevailing. Because of the shortfalls
in M1 in July and August, such a growth rate measured from August would
imply lower levels of M1 in coming months than were implicit in the
longer-run target (of 5¼ per cent for the second half of 1974) that
was adopted at the August Committee meeting. Alternative B con-
templates a 5¾ per cent growth rate for M1 from now on. Such a growth
rate would compensate for recent shortfalls by early spring of next
year--i.e., by early spring of 1975, the rate of increase in M1
measured from mid-1974 would be around 5¼ per cent. The more rapid
almost make up for the recent shortfall by year-end.
(9) The 5¼ per cent growth path for M1 of alternative C
is expected to be consistent with a Federal funds rate range centering
MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATHS
RATIO SCALE. BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
RATE OF GROWTH
DEC. '73 TO AUG '74 5.2%
A=6 12% Growth
B=5%% Growth
C=51/% Growth
J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M
1974 1975
on 11¾ per cent, which is close to the rate that has prevailed on
average since the last meeting. Over the two month September-October
period M 1 growth would be expected to be in a 2¾-4¾ per cent, annual
rate, range. The expectation of a continued relatively low growth
rate over the near-term in part reflects the weakness in the fragmentary
information thus far available for the early days of September, a
period when a substantial recovery in growth had earlier been expected.
M 1 growth is projected to pick up in October, with growth more rapid
over the fourth quarter as a whole, since transactions demands for
cash are assumed to strengthen if the staff forecast for about a
(10) With money market conditions assumed to be essentially
unchanged under this alternative, little further net change in market
interest rates generally would be expected between now and the next
Committee meeting. The volume of new issues expected in corporate and
municipal bond markets is fairly heavy over the week immediately ahead,
but no new Treasury cash borrowing is anticipated until later in the
year. In the mortgage market, rates have already adjusted upward sub-
stantially, and reduced demands for mortgage credit may limit further
upward rate adjustments. However, the spread between corporate bond
yields and mortgages is still unfavorable to the latter, and high short-
term market interest rates would be expected to continue diverting
savings from banks and thrift institutions to market instruments.
(11) Given the market interest rates assumed under alternative
C, growth in savings deposits at thrift institutions would be expected
to remain barely positive, while net inflows of time deposits other than
money market CD's to banks would be expected to expand at a modest pace.
Banks have reduced reliance on money market CD's recently, and growth
in these instruments over the months ahead would probably be slower
than earlier in the year as bank loan growth is projected to abate some-
what. The reduced rate of expansion in economic activity is likely to
temper bank credit demands, although the needs of borrowers under
liquidity pressure could remain substantial. The recent Board action
to remove the marginal reserve requirement on large time deposits
maturing in four months or more is assumed to have a marginal effect
on the structure of CD's issued by banks, but to have an insignificant
effect on the total amount of CD's issued.
(12) Adoption of the somewhat higher 5¾ per cent growth rate
of alternative B would be expected to entail a further decline in the
Federal funds rate over the next few weeks to around 11 per cent, the center
of the 10-12 per cent range shown for this alternative. Growth of M1 in the
September-October period in a 3¼-5¼ per cent annual rate range might be
anticipated. Growth over the fourth and first quarters would be con-
siderably higher--around 6-6 per cent, annual rate--to compensate for
the marked weakness expected in September. The stimulative impact of
the easing in money market conditions on money demand would be felt mainly
in the fourth and first quarters; subsequently growth in M1 could be
expected to drop back to around the 5¾ per cent rate.
(13) If the funds rate were to decline to 11 per cent over
the next few weeks, other rates would be likely to decline rather sharply
on expectational grounds. Rate declines would probably be larger than
justified by the stance of monetary policy and the likely strength of
credit demands, if our nominal GNP forecast is correct. Thus interest
rates would probably readjust upward to some degree as time goes on.
Between now and the next Committee meeting the 3-month bill rate would
be mostly in a 7¾-8¾ per cent range. A very modest recovery in savings
flows at banks and thrift institutions might develop, and mortgage
market rates would be under less pressure.
(14) Alternative A presents a more expansive policy alternative,
characterized by a 6 per cent long-run rate of growth in M1 and a
greater near-term decline in the Federal funds rate. Expectational effects
on markets would be quite strong, and market interest rates generally
could be expected to decline rather sharply. Improvement in the position
of thrift institutions would be rather marked, and mortgage rates, after
some time, may begin to decline. Banks could expand CD offerings over
the near-term to obtain funds for investment in longer-term market
securities while high yields on the securities are still available.
(15) It was assumed in the preceding discussion that if the
Committee adopts alternative B or A, it would want to have the money
market conditions expected to be consistent with the higher growth
rates for M1 established between now and the next meeting. However, the
Committee may wish to phase in any easing of market conditions over a
longer period, particularly under alternative A. Thus, the funds rate
could be permitted to decline in the inter-meeting period by less than
implied by the mid-points of the ranges shown in the summary table of
paragraph (6), in the expectation that some further decline would be
sought later. If staff estimates of relationships between interest
rates and monetary aggregates are correct, however, under such a pro-
cedure achievement of the indicated targets for the aggregates would
require a somewhat larger total decline in the funds rate than if the
move were accomplished quickly. For example, under alternative A, a
drop in the funds rate to 10¾ per cent over the next five weeks, followed
by a further decline to around 10 per cent by mid-November, could be
Proposed directive
(16) Presented below are three alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in
the preceding section. As will be noted, alternative A refers to the
rate of growth in monetary aggregates "over recent months." Over the
second quarter and the first 2 months of the third quarter, growth rates
were 4.8 and 7.1 per cent for M1 and M2, respectively.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of
developments in domestic and international financial markets,
the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market
conditions consistent with A HIGHER RATE OF [DEL: moderate] growth in
monetary aggregates [DEL: over the months ahead] THAN HAS PREVAILED
OVER RECENT MONTHS.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of
developments in domestic and international financial markets,
the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market
conditions consistent with moderate growth in monetary aggregates
over the months ahead.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of
developments in domestic and international financial markets,
the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money market
conditions consistent with MODEST [DEL: moderate] growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
9/6/74
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY
r
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
____I I I I I I
TOTAL RESERVES
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
BANK RESERVES SEPTEMBER 6, 1974
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
II AGGREGATE RESERVES I REQUIRED RESERVES
RESERVES AVAILABLE FOR II --------------------------------------------------------
S PRIVATE NONBANK DEPOSITS f SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
SI----------------------------------------------- --- ----------
--------------------------- TOTAL NONBORROWFD I PRIVATE OTHER CD'S AND GOVT AND
PERIOD SEAS ADJ I NON SEAS ADJ I RESERVES RESERVES I DEMAND TIME DEP NON DEP INTERBANK
I (1) I (2) II (3) (4) I (5) (6) (7) 18
1 (1) 1 (2) 11 (3 (4) (5) (6) (7) 181
MONTHLY LEVELS-SMILLIONSI
---------------- )
ANNUAL RATES OF CHANGE
----------- -
MONTHLY:
1974--JUN.
JUL.
AUG.
SEP.
WEEKLY LEVELS-SMILLICNS
----------------- I
SEP. 4
( 8.81
(37,269)
(37,442)
I 7.7)
S 3.0)
( -2.6)
( 1.51
I 8,997)
( 9,072)
( 17.7)
( 10.0)
( 13.9)
( 5.737)
I 5,840)
( 1,904)
( 1,882)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
SEPTEMBER 6, 1974MONETARY AGGREGATES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED)
I MONEY SUPPLY I ADJUSTED II U.S. I TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS I NONDEPOSIT
I NARROW I BROAD I CREDIT II GOVT. I I OTHER I I SOURCES OF
PERIOD I (Ml) I IM21 I PROXY II DEPOSITS I TOTAL I THAN CD S I CD S I FUNDS
(1) I (2) (3) 11 (4) I (5)
MONTHLY LEVELS-SBILLIONS
-- ------ I -I----- I If I
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH I
- - -- - --------- I I I II I
QUARTERLY I I I I
---- I I I II I
AUG.-SEP. I 2.6) ( 5.8) ( 7.3) ( 6.7)
WEEKLY LEVELS-SBILLIONS I
---------------------- I I I II I
(6) I (7) I (8)
I I I
I I I
(9.4)
( 7.5)
( 8.5)
-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ---------- --------------------------------"- " ' ~ '' "- - ' " - "- ' " -- " " " "
--- -------- --------------- ------- ------------------------- --------- --- ------~"""~"~'~ "" " ' " - ' " " " ' "~" "~~
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
SEPTEMBER 6, 1974
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
SEPTEMBER 6, 1974
