Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
November 15, 1974
CONFIDENTIAL (FR) November 15, 1974
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 grew at a 5.1 per cent annual rate in October, and
data for early November suggest that the growth rate in prospect
for the October-November period is 5½ per cent,1/ slightly below
the midpoint of the tolerance range adopted by the FOMC at its October
meeting. Growth in M2 for the two months appears likely to exceed the
upper end of its tolerance range; flows into time and savings deposits
other than money market CD's have responded much more than expected to
the sharp decline in interest rates since late August. Deposit inflows
at S&L's and mutual savings banks also improved significantly in
October and early November, but less markedly than at commercial banks.
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
in October-November Period
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates Range of
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance La
M1  4¾-7¼
M2 5¾-8¼
RPD 5½-8
Memo:
Federal funds rate
(per cent per annum)
Oc
No
No
test Estimates
for statement
week ending
t. 23 9.81
t. 30 9.72
v. 6 9.63
Nov. 13 9.37
(2) The adjusted credit proxy declined at about a 1.5 per cent
annual rate in October, the first monthly decline in this series since
early 1970. This reduction was largely attributable to a sharp decline in
U.S. Treasury deposits. In addition, with loans and investments increasing
little, banks were less aggressive bidders for large CD's.and allowed non-deposit
liabilities to decline. RPD's were much weaker than expected and appear to
be declining over the two-month period.
(3) Following the last FOMC meeting, the Account Manager
lowered the funds rate from somewhat above 10 per cent to around 9¾ per
cent, the midpoint of the range adopted by the Committee at its October
meeting. By the end of October, incoming data indicated that M1 and M2
were expanding at rates near the midpoint and upper end of their respective
tolerance ranges. A literal reading of the aggregates would have led the
Manager to shade the funds rate slightly on the high side of 9¾ per cent,
to the extent consistent with even keel. But, in view of the evidence of
additional weakness in economic activity, restraint in the lending policies
of banks and other institutions, and the severe financial problems of the
construction industry, Chairman Burns recommended, on October 31, that
the funds rate target be reduced to 9½ per cent for the time being. The
majority of Committee members concurred in this recommendation. With
Federal funds trading around 9½ per cent in the past two statement weeks,
member bank borrowing has declined markedly further to an average of
around $1.1 billion.
(4) Short-term market interest rates have generally declined
from 30 to 100 basis points further since the October FOMC meeting, and
bank prime rates have continued to follow the downward course of these
market rates but with a lag. Downward pressures on short rates were
fostered in part by the decline in the funds rate and expectations of
further declines associated with growing evidence of economic weakness.
Such expectations were reinforced by the Board's November 13 announcement
of a change in reserve requirement regulations. Treasury bill rates
had tended to resist the general trend until quite recently because
of pressures created by actual and prospective additions to the
supply of bills. The Treasury has been adding $200 million to
the weekly bill auction since October, and on November 14 announced
that it will raise $4½ billion more in the bill area by early December.
The 3-month bill closed at 7.32 per cent on Friday, about 30 basis
points below its level at the time of the previous FOMC meeting.
(5) Long-term yields have also been under downward pressure
since the October Committee meeting, particularly in the corporate market,
where yields have fallen by more than a full percentage point despite the
continuation of an exceptionally heavy financing schedule. Mortgage
market rates have begun to decline in response to the general downtrend
in other interest rates and the improvement of deposit flows at thrift
institutions. Treasury note and bond yields dropped moderately even
though the Treasury conducted three cash auctions totalling $4.9 billion,
mainly to refund $4.3 billion of publicly-held debt maturing on November 15.
Dealers were awarded nearly half of these offerings and have made
relatively good progress in distributing their awards.
(6) The table on the following page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various recent
time periods; monetary aggregate figures in this table are on a revised
basis. Appendix table IV compares money supply growth rates computed
on a quarterly-average basis with those computed on a last-month-of-
quarter basis. Projected figures on the two bases are shown in
Average Past Past Past
of Past Three Twelve Six Three Past
Calendar Years Month Month Month Months
-- over over over over
... .. .. 1973 Oct. '73 Apr. '74 Jul, '74 Sept.'74
Total teserves 8.6 8,2 8.7 .5 -1.2
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Nonbank commercial paper -- .5 .6 .6 .9
I/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
2/ Based on month-end figures. Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
Prospective developments
(7) Three alternatives are summarized below for Committee
consideration (with additional detail presented in the table on the
following page). The longer-run targets shown continue to encompass the
seven-month period from August 1974 to March 1975, and the shorter-run
ranges of tolerance cover the November-December period.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Targets (Aug. '74-Mar. '75)
M1 6½ 5¾ 5
M2  9 8 
7
Credit proxy 5½ 5 4
Associated ranges of
tolerance for Nov.-Dec.
M1  7¾-9¾ 7-9 6½-8½
M2  9-11 8¼-10¼ 7½-9½
RPD 4½-6½ 3-5 2½-4½
Federal funds rate 7½-9½ 8¼-10¼ 9-11
(inter-meeting range)
(8) Alternative B continues the 5¾ per cent annual growth rate
for M1 previously adopted by the Committee. The Federal funds rate range
shown for this alternative between now and the next meeting is centered
on 9¼ per cent, and thus represents a slight further easing in money
market conditions. This easing appears to be required because the
rebound in M1 growth this fall has thus far been somewhat more modest
than expected; moreover, projected growth in nominal GNP has been
weakened slightly. In the two-month November-December period, M1 growth
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M3
Alt. A Alt. B
Aug. '74--Mar. '75
Quarters:
1974 4th Q.
1975 1st Q.
Months:
Nov.
Dec.
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Aug. '74--Mar. '75
Quarters:
1974 4th Q.
1975 1st Q.
Months:
Nov.
Dec.
Total Reserves
Alt. A
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. A
RPD
Alt. B
Alt. C
Alt. C
MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATHS
RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
RATE OF GROWTH
DEC. '73 TO AUG. '74 5.0%
J F M A M
1974
J A S O N D J F M
1975
__ r
is indicated to be in a 7-9 per cent annual rate range under this
alternative, reflecting the cumulative impact of the monetary easing
that has already occurred and an expected sharp, temporary spurt in M1
growth late in the year when U.S. Government deposits are projected to
decline substantially (after seasonal adjustment).
(9) Alternative A provides for the greater easing in money
market conditions over the near term that would be needed if the Committee
were to adopt higher longer-run targets for the monetary aggregates,
indexed by a 6½ per cent growth rate for M1 . The funds rate range for
this alternative centers on 8½ per cent. Alternative C provides for the
tightening of money market conditions that would be required if the
Committee were to lower its longer-run target for M 1 to 5 per cent.
(10) As indicated earlier, credit market participants appear
to expect a further easing in monetary policy and a continued decline
in the Federal funds rate. U.S. Government security dealers have
built up positions substantially in the recent refunding and will
probably participate heavily in the forthcoming Treasury bill offerings.
The recent very large sales of corporate bonds at sharply declining
yields also seem to reflect market sentiment that interest rates
have peaked. If the Federal funds rate were to remain around 9½
per cent, however, expectations of further rate declines would tend to
weaken and market rates might well back up. If the funds rate
were to edge lower, averaging around 9¼ per cent, the 3-month Treasury
bill rate might fluctuate in a 7-7½ per cent range, and the 3-month commercial
paper rate could decline slightly further (by an 1/8 or 1/4 percentage
point). Corporate bond yields, however, probably will not decline much,
if any, further from their present sharply reduced levels. The volume
of new offerings is expected to remain strong and the recent surge of
investor interest is likely to moderate at current yield levels, given
continuing inflationary expectations.
(11) Under alternative B, net inflows at banks of time and
savings deposits other than money market CD's would probably remain
fairly substantial. With offering rates on small-denomination deposits at
Regulation Q ceilings, we have assumed that the new reserve requirement
structure will not at present have a significant impact on the growth
of consumer-type time and savings deposits. The position of mutual
savings banks and savings and loan associations should continue improving
over the period ahead, as their deposit flows continue to recover. The
recovery in thrift institution flows, in combination with reduced bond
yields, would be likely to encourage some further easing in mortgage
market conditions. Mortgage markets would ease at a more rapid pace
under alternative A, since there would be a more substantial rebound
in deposit inflows at thrift institutions as market interest rates
dropped further.
(12) Bank credit growth over the months ahead is likely to
be moderate. In view of concerns about liquidity and capital, banks
have become quite cautious in their lending and investment policies.
While the prime loan rate could be expected to decline further under
either alternative A or B, it would still probably remain high relative
to market rates in the weeks ahead. This would work to temper business
loan growth at banks. Growth in mortgages and consumer loans is likely
to remain weak, as demands remain slack and banks scrutinize loan
applications carefully. Banks may, however, show more interest in
security acquisitions in the period ahead than they have most recently,
particularly under alternative A but also to some extent under
alternative B, to take advantage of the apparent opportunity for
capital gains. We have assumed that banks would be willing in the
months ahead to expand their outstanding CD's at a moderate pace partly
in order to acquire investments.
Proposed directive
(13) Presented below are three alternative formulations for
the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in
the preceding section. In all three alternatives, it is proposed to
delete the reference to Treasury financing because the quarterly
refunding announced on October 30 has been completed.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury financing and of] developments in domestic
and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent
with [DEL: resumption of moderate] SUBSTANTIAL growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury and of] developments in domestic
and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent
with [DEL: resumption of] moderate growth in monetary aggregates over
the months ahead.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the
forthcoming Treasury financing and of] developments in domestic
and international financial markets, the Committee seeks to
achieve bank reserve and money market conditions consistent
with [DEL: resumption of moderate] RELATIVELY SLOW growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
RESERVES AVAILABLE TO SUPPORT
PRIVATE NONBANK DEPOSITS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
140
I I I I I I i i I i I
I I I I
A S 0
1974
N D
I I I i I I 1 I I I
M J S D M J S D
*Break in Series, Actual Level of RPD After Changes in Reserve Requirements
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
11/15/74
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
1 550
TOTAL RESERVES
*Break in series, Actual Level of Total Reserves After Changes in Reserve Requirements
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
BANK RESERVES NOVEMBER 15, 1974
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
II AGGREGATE RESFRVS I PEOUIRED RESERVES
RESERVES AVAILARLP POR ---- ----- ---------------------------------------------------
PRIVATE NONVANK DEPOSITS It SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
S----------------- -------------- ------- ------------------
I--------------------- I TOTAL ONfBnRROWED I PRIVATE OTHER CD'S AND GOV'T AND
PERIOD SEAS ADJ I NON SEAS ADJ If RESERVES RESERVES I DEMAND TIME DEP NON OEP INTERBANK
SI 121---------- II (3 ( I (--------6) 7) (8)
1l I 121 1I 131 (4) (41 (6) 17) (8)ONTHLY LEELS I
MONTHLY LEVELS-sMILLIONSI
--------------------- I
ANNUAL RATES C
--------------
MONTHL
197A--
WEEKLY LEVELS----- - --- -
-AUG.
SEP.
OCT. I
NOV.
)F CHANGE I
-------- I
?RLY I
*1ST OTR.
2ND OTR.
3RD QTR.
I
.Yt
*AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
I
OCT.-NOV.
ISMILLIONS
OCT. 2
I
NOV. 6
II
II
II
tIIIt
I,
It
fIII
II
If
I))I
I I
I1
ft
II
I!
II
'I
II
( -3,
( -l1.2
(35.875 I
( 22,8)
S38.0 I
( 9,263)
( 4,911)
( 2,030)
I 0.91
( 3.4
f 12.7)
-- - ------ _------ - --~~- ------- --- ------- - ----------- - ----------------------- -
NOTE! DATA SHOWN IN PARENTHESES ARE CURRENT PROJFCTIONS. AT THE FOMC MEETING OF OCT. 15, 1974,
THE COMMITTEE AGREED ON A RPO RANGE OP 5.5 TO 8B. PERCENT FOR THE OCTOBER-NOVEMBER PERIOD.
--------- - - ------- ---------------------- - -
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
NOVEMBER 15, 1974
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
NOVEMBER 15, 1974
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
NOVEMBER 15, 1974
