Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
(CONFIDENTIAL FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES
AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the Staff
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
February 15, 1974
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) The money stock and reserve aggregates have shown a mixed
performance relative to the Committee's ranges of tolerance during the
January-February target period. For most of the period since the last
meeting, M1 and RPD's appeared to be growing at rates well below the low
ends of their ranges. However, a sharp rise of M1 in the first two weeks
of February (with the second week based on preliminary and partly estimated
data) brought the growth rate back within the range of tolerance, M2 remained
within its range for most of the period, as growth in consumer-type time and
savings deposits was strong, and moved slightly above the top of the range
when the preliminary data for the second week of February became available.
Growth of Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
in January-February Target Period
Reserve and Monetary Aggregates Range of
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance
RPD's 4-3/4--7-3/4
M1 3--6
M2 6--9
Memo:
Fed funds rate
(per cent per annum)
Latest
Estimates
Avg. for Statement
week ending
Jan. 23 9.60
Feb. 13 8.93
(2) In January, M1 declined at a 3.1 per cent annual rate,
instead of rising slightly as originally indicated. The sharp rise
February 15, 1974
of M 1 in the first two weeks of February suggests a growth rate for the month
of around 11 per cent. Some part of this February increase in private balances
may be related to a very sharp and considerably greater than anticipated
decline in U.S. Government deposits.
(3) Growth of RPD's in the January-February period appears to be
somewhat below the lower end of the Committee's range of tolerance. As
shown in the table below, RPD's supporting private demand deposits are
declining substantially--rather than rising slightly as expected--reflecting
mainly the impact on required reserves, as lagged two weeks, of changes in
the weekly pattern of demand deposit flows. Excess reserves also are running
lower than expected, on average, thus reducing the need to supply reserves
through open market operations. CD's and other time deposits have been
absorbing more RPD's than anticipated.
Change in Total RPD's 1/
Comparison of Projected Changes in RPD's by Use
January-February 1974
(In millions of dollars)
Projections as of
January 22, 1974
FOMC meeting
PD's 1/ 44
Change in Category of Use:
Private demand deposits
Time deposits other than
large CD's
CD's and nondeposit funds
Current
Projection
(4) Conditions have eased significantly in the Federal funds
market since the last Committee meeting. The funds rate had averaged 9.60
per cent in the statement week of January 23 that encompassed the meeting.
Shortly after the meeting, in light of the decision taken by the Committee,
the Desk began supplying reserves at a pace consistent with a funds rate in
a 9¼--9½ per cent range. Subsequent operations were conditioned by the
Treasury financing then in process. Shortfalls in growth rates of M1 and
RPD relative to the Committee's ranges of tolerance led to somewhat more
active reserve supplying operations, and the funds rate averaged 8.93 per
cent in the week ended February 13. The Desk is currently aiming at a
reserve supply consistent with a funds rate of around 9 per cent.
(5) As the funds market has eased in recent weeks, declines in
other short-term rates have ranged around 100 basis points and the bank
prime loan rate has dropped from 9¾ to 9 per cent at some banks. Reductions
in market rates have occurred even though the volume of directly placed and
dealer placed commercial paper coming to market was exceptionally heavy
and a sizable amount of large CD's was marketed by commercial banks, given
large business loan growth and a favorable market atmosphere. Despite the
drop in short-term market rates, member bank borrowing at the Fed was
maintained, averaging around $1.1 billion during the past four weeks,
slightly higher than in the previous four weeks.
(6) Yields in all sectors of the bond market have also been
subject to downward pressure since the January FOMC meeting, notwithstand-
ing a heavy volume of new corporate and municipal issues brought to market
and fairly aggressive lengthening of maturities by the Treasury in its mid-
February refunding. These latest reductions in long-term rates offset a
sizable part of the increases recorded in late December and early January.
(7) The Treasury auctioned three new debt issues totaling $4.05
billion during the last week in January to refinance $4.5 billion of publicly
held debt maturing in mid-February. The issues--$1.5 billion of a 3¼-year,
million of a 19½-year, 7½ per cent bond--were well received by the market.
All were sold at premiums; both the 7-year note and the 19½-year bond are
currently trading at prices above their auction averages, while the price of
the 3 -year note is close to its average. However, dealer awards in the
auction were large--amounting to about $1.6 billion in total. Dealers have
since distributed only about one-fourth of these awards, but they have not
been pressing aggressively thus far to market their remaining holdings.
(8) The table on the next page shows (in percentage annual rates
of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various recent time
periods. Appendix Table III compares money supply growth rates computed on
a quarterly-average basis with those computed on a last-month-of-quarter
Months Months Months Month
Dec. '73 Jan. '74 Jan. '74 Jan. '74 Jan. '74
over over over over over
Dec. '70 Jan. '73 Jul. '73 Oct. '73 Dec. '73
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term market paper
(Monthly avg. change in
billions)
institutions--which are derived from either end-of-month or last Wednesday-of-
month figures. Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables
are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series
when reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(9) Three policy alternatives are summarized below for Committee
consideration (with more detailed figures shown in the table on p. 6a ).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Targets (1st & 2nd qtrs.
combined)
M1 6½ 5¾ 5
M2  10¾ 10 8¾
Credit proxy 9¼ 8¾ 8
Associated ranges for
February-March
RPD 5½--7½ 4½--6½ 3½-5½
M1  8¼--10¼ 7½--9½ 6¾--8¾
M2 11--13 10½--12½ 10--12
Federal funds rate range 7½--8¾ 8¼--9½ 8¾-10
(inter-meeting period)
(10) Alternative B includes the 5¾ per cent annual growth rate
for M1 for the period from December to June adopted by the Committee at its
last meeting, which is depicted in the chart on the following page. The
longer-run growth of M2 implied by this alternative is around 10 per cent,
about 2 percentage points higher than indicated at the last Committee
meeting. 1/ The increase in M2 growth reflects the greater than expected
strength of recent net inflows of consumer-type time deposits at banks and
the lower average level of market interest rates that has already developed
and is assumed to continue into the months ahead under this alternative.
Alternatives A and C contemplate faster and slower rates of monetary growth,
MONEY SUPPLY AND LONGER RUN TARGET PATH
RATIO SCALE, BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- 280
RATE OF GROWTH
DEC. '72 TO DEC. '73 5.9%
J A S 0 N D
1973
J F M A M J
1974
A M
Alternative Longer-Run Targets for Key Monetary Aggregates
M
1
Alt. A Alt. B
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Months:
Feb.
Mar.
Alt. C
Adjusted Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Rates of Growth
M3
Alt, A Alt. B
Total Reserves
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
RPD
Alt. A Alt. B
Feb.
Mar.
Quarters:
1974 1st Q.
Months:
Feb.
Mar.
Alt. C
Alt. C
(11) A longer-run 5¾ per cent growth path for M1 is associated
with lower interest rates than in the previous blue book mainly because
of the downward revision in nominal GNP expansion projected by the staff.
At the time of the last Committee meeting, economic activity at current
prices was projected to expand at a 6½ per cent annual rate in the first
half of the year, whereas a 5½ per cent expansion is now projected. This
would be expected to lower transactions demands for money and therefore
to reduce the interest rates associated with a given growth in the money
(12) With short-term interest rates having declined by around
one percentage point since the last meeting, market rates have already
moved close to levels that now seem consistent with a 5¾ per cent M1
growth. Thus, little or no further decline would be expected under
alternative B. The Federal funds rate range for that alternative is
indicated at 8¼--9½ per cent, centering close to the recently prevailing
(13) Recent interest rate declines will be working to sustain
money demand in the months ahead, including demand for both cash balances
and interest-earning deposits. In the February-March period, M1 growth
in a 7½--9½ per cent annual rate range is indicated under alternative B.
Because of the sizable shortfall of M 1 in January, such a rate of in-
crease is needed to restore M1 to the desired longer-run growth path.
Growth of M1 in February may be particularly large, reflecting perhaps
a decline in U.S. Government deposits between January and February that
is virtually unprecedented in size. The Treasury redeemed $800 million
of maturing debt in mid-February and the cash deficit for February also
seems to be a little larger than seasonal.
(16) Growth in consumer-type time and savings deposits at
banks is likely to continue generally strong, perhaps bolstered by a build-
up in precautionary balances by consumers. The growth, however, will
probably slacken a little from that of January, when net inflows (as in
October) may have been enlarged somewhat by an increased amount of
interest crediting (taking place on the final day of quarters) resulting
from the higher ceiling rates. Under alternative A, growth in consumer-
type time deposits would probably be even more rapid for a while--at least
until further declines in market rates lead banks to begin reducing
offering rates for consumer-type deposits. The expected rise of interest
rates under alternative C would reduce the relative attractiveness of
consumer-type time deposits, though, judging from recent experience, the
effect of higher market rates might be more marked on the specialized
thrift institutions than on commercial banks.
(17) With funds available in volume through consumer-type time
deposits, banks are not expected to be aggressive issuers of large CD's
in the weeks ahead. Business loan demand at banks may not moderate
substantially from the January pace until the rate of overall business
inventory accumulation slackens, as is projected for the spring. However,
mortgage and consumer credit demands are likely to be quite modest in the
period immediately ahead, given the weakness in home buying and in sales
of cars, mobile homes, and recreational equipment.
(18) In time, the recent removal of capital controls and large
international funds flows stemming from the rise in oil prices may come to
have an appreciable effect on domestic banking aggregates and market
conditions. Thus far, however, discernible effects have been minor, and
have included mainly reports of offerings of longer-term dollar-denominated
CD's to U.S. investors by foreign affiliates of U.S. banks, and reports of
strong interest by U.S. and foreign corporations in shifting longer-term
borrowing from the Euro-dollar market to U.S. capital markets. The potential
for investment in the United States of funds from the oil-exporting countries
is even more dramatic, but here too there has been little indication of
sizable money-flows. Under the circumstances, we have not yet made any
special allowance for the effects of international financial developments
on domestic markets and aggregates.
Proposed directive
(19) Presented below are three alternative formulations for the
operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to correspond
to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in the preceding
section. In all three alternatives, it is proposed to delete the reference
to Treasury financing because the quarterly refunding announced on January 30
has been virtually completed.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account [DEL: of the
forthcoming Treasury financing and] of international and domestic
financial market developments, the Committee seeks to achieve
bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with moderate
SOMEWHAT GREATER growth in monetary aggregates over the months
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account [DEL: of the
forthcoming Treasury financing and] of international and domestic
financial market developments, the Committee seeks to achieve
bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with moderate
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account [DEL: of the
forthcoming Treasury financing and] of international and domestic
financial market developments, the Committee seeks to achieve
bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with QUITE
moderate growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
FEBRUARY 15, 1974
STRICTLY CONVIDENTrAL (FR)
FEBRUARY 15, 1974
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
FEBRUARY 15, 1974
February 15, 1974
