Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
May 16, 1974
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve SystemBy the staff
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC May 16, 1974
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 expanded at an annual rate of about 5.9 per cent in April,
for the two-month target period M1 appears to be growing at around a 7½ per
cent annual rate, a shade below the mid-point of the Committee's range of
tolerance. The higher rate of growth in M1 for May in part reflects the
substantial volume of tax rebates being disbursed by the Treasury. Growth
in time deposits other than large money market CD's has been somewhat slower
than expected, and M2 appears to be expanding at an annual rate of around
was little changed by the revision. All tables on subsequent pages of this
report (with the exception of Tables 1 and 2 following the charts) are based
on the new series. The new and old series are compared in Appendix Table VI.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
over April-May period 1/
Reserve and monetary aggregates Range of
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance
M1 6-1/2--9
M2  9-1/2-11-3/4
RPD 1-1/2--4-3/4
Latest Estimates
Memo:
Federal funds rate
(per cent per annum) 4-3/4--5-3/4 Avg. for statement
week ending
Apr. 23 5.54
(2) The bank credit proxy appears to be expanding at an annual
rate of about 4 per cent over the April-May period. With business demand
for short-term credit remaining weak and the spread between commercial paper
rates and the bank prime rate continuing relatively wide, bank loans to
businesses contracted further in April and early May. The weakness in loan
demand along with the strength in time and savings deposit flows led
banks to continue adding to their holdings of Government securities, while
allowing further runoffs in CD's. Over the first 4 months of 1975 Government
security portfolios have expanded by about $16 billion, while CD's have
dropped by about $6 billion. Banks have apparently also found it attractive
to advance funds to their branches abroad; preliminary reports from branches
indicate that liabilities to their head offices in the U.S. increased by
about $2 billion in the first quarter.
(3) Following the April 15 FOMC meeting, the Account Manager
initially sought reserve conditions consistent with a Federal funds rate
of 5½ per cent or a shade lower. In following weeks, with incoming data
on the monetary aggregates suggesting that M1 growth over the April-May
target period would be in the lower half of the Committee's range of
tolerance, the Account Manager sought easier money market conditions.
In doing so, however, the Manager tried to avoid aggressive operations that
might distort market expectations about monetary policy during the course
of the Treasury's large May refinancing. In the statement week just ended,
when the Desk sought a Federal funds rate declining into the 5-5¼ per cent
area, an average rate of 5.20 per cent was realized.
(4) Short-term interest rates, after showing little change in
late April, have since declined 25-50 basis points. Most recently, 3-month
bills have traded around 5 per cent--the lowest level since December 1972--
and 3-month CD's and commercial paper around 5-3/4 per cent. These markdowns
of short rates have reflected the decline in the funds rate, against a
background of continuing weakness in short-term credit demands, the return
to more moderate money growth in April, and somewhat disappointing economic
data. Market reaction to the decline in the discount rate to 6 per cent
was mild.
(5) Bond yields rose in the last half of April, but have since
declined 10-25 basis points. The recent rally began following the May 1
Treasury announcement that its borrowing needs over the May-June period
would be $5 billion less than previously stated, and it has since been
sustained by the decline of short-term rates. Against this background,
the Treasury's sale of $7 billion of coupon issues thus far in May has
gone smoothly. The well publicized problems with respect to New York City
have led to a virtual halt in trading in New York City issues, but have
thus far had only minor spill-over effects on the municipal market as
a whole.
(6) Deposits at nonbank thrift institutions continued to expand
at a rapid pace in April, reflecting lower market interest rates and the
placement of tax refunds. Growth in deposits at S&L's and MSB's combined
is estimated at an annual rate of 15 per cent in April, the same as the first-
quarter experience. While mortgage lenders have remained cautious, commit-
ments appear to have risen somewhat further in March and April. Mortgage
market interest rates have risen somewhat over the past few weeks.
(7) The table on the following page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financing flows over various time
periods. Appendix table III compares money supply growth rates computed
on a quarterly-average basis with those computed on a last-month-of-quarter
Past Past Past
Calendar Twelve Six Three Past
Year Months Months Months Month
Apr.'75 Apr.'75 Apr.'75 Apr.'75
Apr.'74 Oct.'74 Jan.'75 Mar.'75
Total reserves 8.6 4.0 -.5 -8.2 8.4
Concepts of Money (Revised Series)
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Large CD's 2.2 1.2 .4 -1.4 -1.4
Nonbank commercial paper .4 .4 .2 -- .1
branches.
NOTE: All items are based on average of daily figures, except for data on
total loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift
institutions--which are derived from either end-of-month or last Wednesday-of-
month figures. Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent
tables are adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in
the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(8) Summarized below for Committee consideration are alternative
short-run operating ranges of tolerance for key monetary aggregates and the
Federal funds rate. More detailed figures on monetary aggregates, including
growth rates for six month periods comprising the second and third quarters,
are shown in the table on p. 6a. Appendix table V shows associated figures
for total reserves, nonborrowed reserves, and RPD's.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges of tolerance
for May-June
M1  8-10 7½-9½ 7-9
M2 10½-12½ 10-12 9-11
RPD 3 -5 2¼-4¼ 1¼ -3¼
Federal funds rate
(intermeeting range) 4-5 4¾-5¾ 5½ -6½
(9) The ranges of tolerance summarized above are generally
consistent with the longer-run 12-month growth ranges adopted by the Committee
at its last meeting. These growth ranges for the March '75-March '76 period
included: M1, 5-7½ per cent; M2 , 8½ -10½ per cent; M3 , 10-12 per cent; and
the bank credit proxy, 6½ -9½ per cent. In all three of the alternatives for
short-run operating targets, the two-month monetary growth rates are above
longer-run ranges, mainly reflecting the temporary impact of large tax
rebates paid out by the Treasury in May and June. In some cases, 6-month
growth rates are also above longer-run objectives.
(10) Each of the alternative short-run operating targets would,
of course, imply different patterns of interest rate change and monetary
Alternative Longer-Run Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. A
716.2
718.8
722.1
727.6
M4
Alt. B
716.2
718.8
721.9
727.0
Alt. C
Alt. C
716.2
718.8
721.8
726.5
Growth Rates for
M 2
Alt. A Alt. B
M5
Alt. A Alt B
1097.0 1097.0
1105.4 1105.4
1114.1 1113.7
1126.3 1124.7
Key Monetary Aggregates
M3
Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. C
1097.0
1105.4
1113.3
1123.3
Alt. A
498.1
500.1
501.7
506.
S 12.9
12.1
12.7
Credit Proxy
S Alt. B
1 498.1
L 500.1
S 501.5
3 505.7
S 518.0
S 537.9
Alt. C
Alt. C
498.1
500.1
501.4
505.3
aggregate growth as the year progresses. Alternative A, which contemplates
a near-term easing of money market conditions, and an 8 per cent rate of growth
in M1 over the second and third quarters, would imply a considerable
turn-around of interest rates later this year if growth in the aggregates
over the 12-month period is to be kept at around the mid-points of the
indicated longer-term ranges, assuming the GNP projection is correct.
Alternative B implies a somewhat smaller rise in interest rates later.
Alternative C involves rising interest rates over the near-term, lower growth
in the monetary aggregates in the second and third quarters, and hence less
upward interest rate pressure later.
(11) The Federal funds rate range for alternative B is centered
near the 5-5 per cent area in which funds have been most frequently
trading in recent days. Given this funds rate, M1 in the May-June period
is expected to increase at a 7½-9½ per cent annual rate. The rate of
growth in M1 is expected to moderate in the third quarter, even though
nominal GNP is projected to expand markedly, as the public reduces balances
temporarily swollen by tax refunds. For the second and third quarters
combined, M1 under this alternative is indicated to expand at about a 7 per
cent annual rate. M2 over the same period would be expected to expand at
about a 10 per cent annual rate, as inflows of consumer-type time and
savings deposits to banks remain sizable.
(12) If the Federal funds rate shows little change over the next
few weeks, we would expect other market interest rates to fluctuate within
a narrow range. After the Treasury auctions $1 billion of 2-year notes
next week, it will have essentially completed its new cash financing for
this half year (apart from continuing cash additions to bill auctions
through mid-June). The corporate and state and local bond calendars
remain sizable, but recent issues have been accorded good receptions, and
the steepness of the yield curve may continue to encourage some investors to
acquire longer-term issues. Business credit demands on banks and in the
commercial paper market are expected to remain weak, at least into early
summer, as corporations continue to restructure balance sheets and liquidate
(12) Credit markets remain highly sensitive, however. U.S.
Government security dealer positions have risen substantially in the wake
of recent financing activity, with positions totaling about $8¼ billion
on May 15 (or $2-3/4 billion more than a month ago). Under the circumstances,
and given the very recent decline in the funds rate, any significant
increase in the rate would probably lead to fairly sharp upward adjustments
of interest rates as market expectations abruptly change.
(13) Alternative C contemplates a rise of the Federal funds
rate into a 5½-6½ per cent range. Under this option, the rise in short-
term interest rates may be substantial over the next few weeks--with the
would probably also rise significantly. It is expected that such a
tightening of money market conditions would lead to M growth over the
1
second and third quarters at around a 6 per cent annual rate. As market
interest rates rise, net inflows of time and savings deposits to banks
and thrift institutions would also diminish, as compared with alternative B.
Mortgage market conditions would certainly tighten further.
(14) Alternative A involves a further easing of money market
conditions, which would likely be accompanied by further downward adjust-
ments in market interest rates more generally. Declines in bond rates
might be rather limited, however, as corporate borrowers would be expected
to accelerate offerings in order to take advantage of a more favorable
market environment. Over the second and third quarters, M1 growth would
be projected at around 8 per cent at an annual rate, while growth in M2
might be at an 11 per cent rate. A substantially lower rate of
monetary growth would be required in the fourth and first quarters unless
the Committee were to raise its longer-run targets, and, as noted
earlier, this would probably require a marked upward readjustment in
interest rates later this year.
(15) Securities markets generally, and the municipal market
in particular, have shown little reaction thus far to the prospect of a
default by New York City on its outstanding notes. It is possible,
however, that an actual default could have wider market repercussions
if investors back away from other issues judged to involve a fair degree
of capital risk. In addition, there may be diminished investor con-
fidence in institutions with large holdings of New York City obligations.
Should markets become very unsettled, the Manager might need to engage
in stabilizing operations, taking account of the customary directive
language regarding "developments in domestic and international
financial markets", in which case the aggregate specifications might
temporarily have to be disregarded.
Proposed directive
(16) Presented below are three alternative formulations
for the operational paragraph of the directive, which are intended to
correspond to the similarly lettered policy alternatives discussed in
the preceding section. In all three alternatives, it is proposed to
delete the reference to Treasury financing because the regular mid-May
financing has been completed. As will be noted, alternatives A and B
refer to growth in monetary aggregates "on average in recent months."
Over the first 4 months of this year, growth rates (using revised data)
were 2.9, 8.3, and 10.8 per cent for M1, M2, and M3 , respectively.
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the forth
coming Treasury financing and of] developments in domestic and
international financial markets, the Committee seeks to achieve
bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with [DEL: somewhat]
more rapid growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead
than has occurred on average in recent months.
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the forth
coming Treasury financing and of] developments in domestic and
international financial markets, the Committee seeks to achieve
bank reserve and money market conditions consistent with somewhat
more rapid growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead
than has occurred on average in recent months.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of [DEL: the forth
coming Treasury financing and of developments in domestic and inter-
national financial markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions consistent with [DEL: somewhat more
rapid] MODERATE growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead
[DEL: than has occurred on average in recent months].
CONFIDENTIAL(FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
RESERVES AVAILABLE
PRIVATE NONBANK
TO SUPPORT
DEPOSITS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- 38
M J
/4 %% growth for Apr -M
I I 1 I
32 J F M A
S D M J S D
1975
RPD series has been adjusted to remove discontinuities associated with changes in reserve requirement ratios
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES
NARROW MONEY SUPPLY M1 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
-I 300
I I I I I I I I I I I I I
ER MONEY SUPPLY M2
,260
1-
J F M
1975
CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
ABLE CLASS II-FOMC
BANK RESERVES MAY 16, 1975
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
RESERVES AV E AGGREGATE RESERVES I REQUIRED RESERVESRESERVES AVAILABLE
Perid FSEASONALLY ADJUSTED
FOR PRIVATE
Period
NONBANK DEPOSITS Total Nonborrowed Total Private Other Time CD's and Gov't. and
SA NSA Reserves Reserves Required Demand Deposits Nondeposits Interbank
MONTHLY LEVELS-$MILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
WEEKLY LEVELS-$MILLIONS
MAY 7
14
( -1.8)
I -7.1)
( -10.1)
( -0.2)
( -2.3)
I 6.3)
( 8,759)
I 4,557)
Table 2 CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
MONETARY AGGREGATES CLASS 
II-FOMC
MAY 16, 1975
ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
MONEY SUPPLY Adjusted U.S. TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS Nondeposit
Period Narrow Broad Credit Govt. Other Sources of
___(M1) (M2) Proxy Deposits Total Than CD's CD's Funds
MONTHLY LEVELS-$BILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
APR.-MAY ( 7.5) ( 9.4) ( 4.0) ( 3.2) ( 10.9) ( -26.1)
WEEKLY LEVELS-$BILLIONS
-- ---- --~---~---a- - -~-~-~----ala_-~_-L I---
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
MAY 16, 1975
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECT OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations 1/ Daily Average Reserve Effects 2/ A in reserve categories Target
Bills Coupon Agency RP's Total pen Market A Member Other4/ Req. res. against available res. 5/ available
&Accept. Issues Issues Net 3/ al perations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) reserves 5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) () (11)
Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month.
* Special certificate (Direct Treasury borrowing from F.R.) ** Reflects special certificate purchase. p - preliminary.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II--FOMC
MAY 16, 1975TABLE 4
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1/
($ millions, not seasonally adjusted)
- 497
- 43
- 280
- 710
- 404
1,620
- - 2 -- - 2 2,390
- 293
- 642
- 612
-- - - - 247 -2,827
50 - -- -- - -- 476 - 698
System, and redemptions (-) of Agency and Treasury coupon issues.
5/ Includes changes in both RP's (+) and matched sale-purchase transactions (-).
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
MAY 16, 1975
TABLE 5
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
(millions of dollars)
U.S. Govt. Security
Dealer Positions Dealer ositions Member Bank Reserve Positions
Corporate Municipal Excess** Borrowing at FRB* Basic Reserve Deficit
Period ___ Bills Coupon Issues Bonds j Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Others
**Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
Federal funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are
Friday figures.
*STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
MAY 16, 1975
TABLE 6
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(Per Cent)
Short-Term Long-Term
Treasury Bill 1 90-119 Day CD's New Issue-NYC Aaa Utility Municipal U.S. Government FNMA
Federal Commercial New Recently Bond (10-yr. Constant Auctions
Prlod funds 90-day -year Paper 60-89 Day 90-119 Day Issue Offered Buyer Maturity) Yields
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr. 2
9
Daily--May 8
(1)
13.55
(5)
12.25
8.00
(9)
7.15
5.16
the weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day quote for Thursday following 
the end of
the statement week. Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceeding the end of the statetment week. The FNMA auction yield is 
the
average yield in bi-weekly auction for short-term forward commitments for Government underwritten mortgages.
* The Treasury has revised its procedure for computing the constant maturity yields. Data have been revised back through December 1974 and result
in an average increase of about 8 basis points in the level of the 10-year yield.
p- preliminary.
