Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
December 12, 1975
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) December 12, 1975
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 increased at about a 12 per cent annual rate in November,
but data available for recent weeks suggest that growth in December will
be much slower. For November and December combined, M1 is, therefore,
projected to grow at about a 7 per cent annual rate. Growth in time deposits
other than money market CD's has been somewhat stronger than expected at the
time of the November FOMC meeting, and M2 is projected to increase at about
a 9.7 per cent annual rate over the November-December period, in the upper
part of the Committee's range of tolerance. Net inflows to thrift institu-
tions have been well maintained.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
over November-December Period
Reserve and monetary aggregates Ranges of
(Growth at SAAR in per cent) Tolerance Latest Estimates
M1 6 to 10 7.1
M2  7½ to 10½ 
9.7
RPD 4½ to 8½ 4.7
Memo: Avg. for statement
Federal funds rate 4½ to 5½ week ending
(per cent per annum) Nov. 19 5.24
(2) Some of the unexpected strength in "other" time deposits at
banks stems from increases in business savings accounts following the recent
lifting of the regulatory prohibition on business holdings of such deposits.
In the first three weeks after this regulatory change, they rose to about
$530 million at the weekly reporting banks. Since this form of saving probably
appeals mainly to smaller firms, much of the recent growth may well reflect
shifts of funds out of demand deposits.
(3) With growth in M2 consistently in the upper part of its range,
and M1 growth in November large (particularly after taking account of the shift
of corporate deposits from demand to savings accounts), the Desk has continued
to seek reserve conditions consistent with Federal funds trading around 5 per
cent. Member bank borrowing has remained minimal. Despite the stability of the
Federal funds rate, short-term market interest rates have edged higher in
recent weeks. These increases appear to reflect in part some market concern
that the recent strengthening of key monetary aggregates may before long induce
the System to tighten money market conditions. In addition, they may reflect
seasonal corporate dividend and tax date pressures.
(4) The volume of securities going through longer-term markets
has been quite heavy, and longer-term rates have remained at relatively
advanced levels. The Treasury this week announced that it will raise $3
billion of new cash through 2-year and 4-year notes to be auctioned in late
December. Moreover, the volume of new corporate and municipal bond issues has
been large--due in part to heavy foreign financing activity. The enactment
of a Federal assistance program for New York City has helped bring about
scattered declines in municipal yields. But the market is still affected by
uncertainties with regard to state agencies, longer-run prospects for the
state itself, and legal challenges to the mandated restructuring of New York
City's debt.
(5) The table on the following page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various time
Past Past
Calendar Twelve Six Three Past.
Year Months Months Months Month
Nov. '75 Nov. '75 Nov. '75 Nov. '75
1974 over over over over
Nov. '74 May. '75 Aug. '75 Oct. '75
Reserves available to support
private nonbank deposits 8.9 -.9 .6 1.0 5.2
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change in
billions)
Large CD's 2.2 -.3 -.7 1.1 .1
Nonbank commercial paper .4 -.3 -.5 -1.0 -.8
1/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
2/ Based on month-end figures. Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institu-
tions--which are derived from either end-of-month or last Wednesday-of-month
figures. Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are
adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when
reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(6) Summarized below for Committee consideration are alternative
operating specifications for the monetary aggregates and the Federal funds
rate for the period between now and the next Committee meeting. All of
the alternatives can be viewed as being consistent with the FOMC's current
longer-run objectives for the aggregates--as indexed by a 5-7½ per cent rate
of growth in M1 from QIII '75 to QIII '76. They do, of course, imply
differing patterns of growth in M 1 over the target period and differing levels
and time paths of interest rates (as shown in appendix table IV).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges of tolerance
for December-January
M1 1/ 4½-6½ 4-6 3½-5½
M2 1/ 7½-9½ 7-9 6½-8½
RPD 4½-6 4-6 3½-5½
Federal funds rate 4¼-5¼ 4¾-5¾ 5¼-6¼
incorporating new seasonal factors will not be published until late
January. By that time benchmark and certain other statistical adjust-
ments will have been completed for M1, weekly seasonals consistent with
the monthly seasonals will have been developed, and figures for reserves
and bank credit will also have been revised. With the exception of the
table in paragraph (6), all tables show data based on the old seasonal
factors. However, the figures in parentheses in the detailed table
on p. 5a reflect the new seasonal factors.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates.
M1 M2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
QII
QIII
QIII '75-QI '76
QI '76-QIII '76
QIII '75-QIII '76
, 2.0(0.8)
3.6(9.1)
preliminary new seasonal factors and are
(6).
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M4  M5  Credit Proxy
Alt, A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
(7) Under alternative B the Federal funds rate range is centered
around the 5¼ per cent level that has been prevailing for several weeks.
The staff believes that in these circumstances M1 would grow in about a
of M 1 in the December-January period is expected to be constrained by
continuing shifts of corporate funds from demand deposits to savings accounts.
The expected range of M1 growth reflects our assumption that such shifts may
reduce M growth by 1 to 1 percentage points. This assumption is based on an
evaluation of early data on the increase in corporate savings accounts and our
expectation that the pace at which funds are transferred out of demand accounts
will slow.
(8) Assuming little change in money market conditions, the 3-month
bill rate is likely to fluctuate within a relatively narrow range between
now and the next Committee meeting. The rate could drop somewhat as mid-
December dividend and tax date pressures ease, but offsetting upward pressures
are likely to be generated by a continuation of the Treasury's practice of
raising sizable amounts of new cash in the weekly and monthly bill auctions.
Longer-term rates are likely to change little over the period ahead. The
holiday period will provide only a brief respite for the market, since the
prospective volume of new corporate and municipal offerings in January
remains relatively sizable and a large amount of Treasury financing is
anticipated for the first quarter of the year.
(9) The basic outlook over the longer run for monetary aggregates and
interest rates appears little changed from the previous blue book. Under
alternative B, the Federal funds rate would be expected to begin rising by
around mid-winter and may reach the 7-7½ per cent range by summer, which would
be a shade less than projected last time. Growth in time deposits other than
large CD's is expected to moderate progressively over the first half of next
year. We have assumed that shifts of funds from demand deposits into corporate
savings accounts will become negligible by late winter, but this assumption
is subject to considerable uncertainty because of the novelty of the development.
(10) Although there may be some effort on the part of banks to issue
CD's for year-end window-dressing purposes, banks are not likely to be aggressive
issuers of CD's in the weeks ahead. Loan demands are likely to remain on the
moderate side, and banks should have ample funds from other sources to accommodate
these demands. Moreover, there are no signs that banks are significantly changing
their conservative lending and liability management policies. Thus, bank credit
growth will probably be relatively moderate in the December-January period, and
also in the first half of next year.
(11) Alternative A contemplates a decline in the Federal funds rate
to the mid-point of a 4¼-5¼ per cent range. Given the high rates of growth
in the monetary aggregates in November, such an easing in the money market
would be contrary to current market expectations and might be accompanied by
a sizable near-term decline in short-term rates. On the other hand, many market
participants may take the view that such an easing is only temporary and, to
that extent, declines in market rates would be limited. Under this alternative,
the staff expects that the funds rate would have to begin rising later in the
winter in order to attain the FOMC's current longer-run monetary objectives
and that the rate would be in the 7½-8 per cent area by summer. This
alternative, therefore, would ultimately tend to exert considerable pressure on
savings inflows at thrift institutions and banks.
(12) Under alternative C, a rise in the funds rate to the mid-point
of the 5 -6 per cent range between now and the next meeting is contemplated.
Such a move would likely be accompanied by increases of to ¾ of a percentage
point in other short-term rates and by smaller upward adjustments in longer-
term rates. Net inflows of consumer-type time and savings deposits at banks
and thrift institutions would be expected to moderate somewhat from their
recent pace over the next few weeks. Later on, however, they would be subject
to less pressure than under alternatives A or B since the early tightening of
money market conditions would tend to limit the extent to which interest
rates would need to rise in the future in order to keep growth in the
monetary aggregates on target, given the staff's GNP projection.
Proposed directive
(13) Shown below is a proposed operational paragraph for
consideration if the Committee wishes to continue formulating its instruc-
tions in terms of desired growth in monetary aggregates over the months
ahead. No alternatives are presented for this formulation, in the expecta-
tion that the reference to desired growth will be taken to apply to the
longer-term targets and that at this meeting the Committee will not
reconsider its present 5 to 7½ per cent target range for M1, with which
all of the short-run operating alternatives discussed in the preceding
sections are consistent.
"Monetary Aggregate" Proposal
To implement this policy, while taking [DEL: more than usual]
account of developments in domestic and international financial
markets, the Committee seeks to achieve bank reserve and money
market conditions consistent with moderate growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead.
(14) Should the Committee desire to formulate the directive
in terms of bank reserve and money market conditions, the language needed
would depend on the specific conditions sought. These alternative "money
market" directives intended to correspond to the similarly lettered policy
alternatives are given below.
Alternative "Money Market" Proposals
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking [DEL: more than usual] account
of developments in domestic and international financial markets,
the Committee seeks to achieve SOMEWHAT EASIER bank reserve and money
market conditions OVER THE PERIOD IMMEDIATELY AHEAD, PROVIDED THAT
MONETARY AGGREGATES DO NOT APPEAR TO BE GROWING AT RATES ABOVE THOSE
CURRENTLY EXPECTED [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead].
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking [DEL: more than usual] account
of developments in domestic and international financial markets,
the Committee seeks to [DEL: achieve] MAINTAIN PREVAILING bank reserve and
money market conditions OVER THE PERIOD IMMEDIATELY AHEAD, PROVIDED
THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES APPEAR TO BE GROWING AT ABOUT THE RATES
CURRENTLY EXPECTED [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary
aggregates over the months ahead].
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking [DEL: more than usual] account
of developments in domestic and international financial markets,
the Committee seeks to achieve SOMEWHAT FIRMER bank reserve and
money market conditions OVER THE PERIOD IMMEDIATELY AHEAD, PROVIDED
THAT MONETARY AGGREGATES DO NOT APPEAR TO BE GROWING AT RATES BELOW
THOSE CURRENTLY EXPECTED [DEL: consistent with moderate growth in monetary
growth in monetary aggregates over the months ahead].
(14) In all four of the alternatives, it is proposed to delete the
words "more than usual" in the phrase, "while taking more than usual account
of developments in domestic and international financial markets," since
action by the Federal Government has somewhat eased New York City's near-
term financial problems.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
NARROW MONEY SUPPLY M1 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
- 00
I 1J I I 260
MONETARY AGGREGATES
ADJUSTED CREDIT PROXY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
BILLIONS Of DOLLARS
- 39
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS AND INTEREST RATES
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS PER CENT
1 14
FR DISCOUNT
RATE
INTEREST RATES Short-term
PER CENT
- 11
PER CENT
- 13
- 11
CONFIDENTIAL (F.R.)
CLASS II-FOMCTABLE 1
BANK RESERVES
(ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS)
DEC. 12, 1975
RESERVES AVAILABLE AGGREGATE RESERVES EQUIRED 
RESERVES
___ _ _SEASONALLY ADJUSTEDFOR PRIVATE . T .
NONBANK DEPOSITS Total Nonborrowed Total Private Total Time Gov't. and
SA NSA Reserves Reserves Required Demand Deposits Interbank
MONTHLY LEVELS-SMILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
WEEKLY LEVELS.
DEC. 3
10
( 2 1)
I 0.1)
( 7.61
( 2.6)
( 11.6)
( 5.0)
( 16.0)
I -0.4)
I -2.0)
( 6.8)
( 6.2)
( 2.1)
f 2.373)
- - --- ---------- "'
Table 2 CONFIDENTIAL (F R )
CLASS II-FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES DEC. 12, 1975
ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
MONEY SUPPLY Adjusted U S TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS Nondeposit
Period Narrow Broad Credit Govt Other Sources of
(Ml) (M2) Proxy Deposits Total Than CD's CD's Funds
MDM1HLY LEVELS-S8ILLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
DEC. ( 2.01 ( 6.51 ( 7.5) ( 11.7) I 10.1) 1 19.21
NOV.-OEC. ( 7.11) I .7) I 9.6) ( 11.7) ( 11.9) I 10.3)
WEEKLY LEV:LS-$BILLIONS
NOV. 5 296.1 662.0 510.2 3.0 446.9 365.9 81.0 8.0
DEL. 3 P 299.1 669.1 516.2 3.4 452.3 369.9 82*4 8.0
. - S - - . - S * - S
NOTI: DATA SHOWN IN PARENThESES ARE CURRENT PROJECtIONS.
P - PRILIMINARY
NOTt; DATA SHOWN IN PARENTHESES ARE CURRENT PROJECTlONS. P - PRELIMINARY
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II- FOMC
DECEMBER 12, 1975
TABLE 3
RESERVE EFFECTS OF
OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS AND OTHER RESERVE FACTORS
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Open Market Operations Daily Average Reserve Effects 6 In Reperve Catgories . .Target
Bills Coupon Agency RP's Open Market A Member Other 4/ Req. res. against available res. 5/ available
Period 6 Accept. Issues Issues Net 3/ Total Operations Bank Borrowing Factors U.S.G. and interb. (6)+(7)+(8)-(9) reserves 5/
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
Dec. 3 -202 - - -5,793 -5,994 -1,064 -7 1,207p -43p 179p
10 -204 - -- -1,482 -1,686 -2,536 -37 2,152p -63p -358p
17
24
31
Target change for previous months reflects the bluebook patterns that are consistent with target ranges that were adopted during the month.
P - Preliminary.
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II -- FOMC
DECEMBER 12, 1975
TABLE 4
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1/
($ millions, not seasonally adjusted)
Treasury Coupons Federal Agencies Net Change
Net Purchases 3/ Net urchases 4/ Outright
Treasury Bills Within Over Within Over Holdings RP's
Period Net Change 2/ 1-year 1- 5 5 - 10 10 Total 1-year 1 - 5 5 - 10 10 Total Total 5/ Net6/
Ij Change from end-of-period to end-of-period.
2/ Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts, and redemptions (-) in bill auctions.
3/ Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts and short-term notes acquired in exchange for maturing bills. Excludes maturity shifts,
rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury borrowings from the System.
4/ Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts only. Excludes redemptions and maturity shifts.
5/ In addition to net purchases of securities, also reflects changes in System holdings of bankers' acceptances, direct Treasury borrowings from the
System, ahd redemptions (-) of Agency and Treasury coupon issues.
6/ Includes changes in both RP's (+) and matched sale-purchase transactions (-).
TABLE 5
SECURITY DEALER POSITIONS AND BANK POSITIONS
(millions of dollars)
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
DECEMBER 12, 1975
U.S. Govt. Security Member Bank Reserve Positions
Dealer Positions Dealer Positions Borrowing at FRB** Basic Reserve Deficit
Corporate Municipal Excess**
Period Bills Coupon Issues Bonds Bonds Reserves Total Seasonal 8 New York 38 Others
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
*4,765
*4,616
*4,748
*4,620
*2,022
*1,534
*1,281
* 875
- 9,715
- 9,744
- 9,533
-10,302
- 9,896
- 9,966
- 9,015
- 9,202
- 7,207
- 9,923
-10,042
- 9,398
- 7,661
- 8,868
-11,632
-10,635
- 9,626
- 9,70 1p
-11,664p
** Monthly averages for excess reserves and borrowings are weighted averages of statement week figures.
Government security dealer trading positions are on a commitment basis. Trading positions, which exclude Treasury bills financed by repurchase
agreements maturing in 16 days or more, are indicators of dealer holdings for sale over the near-term. Other security dealer positions issues
still in syndicate, excluding trading positions. The basic reserve deficit is excess reserves less borrowing at Federal Reserve less net Federal
funds purchases. Weekly data are daily averages for statement weeks, except for corporate and municipal issues in syndicate which are Friday figures.
- " - ~LIIIL L- i ~ - --- i--
* STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
DECEMBER 12, 1975
TABLE 6
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(Per Cent)
S Short-Term Long-Term
STreasury Bills 90-119 Day CD's New Issue-NYC Aaa Utility Municipal U.S. Government FNMA GNMA
Federal Commercial New Recently Bond (20-yr. Constant Auction Guaranteed
Period Funds 90-Day 1-year Paper 60-89 Day 190-119 Day Issue Offered Buyer Maturity) Yield Securities
Apr.
May
June
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Daily--Dec. 4
11
(1)
13.55
8.45
the weekly date is the mid-point of the calendar week over which data are averaged. Column 9 is a one-day quote for Thursday following the end of
the statement week. Column 11 gives FNMA auction data for the Monday preceding the end of the statement week. Column 12 is a one-day quote for
the Monday preceding the end of the statement week. The FNMA auction yield is the average yield in bi-weekly auction for short-term forward
commitments for Government underwritten mortgages. GNMA yields are average net yields to investors on mortgage-backed securities for immediate
delivery, assuming prepayment in 12 years on pools of 30-year FRA/VA mortgages carrying the prevailing ceiling rate.
DEC. 12, 1975
