Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
February 13, 1976
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) February 13, 1976
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M1 appears to be growing at about a 4¼ per cent annual
rate in the January-February period--slightly above the lower limit of the
Committee's two-month range of tolerance--as the table shows. On the other
hand, M2 is expanding at around a 12 per cent rate--somewhat above the
upper limit of its range. The larger than expected increase in M2 mainly
reflects the sizable expansion in savings deposits that has occurred
since early January, when yields on some key short-term market securities
dropped below the 5 per cent ceiling rate on such accounts. In January, M1
grew at only a 1.6 per cent annual rate, but the pace of expansion picked
up during the early weeks of February.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates and RPD's
over January-February Period
Reserve and monetary aggregates Ranges of
(Growth at SAAR, in per cent) Tolerance Latest Estimates
M1 4 to 9 4.3
M2  7 to ll½ 12.1
RPD -7 to -2 -6.0
Memo: Avg. for statement
Federal funds rate 4¼ to 5 week ending
(per cent per annum) Jan. 21 4.81
(2) The adjusted bank credit proxy declined somewhat on balance
in January and is projected to expand at no more than about a 2¼ per cent
annual rate in February. Bank loans have increased only modestly since the
beginning of the year, and banks have permitted CD's to run-off in large
volume. While most major banks cut their prime lending rate to 6¾ per cent
during the intermeeting period, the adjustment to earlier declines in
market rates was only partial, so that spreads of the prime over commercial
paper rates remained unusually wide.
(3) With strength in M2 offsetting weakness in M1 , the Desk
continued throughout the intermeeting period to aim at the 4¾ per cent
Federal funds rate prevailing at the time of the last meeting. Other
short-term market rates did drift down another 10-15 basis points in late
January when market participants were still anticipating some further
reduction in the funds rate, but these declines were reversed once it
became clear that such a cut was unlikely. As a result, most market
interest rates showed little net change over the intermeeting period.
However, the strong performance of deposit flows at thrift institutions
encouraged some additional decline in mortgage rates.
(4) The announcement of terms on the Treasury's February
refinancing--which involved a fixed price offering of a 7-year note and
auctions of a 3-year note and a re-opened long bond--exerted less upward
yield pressure on the market for outstanding issues than many had antici-
pated. As a result, the 8 per cent coupon on the offering of 7-year notes
at par was particularly attractive. Tenders were huge, and the Treasury
issued $6 billion of the note rather than the $3½ billion originally
planned. This issue has moved to about a 1½ point premium. Meanwhile,
the new 3-year note and the re-opened long bond have moved to small
discounts relative to their auction averages. Dealers were awarded
negligible amounts of the 8 per cent note and have acquired only modest
amounts through the secondary market. Awards of the short note and the
bond were fairly large. While reasonably good progress has been made in
distributing the issues, dealers' over-all position in coupon issues is
still sizable. Moreover, their holdings of Treasury bills are unusually
large, reflecting the cumulative impact of large Treasury cash raising
activities in that area.
(5) The table on the following page shows (in percentage annual
rates of change) selected monetary and financial flows over various time
Calendar Calendar Six Three Past
Year Year Months Months Month
July '75 Oct.'75 Dec.'75
Reserves available to support
private nonbank deposits 8.8 -.9 .2 2.2 -2.6
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change in
billions)
Large CD's 2.2 -.6 -.5 -.6 -3.7
Nonbank commercial paper .4 -.2 -.3 .1 .5
1/ Other than interbank and U.S. Government.
2/ Based on month-end figures. Includes loans sold to affiliates and branches.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures, except for data on total
loans and investments of commercial banks, commercial paper, and thrift institu-
tions--which are derived from either end-of-month or last Wednesday-of-month
figures. Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are
adjusted to remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when
reserve requirements are changed.
Past Past
Prospective developments
(6) Summarized below for Committee consideration are alternative
shorter-run operating ranges for the monetary aggregates and the Federal
funds rate.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges of tolerance
for February-March
M1 5½ to 9½ 5 to 9 4½ to 8½
M2  10½ to 13½ 10 to 13 9½ 
to 12½
RPD -4 to 0 -4½ to -½ -5 to -1
Federal funds rate 3¾ to 4¾ 4¼ to 5¼ 4¾ to 5¾
(intermeeting range)
(7) Each of these short-run alternatives is consistent with
a 6 per cent growth rate for M1 over the period from QIV '75 to QIV '76--
the mid-point of the longer-run M1 growth range adopted by the Committee
at its last meeting. Growth rates for M2 and M3 over the longer-run
for each of the alternatives are also around the middle of the 12-month
ranges for these aggregates adopted at the last meeting. There are some
minor differences in growth rates for the broader aggregates among the
alternatives because of projected differences in interest rate patterns.
Longer-run growth rates, as well as more detailed figures, are shown in
the tables on pp. 5a and 5b.
(8) Under alternative B, the Federal funds rate range is centered
on the recently prevailing 4¾ per cent level. Given such a funds rate, M1
growth over the February-March period is expected to be within a 5 to 9 per
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1  M2  M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
Committee lpnger-run
Growth Ranges
QIV '75-QIV '76 4) to 74 7 to 10 9 to 121 L - ---
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Credit Proxy
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
J976 QI
QII
QIII
QIV
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Averages:
QIV '75-QII '76
QII '76-QIV '76
QIV '75-QIV '76 8.0
cent, annual rate, range. Tax refunds are projected to be very large
beginning in the second half of February--even a little larger than a
year ago, when refund payments in this period were unusually high. In
addition, the projected strength in economic activity in the first quarter
should involve rising transactions demands.
(9) Even if M1 growth in February-March is as rapid as implied
by the mid-point of the range stipulated for alternative B, M1 would
expand at only about a 3¼ per cent annual rate from the fourth quarter of
of about 12 per cent annual rate, another sizable rise in velocity appears
in store--as would be consistent with a further downward shift in the demand
for money. The staff is assuming only a small further downward shift after
the first quarter, and as a result interest rates can be expected to begin
rising in the spring if M1 growth is to be kept to around a 6 per cent rate
over the year. The funds rate under alternative B is expected to reach
an average level of around 6¾ per cent by the fourth quarter of this year.
Rate pressures would, of course, be stronger if the demand for money began
strengthening relative to GNP. Appendix Table IV shows Federal funds rates
expected over the course of the year for each of the alternatives.
(10) M2 growth in the February-March period under alternative
B is likely to be in a 10 to 13 per cent annual rate range. The rate of
growth in time and savings deposits (other than large CD's) may moderate
over the next few weeks from its recent exeptionally rapid pace, partly
in consequence of withdrawals in connection with payment for the new 8 per
cent 7-year Treasury note. A further slowing in such deposit flows can be
expected as the year progresses in view of the anticipated rise in
short-term market interest rates.
(11) Little further change in market interest rates would be
expected between now and the mid-March Committee meeting under the
specifications of alternative B. The 3-month bill rate could rise
somewhat because a substantial part--perhaps half--of the Treasury's
very heavy cash need of around $15 billion between now and mid-April may
be raised in the bill area, where dealer bill positions are already large.
Upward adjustment of interest rates in the 2 to 7 year maturity area may
also develop, since the Treasury will be offering additional notes
for cash in the forthcoming period; a $2 billion 21-month note to be
auctioned next Friday was announced today. Yields in the corporate bond
market are likely to fluctuate within a narrow range, with little signifi-
cant change anticipated over the next few weeks in the flow of new issues
coming to market. The municipal market is still subject to substantial
uncertainty because of persisting doubts as to how New York State and
certain other borrowers will cover forthcoming financing needs.
(12) Alternative A involves a decline in the Federal funds rate
to the mid-point of a 3¾ to 4¾ per cent range, and slightly higher growth
rates for M1 and M2 over the near-term than under alternative B. Such a
drop in the funds rate might be accompanied by only a modest decline in the
earlier. Long-term market rates would probably decline only temporarily,
if at all, in response to a drop in the funds rate, in view of the wide-
spread market expectations of continuing economic recovery and the
likelihood that borrowers would accelerate bond offerings should rates
soften noticeably.
(13) The staff would not expect a decline in the funds rate to
be sustainable, given the FOMC's longer-run monetary growth ranges. If
alternative A were adopted, the funds rate would probably have to start
rising by early spring, and during the third and fourth quarters would
reach levels somewhat above those resulting under alternative B. However,
reflecting the initially somewhat more accommodative reserve policy under
alternative A, growth in the aggregates would be a little stronger in the
first half of 1976 than under alternative B. Monetary growth would, of
course, be somewhat less rapid in the second half.
(14) Alternative C involves a rise in the Federal funds rate to
the mid-point of a 4¾ to 5¾ per cent range over the next few weeks. This
may engender increases of as much as 50 to 100 basis points in other
short-term rates and in yields on Treasury notes, given current market
expectations of near-term rate stability and the heavy prospective volume
of Treasury financing. Rate increases on longer-term market securities
would probably be less pronounced. The prospect for reduced flows to
thrift institutions would forestall any further decline in mortgage rates
and may set the stage for some back-up.
(15) However, under this alternative, mortgage markets, and
credit markets generally, may tighten less over the course of the year
than under either alternatives A or B. Given response lags, an early
tightening of the funds rate would mean that less pressure would have to
be exerted on markets later in the year to constrain growth in money. The
lower average level of market rates achieved under this alternative would
thus tend to limit pressures on thrift institutions during the second
half of the year compared with the other alternatives.
Proposed directive
(16) Given below is a proposed operational paragraph if the
Committee wishes to formulate its instructions in terms of desired growth
in monetary aggregates over the months ahead. No alternatives are presented
for this formulation, in the expectation that the reference to desired growth
will be taken to apply to the longer-term targets and that at this meeting
the Committee will not reconsider those targets.
"Monetary aggregates" proposal
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to [DEL: maintain-prevailing] ACHIEVE bank reserve and money market conditions
CONSISTENT WITH MODERATE GROWTH IN MONETARY AGGREGATES over the
period [DEL: immediately] ahead [DEL: , provided that monetary aggregates appear
to be growing at about the rates currently expected.]
(17) Should the Committee desire to continue placing main
emphasis on bank reserve and money market conditions, the language needed
would depend on the specific conditions sought. Three alternative "money
market" directives intended to correspond to the similarly lettered policy
alternatives are given below.
Alternative "money market" proposals
Alternative A
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE SOMEWHAT EASIER bank reserve and money
market conditions over the period immediately ahead, provided that
monetary aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates currently
Alternative B
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to maintain prevailing bank reserve and money market conditions over
the period immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates
appear to be growing at about the rates currently expected.
Alternative C
To implement this policy, while taking account of developments
in domestic and international financial markets, the Committee seeks
to [DEL: maintain prevailing] ACHIEVE SOMEWHAT FIRMER bank reserve and money
market conditions over the period immediately ahead, provided that
monetary aggregates appear to be growing at about the rates currently
Table 2 CONFIDENTIAL (F R )
CLASS II FOMCMONETARY AGGREGATES FEB. 13, 1976
ACTUAL AND CURRENT PROJECTIONS, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
MONEY SUPPLY Adjusted U S TIME AND SAVINGS DEPOSITS Nondeposit
Period Narrow Broad Credit Govt Other Sources of
(Ml) (M2) Proxy Deposits Total Than CD's CD's Funds
MONTHLY LEVELS-$6LLIONS
PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH
JAN.-FFB. ( 4.3) ( 12.1) 1 0.9) ( 5.7) ( 18.4) ( -50.7)
WEEKLY LEVELS-BILLIONS
;  
373.9 78.6 8.0
-I A U_ U- 4- 4 4-- -
P - PRELIMINARY
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
FEBRUARY 13, 1976
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II -- FOMC
FEBRUARY 13, 1976
CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
FEBRUARY 13, 1976
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II - FOMC
FEB. 13, 1976
