Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was created 
through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned 
versions text-searchable.2   Though a stringent quality assurance process was 
employed, some imperfections may remain. 
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  In some cases, original copies needed to be photocopied before being scanned into electronic 
format.  All scanned images were deskewed (to remove the effects of printer- and scanner-introduced 
tilting) and lightly cleaned (to remove dark spots caused by staple holes, hole punches, and other 
blemishes caused after initial printing). 
 
2 A two-step process was used.  An advanced optical character recognition computer program (OCR) 
first created electronic text from the document image.  Where the OCR results were inconclusive, 
staff checked and corrected the text as necessary.  Please note that the numbers and text in charts and 
tables were not reliably recognized by the OCR process and were not checked or corrected by staff.
Content last modified 6/05/2009.
August 12, 1977
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) August 12, 1977
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M-1 surged to an 18.3 per cent annual rate of expansion
in July, with only a minor part of this increase apparently attributable
to special factors such as early disbursements of social security checks
and the New York blackout. More recently, growth in M-1 has slowed
considerably, but for the July-August period is still estimated at an
end of the Committee's range. Mainly reflecting the strength of M-1,
growth in M-2 over July and August is now estimated at an 11.7 per cent
annual rate, about 1 percentage point above the upper end of its range.
Savings account balances increased at a moderate rate in July after
having declined somewhat in June, while growth in the time deposit
component of M-2 was maintained in July at the strong June pace.
Deposit flows into thrift institutions have also been quite strong
in recent weeks. Reflecting the rapid growth in demand and time deposits,
nonborrowed reserves are expected to expand at about a 9.2 per cent
annual rate over July and August.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
Over July-August period
(SAAR in per cent)
Ranges Latest Estimates
M-1 3½ to 7½ 11.7
M-2 6½ to 10½ 11.7
Memorandum: Avg. for statement
Federal funds rate week ending
(per cent per annum) July 20 5.35
(2) In the last week of July, as incoming data provided
confirmation of the unexpectedly strong expansion in the monetary
aggregates, the Account Management began raising its Federal funds
rate objective from the prevailing level of around 5-3/8 per cent. By
the end of the August 3 statement week, the Desk was aiming at a Federal
funds rate of 5¾ per cent, the upper limit of the intermeeting range
specified in the Committee's directive. On August 4, Chairman Burns
recommended raising the upper limit of the range for the funds rate to
operations, while continuing to take into account the current Treasury
financing and financial market developments. He further recommended
that the additional leewaybe used very gradually, and only in the event
that the aggregates continued to register values far beyond the Committee's
objectives. This recommendation was approved by the Committee. The
Account Management continued to aim for a funds rate of around 5¾ per cent
until late in the August 10 statement week, but more recently raised the
funds rate objective to 6 per cent, since incoming data continued to
indicate strong growth of the aggregates.
(3) Commercial bank credit expanded at an annual rate of about
banks were able to finance loans and investments while letting out-
standing negotiable CD's and nondeposit sources of funds contract.
Total loans of banks increased substantially, paced by strong
gains in real estate and consumer installment loans. Business
loans also posted a further advance during the month, but the
increase was significantly below the average monthly gain of the second
(4) Aggregate credit demands have remained relatively strong
in recent weeks. Households have apparently continued to raise a sub-
stantial volume of funds in the mortgage and consumer credit markets,
and the U.S. Treasury has once again been raising sizable amounts of new
money, following its second-quarter paydown of debt. Partly offsetting
these areas of strength, issuance of long-term bonds by State and local
governments has declined more than seasonally from the record June pace.
In addition, total business credit demands have moderated, as the slowing
in growth of business loans at banks in July was accompanied by a sizable
reduction in the commercial paper indebtedness of nonfinancial corpora-
tions. Also, while issuance of publicly-offered corporate bonds picked
up a bit in July, the volume coming to market in August has declined
(5) In response to the tightening of the Federal fund rate
and the strengthening in the monetary aggregates, short-term interest
rates have increased since the July FOMC meeting by around 15 to 45 basis
points. Increases in yields on long-term bonds have been decidedly more
moderate, with rates on Treasury bonds increasing by around 10 basis
points, while yields on corporate and municipal securities have changed
(6) Since the July meeting, the U.S. Treasury has raised
about $1 billion in domestic credit markets through a sale of 2-year
refunding.1/ In the refunding the Treasury auctioned $3.0 billion of a
reopened 29 -year bond at an average yield of 7.72 per cent. Dealers
have distributed essentially all of the $2.7 billion of issues they were
awarded in the auctions, however, and now have deep net short positions
in coupon issues with less than 10 years to mature and very modest long
positions in issues with over 10 years maturities.
(7) The table on the following page shows (in terms of
percentage annual rates of change) related monetary and financial flows
over various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average July '76 Jan. '77 Apr. '77 June '77
Concepts of Money
M2 (M plus time deposits
acommercial banks
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
Prospective developments
(8) Shown below for Committee consideration are alternative
specifications for the monetary aggregates and the Federal funds rate
covering the period between now and the next Committee meeting. (More
detailed data on the aggregates for a longer time span are shown in the
tables on pp. 7 and 8).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for Aug.-Sept.
M-1 2½-6½ 2-6 1½-5½
M-2 5-9 4½-8½ 4-8
Federal funds rate 5¼-5¾ 5¾-6¼ 6¼-6¾
(intermeeting period)
(9) A marked slowing in growth of M-1 is anticipated for
the August-September period, as the extremely rapid expansion in M-1
in July probably provided the public with enough cash to accommodate
the bulk of third-quarter transactions needs. Under alternative B,
M-1 is expected to expand in a 2-6 per cent, annual rate, range. Such
an expansion would produce an 8¾ per cent annual rate of growth from the
second to the third quarter, as compared with a 12 per cent annual rate
of growth in nominal GNP projected for that period.
(10) Growth in M-2 over the August-September period under
alternative B is expected to be in a 4 -8 per cent annual rate range.
The time and savings deposit component of M-2 is likely to expand at
about an 8¼ per cent annual rate over the period, well below the June-
July average. The higher level of interest rates on short- and
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
FOMC Range: 7-94-6k
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M 3  Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
FOMC Range: 7-108½-11
intermediate-term market instruments that has recently emerged is
expected to divert funds away from savings and shorter-maturity time
(11) As of this writing, credit markets probably have not
fully adjusted to a 6 per cent Federal funds rate, the current Desk
objective. Thus, some further rise in interest rates, particularly
short rates, could develop over the next week or so. Assuming the funds
rate remains around 6 per cent over the whole intermeeting period, and
with the Treasury bill supply expected to be relatively limited over the
near-term, the 3-month bill rate may be in the neighborhood of 5-5/8
per cent. The Treasury is not expected to raise new cash through bill
offerings until the fourth quarter.
(12) Longer-term markets are in a strong technical position.
Dealers have a net short position in Treasury coupon issues maturing
in more than a year of around $1 billion. And a reduced volume of
corporate and municipal bonds is expected to be marketed over the balance
of the current quarter, though the volume of municipal securities will
probably still be substantial. Thus, relatively little upward adjust-
ment in long-term rates may be expected over the next few weeks, assuming
a 6 per cent Federal funds rate.
(13) The staff expects that the Federal funds rate would have
to rise above 6 per cent over the next few months, however, if growth
in M-1 were to be held to the mid-point of the 4 to 6½ per cent longer-run
range (pertaining to the QII '77-QII '78 period) adopted by the Committee
at its July meeting. A substantial cut-back in M-1 growth to about a
The necessary curtailment in the supply of reserves would probably
lead to a Federal funds rate of around 6-7/8 per cent by early next year.
This is a higher rate than estimated at the time of the last meeting,
and takes account of the apparent strengthening of money demand relative
to GNP that has developed in the spring and early summer.
(14) As market interest rates rise, inflows of time and
savings deposits, other than large CD's, would probably slow down,
assuming no adjustment in Regulation Q ceiling rates. With bank credit
demands expected to remain generally strong through mid-1978--given
the staff's GNP forecast--banks are likely to bid actively for CD's
and nondeposit funds. Thrift institutions, too, would probably begin
to rely more heavily on borrowed funds, or sales of liquid assets, to
meet commitments. These financial adjustments, as they develop, may
entail a 3-month bill rate in the 7 per cent area in the first half
of 1978, a commercial paper rate in the order of 7¼ per cent, and minor
upward adjustments in long-term rates, including a rise in the high-
grade corporate bond rate to around 8 per cent and primary mortgage
market rates to a little over 9 per cent.
(15) Alternative C involves a rise in the Federal funds
rate to the mid-point of a 6¼-6¾ per cent range between now and the
next Committee meeting. Such an approach would add to restraint on
money growth in the weeks ahead--with M-1 expected to expand in a
only a very minor further rise in the funds rate might be required in
achieving the Committee's current longer-run ranges for the monetary
(16) The further rise in the funds rate of ½ percentage point
over the next few weeks contemplated under alternative C would likely
lead to increases of comparable magnitude in short-term rates generally.
Upward rate pressures would probably also be communicated to the inter-
mediate-term market, where the Treasury is expected to raise $2-$3 billion
of new cash through routine offerings of 2- and 4-year notes during the
next few weeks, though they may be moderate in view of the market's strong
technical position. Longer-term rates, too, might increase somewhat, but
any such increases might not be long sustained if the market came to
believe that the process of tightening was near an end or that the
process would work to restrain inflation.
(17) The easing in the money market envisioned under alternative
A may stimulate rather substantial downward adjustments over the short-run
in intermediate- and longer-term interest rates, particularly in the
Treasury securities market where dealers may be expected to make efforts
to cover short positions. The staff would not expect that downward rate
movements could be sustained, however. Given the projected strength in
nominal GNP and money demand between now and mid-1978, interest rates would
probably once again begin rising by early fall--with the funds rate under
this alternative peaking at around 7¼ per cent in the second quarter of
Directive language
(18) Given below are alternatives for the operational paragraphs
of the directive. The first formulation, like the directive adopted at
the last meeting, places main emphasis on near-term rates of growth in
monetary aggregates; it shows--in strike-through form--the specifications
adopted at the last meeting. The second formulation places main emphasis
on money market conditions. As suggested below, the particular language
needed in the opening lines of the money market formulation would depend
on the specific conditions sought; the three alternatives shown--calling,
respectively, for somewhat easier, prevailing, and somewhat firmer money
market conditions--are intended to be associated with the specifications
discussed in the preceding section under alternatives A, B, and C.
"Monetary Aggregates" Formulation
The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of growth in
M-1 and M-2 on a path believed to be reasonably consistent with the
longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the preceding
paragraph. Specifically, at present, it expects the annual growth
rates over the [DEL: July-August] AUGUST-SEPTEMBER period to be within the
ranges of [DEL: 3-l/2 to 7-1/2] ____ to ____ per cent for M-1 and
[6-1/2-to-10-1/2] ____ to ____ per cent for M-2. In the judg-
ment of the Committee such growth rates are likely to be associated
with a weekly-average Federal funds rate of about [DEL: 5-3/8] ____
per cent. If, giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2,
it appears that growth rates over the 2-month period will deviate
significantly from the midpoints of the indicated ranges, the
operational objective for the Federal funds rate shall be modified
in an orderly fashion within a range of [DEL: 5-1/4 to 6] ____ to
____ per cent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the operating constraints specified above are proving to be sig-
nificantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the
Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls for
supplementary instructions from the Committee.
"Money Market" Formulation
At this time, the Committee seeks to maintain about the prevail-
ing money market conditions (or to achieve somewhat easier or some-
what firmer money market conditions) during the period immediately
ahead, provided that monetary aggregates appear to be growing at
approximately the rates currently expected, which are believed to be
on a path reasonably consistent with the longer-run ranges for mone-
tary aggregates cited in the preceding paragraph. Specifically, the
Committee seeks to maintain the weekly-average Federal funds rate
at about ____ per cent, so long as M-1 and M-2 appear to be grow-
ing over the August-September period at annual rates within ranges of
____ to ____ per cent and ____ to ____ per cent, respectively.
If, giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that
growth rates over the 2-month period are approaching or moving beyond
the limits of the indicated ranges, the operational objective for
the weekly-average Federal funds rate shall be modified in an
orderly fashion within a range of ____to ____ per cent.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the operating constraints specified above are proving to be sig-
nificantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the
Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls for
supplementary instructions from the Committee.
