Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
January 13, 1978
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) January 13, 1978
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M-1 increased at about an 8 per cent annual rate in
December, and incoming data suggest that growth over December and
January will be at about a 7¼ per cent rate, in the upper half of the
FOMC's range. M-2 appears to be increasing at a 6¼ per cent annual
rate over the December-January period, near the lower end of its range.
As in November, all of the increase in the interest-bearing component
of M-2 occurred in large denomination time deposits. Flows into
savings and consumer-type time deposits remained weak, apparently
reflecting the continued diversion of funds from these deposits to
higher yielding market instruments. Deposit flows at thrift institu-
tions moderated slightly further in December from November's reduced
rate. Commercial bank credit is estimated to have remained about
unchanged in December, on a last-Wednesday-of-the-month basis; over
the fourth quarter as a whole, bank credit growth was quite strong.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
over December-January Period
(SAAR in per cent)
Ranges Latest Estimates
M-1 2½ to 8½ 7.2
M-2 6 to 10 6.2
Memo: Federal Through Jan. 6: Average for statement
funds rate 6¼ to 6¾ week ending
(per cent per From Jan. 7: Dec. 21 6.54
annum) 6½ to 7 28 6.65
(2) Total reserves are projected to be increasing at about a
up in growth of demand deposits and continued strong expansion in large
denomination time deposits. Growth in nonborrowed reserves is expected
to be even more rapid over this period, as member bank borrowing has
declined from its November level.
(3) With the monetary aggregates apparently expanding at
rates well within the ranges specified by the FOMC, the Account Management
continued to aim for a Federal funds rate of around 6½ per cent in the
last weeks of December and first week of January. However, reflecting
technical factors,including usual window-dressing pressures around year-end
Federal funds generally traded at rates above this level. On January
per cent. On that day, the FOMC also concurred in the Chairman's
recommendation to raise the Federal funds rate range to 6½ to 7 per
cent and to instruct the Account Manager to raise the funds rate to
around 6¾ over the next few days.
(4) Short-term market interest rates changed little during
late December and early January, though longer-term rates moved up
somewhat. After the discount rate was raised and the System increased
its Federal funds rate target, however, Treasury bill rates increased
sharply and, on balance, are up 35 to 45 basis points for the inter-
meeting period. At the same time, private short-term rates have
increased more modestly. Yields on longer-term market securities have
risen to 10 to 35 basis points since the last Committee meeting, while
rates in the primary mortgage market edged higher.
(5) The table on the following page shows (in terms of
percentage annual rates of change) related monetary and financial
flows over various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average Dec. '76 June '77 Sept. '77 Nov. '77
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
--which are derived from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures.
Growth rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to
remove the effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve require-
ments are changed.
Prospective developments
(6) Shown below for Committee consideration are three
alternative sets of longer-run growth ranges for the monetary aggre-
gates applicable to the QIV '77-QIV '78 period.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M-1 4 to 7 4 to 6 4 to 6
M-2 7 to 9 6 to 9 6 to 8
M-3 8 to 11 8 to 10 7 to 10
Bank credit 7 to 10 7 to 10 6 to 9
(7) Alternative B encompasses the ranges for all of the
aggregates adopted by the Committee in October for the QIII '77-
QIII '78 period. The ranges for M-2 and M-3 now assume an upward
adjustment of one-half percentage point in ceiling rates on small
denomination time deposits in the first half of the year. Without
such an adjustment, the increase in market interest rates thought
necessary to restrain M-1 growth to the mid-point of its indicated
range would--given associated projections for time deposit flows into
banks and thrift institutions--lead to growth in M-2 and M-3 at rates
near or below the lower ends of the ranges shown.1 / Alternatives A
and C represent, respectively, somewhat more and somewhat less expansive
policy alternatives; both also assume the upward adjustment in ceiling
(8) The table below provides perspective on the relationship
between growth rates proposed for the QIV '77-QIV '78 period and for 5-
and 18-month periods also ending in QIV '78. It shows, for instance,
that growth in M-1 at around the 5-1/4 per cent mid-point of the pro-
posed alternative B range would lead to a 5.6 per cent annual rate of
expansion over the 15-month period starting with QIII '77 and to a 6.3
per cent annual rate of growth over the 18-month period beginning with
QII '77--in both cases within the current FOMC range, but above the mid-
point. This is the case because of the sizable overshoot in M-1 growth in
the third quarter of last year and the slight overshoot in the fourth.
M-1 growth at the mid-point of the proposed 4-6 per cent alternative C
range would virtually compensate for the slight fourth quarter overshoot,
since this would lead to a 5.4 per annual rate of expansion over the
Growth Rates in Monetary Aggregates Assuming
Growth Over QIV '77-QIV '78 Period at Near
Mid-Point of Alternative Ranges
(Annual rate, compounded quarterly)
Period Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M-1
text table are shown in connection with the growth triangles in
Appendix IV.
(9) Shorter-run specifications for monetary aggregates and
the Federal funds rate believed consistent with longer-run proposals
are summarized below for Committee consideration. (More detailed, and
longer-term, data are shown in the tables on pp. 8 and 9.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for Jan.-Feb.
M-1 3 to 9 2½ to 8½ 2 to 8
M-2 5½ to 9 5 to 9 4½ to 8½
Federal funds rate
(Intermeeting period) 6 to 6½ 6½ to 7 7 to 7½
(10) A Federal funds rate centered on the recently prevailing
associated with M-1 growth over January-February in a 2½ to 8½ per cent
annual rate range. However, the staff expects that further increases
in market interest rates will be required relatively soon in order to
limit growth in this aggregate over the QIV '77 to QIV '78 period to
the mid-point of the longer-run 4 to 6½ per cent range associated with
alternative B. Money demand can be expected to be relatively strong over
the year. Nominal GNP is projected to increase at about an 11¾ per cent
rate during 1978, reflecting in part an assumed additional fiscal stimulus
from tax cuts. And the restraining effect of the previous increases in
interest rates will be diminishing with the passage of time. Moreover,
the evidence of the last three quarters suggests that the depressing
effect on money demand of regulatory and innovational factors has been
wearing off. Consequently, the staff has assumed only some moderate
additional downward shift in the demand for money over 1978. Thus, in
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1 M-2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-3 Bank Credit
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
order to constrain M-1 growth, the Federal funds rate under alternative
B begins to rise next month and reaches an average of 8 per cent in the
fourth quarter, as shown in Appendix I.1/
(11) Under alternative B, growth in M-2 over the January-
February period is likely to be in a 5 to 9 per cent annual rate
range. With the recent increase in market yields, it appears likely
that savings deposits at banks, which were essentially unchanged in the
last two months of 1977, will remain weak in the early months of 1978.
Moreover, now that yields onmarket instruments are at or above effective
ceiling rates on all maturities of small denomination time deposits at
banks, growth in such deposits is likely to remain modest at best. But
relatively strong growth in large denomination time deposits included
in M-2 can be expected as banks offer these instruments aggressively
to offset slow growth of deposits subject to Regulation Q
(12) Thrift institutions too are faced with unfavorable
market rate comparisons, except on their 4 and 6 year maturities where
the favorable spread has narrowed to only about 5 and 25 basis points
respectively, since the last meeting. Consequently, growth in deposits
at these institutions can be expected to slow further in January-February.
With outstanding commitments at record levels, it seems likely that S&L's
will not only be forced to reduce their liquidity and to maintain a high
rate of borrowing from the FHLBanks, but also to slow their new commit-
ment activity in early 1978.
(13) If the Federal Funds rate remains near its present
alternative B, short-term market interest rates will probably remain
near current higher levels. And given their increases since November,
bond yields may be fully adjusted to the current level of short-term
rates. Thus, yields in the corporate and tax-exempt bond markets may
remain essentially unchanged, and could even decline somewhat in response
to continuing strong institutional investment demands and a recent
reduction in new offerings of corporate bonds. However, on January 25,
the Treasury will announce terms for refunding more than $5 billion of
publicly-held issues maturing in mid-February; the Treasury may also
take the occasion to raise $1 to $2½ billion of new money.
(14) Beyond the intermeeting period, short-term interest
rates are expected to be under renewed upward pressure as efforts are
made to limit M-1 expansion to the 5¼ per cent mid-point of the
alternative B longer-run range. As short-term rates rise, some further
induced increase in intermediate-term rates can be expected. Thus,
even with the assumed increase in deposit rate ceilings, inflows to
thrifts will probably not be sufficient to enable them to meet their
mortgage commitments without further increases in borrowings from
the FHLBanks. Under the circumstances, mortgage rates are
likely to come under upward pressure. Banks would find it necessary
to continue to offer large denomination time deposits in volume to
supplement their deposit sources, and to reduce further their port-
folio liquidity in order to meet loan demands. Moreover, with
Treasury, corporate, and municipal bond offerings remaining sizable,
long-term yields can also be expected to be under renewed upward pres-
sure. Such increases, however, will be limited by the continued high
cash flows of insurance companies and pension funds.
(15) Alternative C contemplates an increase in the Federal
funds rate over the next few weeks to the mid-point of a 7 to 7-1/2
per cent range. Under this alternative M-1 and M-2 growth over the
January-February period may be in 2 to 8 and 4½ to 8½ per cent ranges,
respectively. If the Committee followed this course, the 3-month bill
rate would likely increase to about 7 per cent between now and the next
meeting, with commensurate adjustments in other short rates. Member
bank borrowing would begin to rise, and pressures for a discount rate
increase would develop. The increase in short-term interest rates under
the alternative would tend to strengthen the dollar on international
exchange markets.
(16) Such adjustments in short-term market conditions,
following so closely on recent discount rate and open market actions,
would probably be accompanied by a reappraisal of the basic financial
outlook by market participants. It is likely that banks and thrift
institutions would adopt more restrictive lending policies, while
mortgage bankers would take down existing FNMA commitments and aggres-
sively seek new commitments. Pressures for an upward adjustment in
ceiling rates on time deposits would be likely to emerge. Long-term
interest rates would probably rise further. At the higher level of
rates, corporate and municipal bond offerings would likely be postponed
or possibly cancelled, with borrowers turning more toward banks and the
short-term sector of the open market.
(17) The tightening of the money market over the next few
weeks would be a step toward reducing longer-run growth in the aggre-
gates to rates within the somewhat lower ranges proposed for alterna-
tive C. However, further interest rate increases appear necessary as
the year progresses, given the underlying strength of money demand.
The staff would expect the funds rate under this alternative to average
(18) An easing in money market conditions over the next few
weeks under alternative A, which calls for a Federal funds rate of
about 6-1/4 per cent, would come as a considerable surprise so soon
after the Board's recent discount rate action. Recent interest rate
increases would be reversed, although perhaps not entirely in long-term
markets if the rate decline was considered to be temporary. The decline
in short-term rates, however, would tend to soften the dollar in inter-
national exchange markets.
(19) Even though this alternative is consistent with a shift
to higher long-term growth ranges for the aggregates, the decline in
the funds rate would soon have to be reversed in order to keep the aggre-
gates within the longer-run ranges of alternative A. The funds rate
would probably have to begin rising late in the first quarter and
reach a high of 7-3/4 per cent by fall. The delayed rise in short-
term rates would postpone the need for a change in deposit rate
Directive language
(20) Given below are alternatives for the operational
paragraphs of the directive. The first formulation places main
emphasis on near-term rates of growth in monetary aggregates. The
second formulation, like the directive adopted at the last meeting,
places main emphasis on money market conditions; it shows--in strike-
through form--the specifications adopted at the last meeting (except
that the specifications for the Federal funds rate reflect the modifi-
cations agreed upon on January 6). As suggested below, the particular
language needed in the opening lines of the money market formulation
would depend on the specific conditions sought; the three alternatives
shown--calling, respectively, for somewhat easier, prevailing, and
somewhat firmer money market conditions--are intended to be associated
with the specifications discussed in the preceding section under
alternatives A, B, and C.
"Monetary Aggregates" Formulation
The Committee seeks to encourage near-term rates of growth
in M-1 and M-2 on a path believed to be reasonably consistent with
the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the preceed-
ing paragraph. Specifically, at present, it expects the annual
growth rates over the January-February period to be within the
ranges of ____ to ____ per cent for M-1 and ____ to ____
per cent for M-2. In the judgment of the Committee such growth
rates are likely to be associated with a weekly-average Federal
funds rate of about ____ per cent. If, giving approximately
equal weight to M-1 and M-2, it appears that growth rates over
the 2-month period will deviate significantly from the midpoints
of the indicated ranges, the operational objective for the Federal
funds rate shall be modified in an orderly fashion within a range
of ____ to ____ per cent. In the conduct of day-to-day opera-
tions, account shall be taken of emerging financial market condi-
tions, including the unsettled conditions in foreign exchange
If it appears during the period before the next meeting
that the operating constraints specified above are proving to be
significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify the
Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls for
supplementary instructions from the Committee.
"Money Market" Formulation
At this time, the Committee seeks to maintain about the
prevailing money market conditions (OR TO ACHIEVE SOMEWHAT EASIER
OR SOMEWHAT FIRMER MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS) during the period
immediately ahead, provided that monetary aggregates appear to be
growing at approximately the rates currently expected, which are
believed to be on a path reasonably consistent with the longer-
run ranges for monetary aggregates cited in the preceding paragraph.
Specifically, the Committee seeks to maintain the weekly-average
Federal funds rate at about [DEL: 6-3/4-per cent] ____, so long as M-1
and M-2 appear to be growing over the [DEL: December-January] JANUARY-
FEBRUARY period at annual rates within ranges of [DEL: 2-l/2-to-8-1/2]
____ TO ____ per cent and [DEL: 6-to 10] ____ TO ____ per cent,
respectively. If, giving approximately equal weight to M-1 and
M-2, it appears that growth rates over the 2-month period are
approaching or moving beyond the limits of the indicated ranges,
the operational objective for the weekly-average Federal funds
rate shall be modified in an orderly fashion within a range of
[DEL: 6-l/2-to-7] ____ TO ____ per cent. In the conduct of day-
to-day operations, account shall be taken of emerging financial
market conditions, including the unsettled conditions in foreign
exchange markets.
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the operating constraints specified above are proving to be
significantly inconsistent, the Manager is promptly to notify
the Chairman who will then decide whether the situation calls
for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
