Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
August 10, 1979
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) August 10, 1979
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) M-1 expanded at about a 10 percent annual rate in July and, though
growth is apparently slowing markedly in August, for the two months it is
still expected to be above the upper end of the 2½ to 6½ percent range
specified by the FOMC. M-2 growth over July and August is projected at an
annual rate of about 11 percent, also above the upper end of its FOMC range.
Savings deposits increased somewhat more rapidly in July than in June, after
having declined almost without interruption over the preceding eight months.
The time deposit component of M-2 continued to grow at about its strong
second-quarter pace in July, as large time deposits included in M-2
increased for the first time since late last year. Growth in small time
deposits remained strong by historical standards, but slowed from other
recent months. At thrifts, however, deposit expansion decelerated
from June's relatively strong pace.
Comparison of FOMC Policy Ranges for
July-August
to Latest Staff Estimates
Ranges Latest Estimates
M-1 2½ to 6½ 7.5
M-2 6½ to 10½ 11.3
(2) With growth in loans slowing somewhat, commercial bank
credit increased at a 12½ percent annual rate in July, below the average
pace for the first half of the year. Given the strong growth in demand
and consumer-type time and savings deposits last month, banks reduced
reliance on managed liabilities to finance credit expansion. In particular,
over the course of the month banks tapped their foreign affiliates for only
a minimal additional amount of funds, reflecting a relative firming of
interest rates in the Durodollar market associated with weakness in the dollar.
(3) The Account Management continued to aim for a Federal funds
rate in the 10 percent area during the days immediately following the July
FOMC meeting. On July 20, however, as projections suggested that over the
July-August period M-1 and M-2 would grow at rates moderately above and about
equal to the upper limits of their respective short-run ranges, the Manager
began to aim for a weekly average Federal funds rate at about the 10
percent upper limit specified by the Committee. On the same morning the
Board announced an increase in the discount rate from 9½ percent to 10
percent. On July 27, as projections suggested that growth in both M-1 and
M-2 over July and August would exceed the upper limits of their respective
ranges, the Committee raised the upper limit of the intermeeting range
for the Federal funds rate to 10¾ percent and instructed the Manager to
aim for a rate within a range of 10 to 10¾ percent, depending on sub-
sequent behavior of the aggregates and conditions in foreign exchange markets.
Initially, the Desk aimed for a rate around 10-5/8 percent. Most recently,
however, with the aggregates continuing strong and with renewed pressure
on the dollar in foreign exchange markets following publication of the
July producer price index, the Desk has sought a funds rate a shade higher
than 10-5/8 percent.
(4) Total reserves, after declining at a 4 percent annual rate in
the first half of the year, are projected to expand at about an 8¼ percent
annual rate in the July-August period as strengthening deposit flows have
been accompanied by increases in required reserves. Growth in the monetary
base is projected to rise at about a 10¼ percent annual rate over July and
August as currency in circulation continues to expand at a brisk pace.
(5) Short-term interest rates have generally increased about 20
to 50 basis points since the July FOMC meeting, with the largest increases
on private instruments. Bond yields have changed little on balance over
the intermeeting period, however, as a light corporate and municipal
financing calendar and widespread views that the economy is moving into
recession have tended to damp reactions to the System's policy actions.
Against this general background, the Treasury offerings of $2.75 billion
of 3-year notes, $2.5 billion of reopened 7 -year notes, and $2 billion
of reopened 29 -year issues--to refund $4.8 billion of maturing issues
and raise $2.4 billion of new money--were well bid for in their respective
auctions. The two shorter issues are currently trading at or close to their
average prices in the auction, after having been at premiums in the days
immediately after the offering, while the longer issue is now at a signifi-
cant discount. Average primary market rates on conventional home loans
have edged down a few basis points, perhaps reflecting some slackening in
housing credit demand and the attraction of diversified investors to this
market by the wide spread between mortgage and bond yields.
(6) The dollar was under heavy selling pressure the first two
weeks following the July FOMC meeting, reflecting market participants'
apprehension over the course of U.S. economic policy, particularly in the
wake of the Cabinet reshuffle. These pressures abated with the naming
of the new Federal Reserve Chairman, but pressures have resumed in recentdays
as noted in paragraph (3). Since the last FOMC meeting the United States
has purchased $2 billion in support of the dollar,
(7) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for related monetary and financial flows
over various time periods.
Past Past Past
Twelve Six Three Past
Months Months Months Month
Average July '78 Jan. '79 Apr. '79 June '79
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Loans and investments of
all commercial banks 2/
Short-term Market Paper
(Monthly average change
in billions)
are derived from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures. Growth rates
for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the effect of
discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are changed.
Prospective developments
(8) The table below presents for the Committee's consideration
three alternative specifications for the monetary aggregates and the Federal
funds rate for the August-September period. The Federal funds rate
specifications of alternative B are centered on the currently prevailing
respectively, money market conditions in coming weeks. (More detailed
and longer-term data are contained in the tables on pages 7 and 8.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Ranges for August-September
M-1 5½ to 9½ 5 to 9 4½ to 8½
M-2 8½ to 12½ 8 to 12 7½ to 11½
Federal funds rate 9¾ to 10½ 10¼ to 11 10 to 11½
(intermeeting period)
(9) Under alternative B, M-1 would be expected to expand in a
would represent a noticeable deceleration from the 11 percent average pace
of the preceding four months, but would still leave M-1 growth for the
current quarter at a 9 percent annual rate. With nominal GNP projected
to rise at a 7 percent rate, velocity would decline by about a 2 percent
annual rate, following a 1 percent decline in the second quarter.1/ Because of
the lags that ordinarily characterize the public's adjustment of its cash
balances to changes in economic circumstances, some weakening in velocity would
have been expected in light of the sharp deceleration of nominal GNP growth
shifting of demand deposits to ATS/NOW accounts is estimated to have
depressed M-1 growth--and raised velocity--by about 1¼ percentage points
in the second quarter, and is expected to have about ¾ percentage point
impact in the current quarter. Quarterly velocity figures are shown in
Appendix I.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M-1 1/
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
QIV '78-QII '79
QII '79-QIV '79
QIV '78-QIV '79
'78 to QIV '79 M-1
Alternative Levels and
Growth Rates
Monthly:
Quarterly Average:
QIV '78-QII '79
QII '79-QIV '79
QIV '78-QIV '79
Alt. A
Alt. B
Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Bank Credit
Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
in the spring. However, the continued strength of M-1 suggests the
possibility of a precautionary accumulation of liquid balances in
response to unusual economic uncertainties. Such a pattern would not
be expected to persist for an extended period, and the staff anticipates
a return to somewhat weaker demands for M-1 over the remainder of the
year--although not to the marked weakness observed in the past fall and
(10) Under alternative B, M-2 growth is projected to expand at
about a 10 percent annual rate during the August-September period, a some-
what slower growth rate than in June and July. In addition to the
slowing in growth of the M-1 component, it is unlikely that savings
deposits will continue to expand at their recent rate, given the high level
of market interest rates. Nonetheless, growth in small time deposits should
remain brisk, with banks continuing to attract a substantial amount of MMC
deposits in the absence of an inter-institutional ceiling rate differential.
(11) As shown in the upper panel of the chart on page 10,
under alternative B M-1 in September would be above the level implied by the
upper end of the Committee's 1½ to 4½ percent growth range for the QIV '78
to QIV '79 period. This would also be true under alternatives A and C.
However, as is indicated in the lower panel of the chart, if the longer-run
range is adjusted to reflect the downward revision in the staff's estimate
of the ATS/NOW effect from the original 3 percent to the current 1 percent,
the projected September level (under alternative B) is within, though in the
upper half, of the adjusted 3 to 6 percent range. For M-2, growth indicated
by the alternative B range would place the aggregate in September well
into the upper half of the 5 to 8 percent range established by the Committee
for the period QIV '78 to QIV '79.
Growth Ranges and Actual M-1
LONGER-RUN RANGE REFLECTING 3 PERCENTAGE
POINT IMPACT FROM ATS ASSUMED IN FEB. '79
Alt. B Short-Run Range
Billions of dollars
385
Q4 '78-Q4 '79 - 380
S9% . 4 V2 %<'«^4/,
t I I
LONGER-RUN RANGE REFLECTING
Aft B Short-Run Range ---
I I J I I ED
.---
, " / ^---"
w 
-
^''' / -r' *'
i, i
O N
I i I
O~ J F M A M. J J A S 0 N- O
ED
385
Growth Ranges and Actual M-2 and M-3
Current Longer-Run Range -----
Alt. B Short-Run Range -
I I I I I i I I
Bilions of dollars
950
Q4 '78-Q4 '79
, 8%
S - 940
- 920
- 910
- 900
SI 860
Current Longer-Run Range -----
Alt. B Short-Run Range--
Q4 '78-Q4 '79
% -6%
I I I I I I I
O N D J F M A M J J A S O N 0
(12) The table on page 13 indicates the annual rates of growth
of M-1 and M-2 required to reach the high ends, low ends, and midpoints of
their respective longer-run ranges within certain periods. It may be noted
that, assuming ATS retards M-1 growth by 1½ percentage points over the
year, M-1 would need to rise at a 4.1 percent annual rate between July
and the fourth quarter to hit the midpoint of its longer-run range. Growth
in M-2 would have to be at a 5.3 percent annual rate over the same period
to achieve the midpoint of its longer-run range.
(13) With Federal funds continuing to trade around 10½ to 10¾
percent, the midpoint of alternative B, other interest rates would likely
change little in the near term. Credit markets are not likely to be
subject to demand pressures over the next few weeks. The Treasury's
net borrowing activities during the intermeeting period may be limited to
an early September cash management bill to carry it through the mid-month
tax date, although the sale of a 5-year note is a possible alternative.
Market participants likely will be focusing more on the greater cash needs
confronting the Treasury in the fourth quarter. The forward calendars
in the corporate and municipal bond markets are moderate. Loan demands
at commercial banks may edge off, as inventory investment declines and
household spending continues weak. Use of bank credit lines, and there-
fore bank demands on the money markets, could be increased, however, by
any adverse developments in the commercial paper market associated with the
Chrysler situation. At thrift institutions, growth of deposits subject to
rate ceilings likely will remain sluggish, leading to continued borrowing
from Home Loan Banks and market sources.
Growth Rates from July Levels Required to Achieve Levels
Implied by FOMC Longer-run Ranges for M-1 and M-2
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Low End
of Range
Midpoint
of Range
High End
of Range
Achieve level by:
September 1979
(in 2 months)
QIV '79 (end of
longer-run period)
Achieve level by:
September 1979
(in 2 months)
QIV '79 (end of
longer-run period)
September 1979
(in 2 months)
QIV '79 (end of
longer-run period)
M-1
(3 percent ATS/NOW impact on M-1)
M-1
(1½ percent ATS/NOW impact on M-1)
(14) Alternative A involves a decline in the Federal funds rate
to the midpoint of a 9-3/4 to 10-1/2 percent range. Growth in M-1 and M-2
over the August-September period would likely be in annual rate ranges of
term market rates could decline rather considerably, since the market at
present does not expect an easing in the System's posture. Given the
recent data on inflation and unemployment, and the prevailing state of
expectations regarding monetary policy, such a movement in domestic rates
would likely lead to an appreciable weakening of the dollar on foreign
exchange markets. Purchases of Treasuries by foreign official institutions
associated with any substantial intervention activity might result in
relatively larger declines in Treasury bill rates than in private rates.
In long-term debt markets, bond yields would probably also decline, though
such tendencies would be limited if an easing in the funds rate were to
strengthen inflationary expectations. Thrift deposit flows would benefit
from the decline in market rates, especially if bill yields fell enough
to reopen a ceiling rate differential, and mortgage rates might edge
(15) Alternative C calls for an increase in the Federal funds
rate to the midpoint of a 10-3/4 to 11-1/2 percent range. Over the August-
September period, M-1 probably would grow in a 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent
annual rate range and M-2 between 7-1/2 and 11-1/2 percent. A further
tightening action at this juncture would reinforce the view that the
Federal Reserve is giving relatively heavy weight to domestic inflation
and the performance of the dollar abroad in formulating its policies.
The dollar likely would strengthen on foreign exchange markets, and while a
rise in short-term rates could be anticipated, bond yields might increase
rather little, if at all. Given the already wide spread between bond
yields and mortgage rates--and the minor impact of the assumed short-term
rate increase on thrift institution deposit flows--mortgage rates probably
might increase only moderately.
(16) As noted in paragraph (9), the staff currently expects
that the public's demand for M-1 will be significantly weaker over the
remainder of the year than it has been in recent months. Given the out-
look for nominal GNP, and assuming that the Committee adopts short-run
alternative B, the projected behavior of money demand would permit a
decline in the Federal funds rate to around 9-1/2 percent by year-end with
M-1 growth for the QIV '78 to QIV '79 period ending up close to the mid-
point of the longer-run range (of 3 to 6 percent, assuming 1-1/2 percent
ATS adjustment). However, should the public's demand for M-1 not exhibit
the anticipated weakening, M-1 growth might be well into the upper half
of the longer-run range even if the funds rate were held at its current
Directive language
(17) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for
the directive in the customary form, with alternative language related
to the short-run specifications presented in the preceding section.
Alternative language is also provided for placing main emphasis either on
monetary aggregates or on money market conditions. The specifications
adopted last month are shown in strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks to achieve bank
reserve and money market conditions that are broadly consistent
with the longer-run ranges for monetary aggregates cited above,
while giving due regard to [DEL: the program for supporting the foreign
exchange value of the dollar and to] developing conditions in
FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND domestic financial markets. Early in the
period before the next regular meeting, System open market
operations are to be directed at maintaining the (or ATTAINING A)
weekly average federal funds rate
(A) SLIGHTLY BELOW THE CURRENT LEVEL.
(B) at about the current level.
(C) SLIGHTLY ABOVE THE CURRENT LEVEL.
Subsequently, operations shall be directed at maintaining the
weekly average federal funds rate within the range of 9¾-to-10¾ 1/
____ TO ____ percent. In deciding on the specific objective
for the federal funds rate the Manager shall be guided mainly by
the relationship between the latest estimates of annual rates of
growth in the July-August AUGUST-SEPTEMBER period of M-1 and M-2
and the following ranges of tolerance: 2½-to-6½ ____ TO ____
percent for M-1 and 6½ to 10½ ____ TO ____ percent for M-2. If
rates of growth of M-1 and M-2, given approximately equal weight,
appear to be
Monetary aggregates emphasis
SIGNIFICANTLY ABOVE OR BELOW THE MIDPOINTS
Money market emphasis
close to or beyond the upper or lower limits
of the indicated ranges, the objective for the funds rate is to
be raised or lowered in an orderly fashion within its range.
If the rates of growth in the aggregates appear to be beyond
the upper or lower limits of the indicated ranges at a time
when the objective for the funds rate has already been moved to
the corresponding limit of its range, the Manager shall promptly
notify the Chairman, who will then decide whether the situation
calls for supplementary instructions from the Committee.
