Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
December 12, 1980
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC
December 12, 1980
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent developments
(1) Growth of M-1A and M-1B slowed further in November, but re-
mained well above that needed to reach the FOMC's short-run target path.
Meanwhile, growth in M-2 and M-3 accelerated last month. The pickup in
the broader aggregates reflected a surge in the expansion of small time
deposits and large CDs. Savings deposits, on the other hand, declined
for the first time since May, and money market mutual funds dropped slightly
further. Recent data suggest a substantial slowing in growth of all of the
monetary aggregates in December. M-1A growth for the year 1980, shown in the
penultimate column of the table below, is likely to be just under the upper
limit of its longer-run FOMC range, while growth rates for the other
monetary aggregates will exceed the upper limits of their respective
Oct. to Dec.
Growth Consistent Growth from
Monetary with FOMC QIV '79 to Target Growt
Aggregates Oct. Nov. Short-run Target QIV '80 e/ for 1980
Memo:
Bank Credit 13.3 16.1
e/ Estimated
as commercial and industrial loans continued to expand sharply, and bank
credit growth for the year 1980 will be in the upper half of its longer-
run range.
(2) Reserve aggregates rose sharply in November, but a
substantial part of this growth was attributable to an increase needed to
accommodate a large rise in reserve requirements resulting from the
reduction of weekend Eurodollar reserve-avoidance activities. After adjust-
ment is made for this development, nonborrowed reserves declined at about
a 5 percent annual rate last month, as shown in the last column of the table
on page 3. However, total reserves, adjusted, grew at an 18 percent annual
rate. This advance reflected not only the continued rapid expansion in
required reserves associated with the larger than targeted growth in the
monetary aggregates, but also unexpectedly strong demands for excess
reserves, probably related to the implementation of the Monetary Control
Act. The enlarged level of excess reserves accounted for 8 percentage
points of the growth in total reserves. With demands for reserves out-
pacing the adjusted target path of nonborrowed reserves, member bank
borrowing increased substantially further early in the intermeeting
period, and the federal funds market continued to tighten. In the latest
statement week, however, member bank borrowing declined to an average of
$1.8 billion.
Recent Growth in Reserve Aggregates
(SAAR)
Memo:
Adjusted
October November November*
Nonborrowed reserves 2.5 13.2 -5.1
Total reserves 5.2 35.9 18.1
Monetary base 10.1 15.0 10.6
Memo: ($ million)
Average level of Discounts and Advances
Adjustment borrowings 1,310 2,059
Average level of excess reserves 206 498
* Deducting estimates of the additional reserves required in association
with the reduction of weekend reserve avoidance activities.
(3) With demand for reserves outpacing the amount supplied through
open market operations, and with further pressure on short-term markets
generated by the percentage point increase in both the basic discount rate
and the surcharge, short-term interest rates have risen another 2 to 5
percentage points since the November FOMC meeting. Pressures have been
particularly intense on very short-term instruments. The federal funds
rate averaged 18.82 percent in the most recent full statement week.1/ Rates
on 3-month Treasury bills and 3-month CDs rose to as high as 17 and 21
percent, respectively, above peaks reached in early spring. With bank
credit demand strong, banks have pressed large CD offerings on the market.
In addition, the Treasury raised more than $6 billion of new cash through
short-term bills since the previous meeting. With business loan demands
remaining quite strong and costs of loanable funds rising, banks raised
their prime lending rates from 16 1/4 percent to 20 percent.
(4) Bond yields have increased less than short rates, rising
about 5/8 to 1 percentage point since the November meeting. The Treasury
raised just under $5 billion of new money with coupon securities in that
period. At the same time, the volume of public offerings of bonds by
corporations in November and early December was relatively light as firms
have backed away from the market in the anticipation that yields would
come down over the near term. Primary mortgage rates have moved up less
than bond yields; new mortgage commitment activity is reported to be
quite limited at current rate levels.
(5) The dollar has risen sharply on exchange markets since the
last Committee meeting, in response to the continued widening of interest
rate differentials in favor of dollar assets and to the intensification of
concerns over the Polish situation. The dollar rose by 3 to 4 percent
against Continental currencies and declined only against the yen.
U.S. authorities acquired $2 billion of DM.
(6) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for selected monetary and financial flows over
various time periods.
Past
Three Past
Months Month
QIII '80 Nov. '80 Nov. '80
Concepts of Money
Bank Credit
Managed Liabilities of Banks
(Monthly average change in
billions)
Alternative longer-run monetary strategies
(7) To aid the Committee in its preliminary assessment of monetary
targets for next year, to be announced in February, the table on the following
page presents estimates of GNP, prices, and unemployment that might be
expected with alternative monetary strategies. Strategy I is based in part
on the FOMC's tentative decision with respect to M-1 for 1981 made in July,
and is the monetary premise for the greenbook GNP projection. It involves
a reduction next year of ½ percentage point in target growth of M-1A and
M-1B, abstracting from the distorting effects on these aggregates of shifts
into NOW and related accounts. It further assumes similar reductions in
years thereafter of the FOMC's 1980 target for M-1A--that is, growth at
the 4¾ percent midpoint of this year's range. The figures for strategies
III and IV show impacts if instead growth over the next three years is
at 6 and 3½ percent, respectively.
(8) The steadily reduced rate of money growth envisioned by
strategy I is likely to entail a noticeable reduction in the rate of inflation,
with some improvement next year and larger improvement in later years. Such
monetary restraint, so far as we can tell now, would permit little real
growth, and unemployment would be expected to rise throughout the 3-year
projection period. Strategy II would provide a bit more scope for real
growth, but with slightly less success in slowing price increases within
the projection time horizon. The higher money growth rates of strategy
III would appear to permit enough real growth to reduce the unemployment
rate and to move it below its current level in 1983. However, there would
be less progress in reducing inflation. Finally, strategy IV--which entails
Economic Implications of Alternative
Long-run Policy Strategies
Nominal GNP (percent change, Q4/Q4)
Strategy I
Strategy II
Strategy III
Strategy IV
Real GNP (percent change, Q4/04)
Strategy I
Strategy II
Strategy III
Strategy IV
Deflator (percent change. Q4/Q4)
Strategy I
Strategy II
Strategy III
Strategy IV
Unemployment Rate (percent. Q4)
-. 9
Strategy I
Strategy II
Strategy III
Strategy IV
-. 8
-.5
.2
a prompt, sizable reduction in money growth--would have the largest effect
in reducing inflation over the projection period, but at the highest short-
run cost in terms of real growth and unemployment.
(9) The behavior of the economy in response to these several
strategies will depend, among other things, on changes in expectations by
the public. We have assumed no more than a gradual abatement of inflationary
expections, as actual price increases diminish as a result of slack markets.
But should, for instance, the strong commitment to restraint of strategy I
or strategy IV lead to a rapid decline of inflationary expectations, and
hence to reduced upward pressure on wages and prices, there would be more
scope for expansion in real GNP. On the other hand, the greater money growth
of strategy III, which exceeds the upper limit of the tentative target
announced by the FOMC for 1981, could exacerbate inflationary expectations
because the System might be seen as becoming accommodative to inflation;
in that case, this strategy could involve more rapid inflation and less
real growth than shown in the table.
(10) All of our projections assume a further downward shift of
demand for M-1A and M-1B relative to GNP and interest rates (as measured
by the prediction error in the money demand equation of the Board's
quarterly model). The extent of shift in 1981 is somewhat less than occurred
in 1975 - 1976, after allowing for the estimated impact from introduction
of nationwide NOW accounts at the beginning of next year.1/ If such a down-
ward shift does not occur, the proposed targets would be even more restraining
in their impact on nominal GNP growth. For example, if the downward shift
were not to occur, or to be significantly less than expected, then adoption
of the targets for 1981 involved in strategy I probably would yield an
economic outcome for that year more restrictive than implied by strategy IV.
(11) It should also be pointed out that the M-1 growth rates
assumed for these projections appear to involve relatively more growth in
the broader aggregates, particularly M-2, than was implicit in the Committee's
tentative thinking about targets for 1981. The table below compares the
monetary targets for 1981 decided in July with the set the staff believes
consistent with those M-1 ranges. As reflected in the two sets of ranges,
Tentative targets Current estimates
for 1981 set in July of consistent set
M-1A 3 to 5½ 3 to 5½
M-1B 3½ to 6 3½ to 6
M-2 5 to 8½ 8 to 11
M-3 6½ to 9½ 7½ to 10½
Bank credit 6 to 9 6½ to 9
we would expect M-2 growth to be above the upper end of the tentative range
for this aggregate announced in July and M-3 to be at least in the upper
part of its tentative range. This is based on our assessment of credit demands
on banks and thrift institutions next year, asset preferences of the public
at expected market rates of interest, the availability of attractive consumer-
type instruments at depository institutions, and recent experience.
(12) Adjustments to targets next year for M-1A and M-1B would
need to be made to take account of the impact on the public's deposit
holdings from the introduction of NOW and related accounts on a nationwide
basis. Our estimates of likely impacts are described in appendix III. On the
assumption that thrifts, including credit unions, will very actively compete
for such deposits, we have assumed that the total of funds newly shifted into
NOW accounts will be larger than earlier expected; however, we have retained
the assumption that two-thirds of these funds will come from demand deposits.
There is a wide range of error around these estimates, but our midpoint
estimate is that such shifts will reduce M-1A growth by about 4 percentage
points and raise M-1B growth by 2 percentage points. The relation between
M-1A and M-1B will also be influenced by the rate of growth in already
outstanding checkable deposits other than demand deposits (OCDs) as compared
with M-1A. We have assumed that the OCD component of M-1B will grow somewhat
faster than M-1A; this is consistent with the recent trend growth in house-
hold transactions balances, but the actual outcome will also depend to a
great extent on the behavior of OCDs as a savings vehicle. On balance,
consistent with the Committee's earlier tentative decision effectively to
reduce M-1A and M-1B growth by ½ point next year, we would now anticipate
that actual growth for M-A over the year 1981 would be in a -1 to 1½
percent range (1 point lower than earlier), and for M-1B in a 5½ to 8 per-
cent range (½ point higher than earlier).
Near-term targets
(13) The table below presents for Committee consideration alterna-
tive sets of targets for the monetary aggregates through the first quarter of
next year, taking the known November level as a base. The growth rates of
M-1A and M-1B are specified in terms of their behavior in the absence of
the January 1 introduction of nationwide NOW accounts; the corresponding
actual changes in these narrow aggregates, reflecting the anticipated
distorting effects of shifting into interest-bearing checking accounts,
are shown in parentheses. The staff's assumption is that the Committee
would wish to set its targets for M-1A and M-1B in terms of the "effective"
growth rates, with paths for the measured aggregates being adjusted as
incoming weekly data give some indication of the actual degree of shifting.
Also shown in the table are associated federal funds rate ranges for the
intermeeting period. (Detailed and longer-run data for the monetary
aggregates are contained in the table on the next page.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from
November to March
M-1A 4% ( ) 3% (- ) 2k (-2)
M-1B 5% (7%) 4% (6%) 3% (5t)
M-2 9k 8% 8
Intermeeting range
for federal funds 12 to 18 13 to 19 15 to 20
(14) All of the alternatives would imply a substantial decelera-
tion of monetary growth from the rates recently experienced. Nonetheless,
given the likely reduction in demand for cash balances from the sharp
increase in interest rates that has occurred over the past few months and
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates Monthly
December '80 -
March '81
Quarterly Average
(-3.4)
1.5
(-4.6)
2.0
Alt. A
Alt. B
Alt. C
(4.9)
2.6
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
December '80 -
March '8 1
Quarterly Average
credit for the year and for the quarters
8; 1980 QIV, 15; 1981 QI, 11. Only minor
under alternatives A and C.
from the substantial weakening of economic activity projected, growth of
the narrow aggregates at the rates indicated for any of the alternatives
probably would be accompanied by a decline in interest rates from their
current levels. However, as noted earlier, inflationary trends will be
giving considerable impetus to the public's demand for transactions balances
over the whole of 1981, and thus interest rates may well stay at high
levels on average next year.1/
(15) Alternative B has been designed to place M-1A and M-1B
in March near the midpoints of the FOMC's tentative long-range targets for
over the first three months of next year would be 4¼ percent annual rate,
assuming M-1A grows at the 2½ percent annual rate for December. Substantially
lower growth rates are included in alternative C. This alternative would tend
to limit the potential for interest rate declines should the economy weaken
as projected and may tend to reduce the risk of pronounced interest
rate fluctuations in the course of the year. Alternative A proposes some-
what higher growth rates of money than alternative B. (The charts on the
following pages depict the near-term behavior of the monetary targets under the
three alternatives, with M-1A and M-1B shown both before and after adjust-
ment for the impact of NOW accounts; the alternatives are shown in relation
to the tentative long-run ranges for 1981 established at the July meeting.)
(16) Under alternative B, actual M-A growth may be slightly
negative after the turn of the year, on the assumption that the NOW account
effect reduces M-1A growth by about 5½ percentage points over the first
three months of the year. Measured M-1B growth may be around 7½ percent in
the early months of next year on the assumption that shifts out of assets
not contained in M-1B raise growth of that aggregate by about 2 percentage
points. To achieve the monetary expansion indicated by alternative B,
total reserves would have to increase at about a 1¾ percent annual rate
from November to March, and by 3 percent over the shorter-run period from
November to January.
(17) Under alternative B, the federal funds rate might be expected
to drop over the forthcoming intermeeting period to around 17 percent, and
probably by more later in the quarter, unless the economy proves to be
stronger than expected. A 17 percent funds rate would imply borrowing in
a range of $1¼ to $1 billion, given the present discount rate structure. A
drop in the funds rate to this level would be accompanied by declines of 2
percentage points or so in very short rates. Intermediate- and longer-term
market rates would drop substantially initially, partly as short positions
are covered. Rate declines may be more limited over the longer run, as
markets face adverse expectational pressures associated with sharp increases
that may be published in the consumer price index and with discussion of a
deficit-expanding tax cut. Even before such a tax cut becomes a reality,
debt markets will be burdened with heavy federal financing requirements--
expected to run between $20 and $25 billion in the first quarter. The long-
term bond markets will, in addition, be called upon to absorb a massive
backlog of corporate and municipal offerings that have been awaiting a down-
turn in rates.
(18) Bank credit growth should slow in the months ahead, reflecting
not only the slackening of loan demand associated with the weakening of final
demands and some liquidation of inventories but also the funding of short-term
debt by businesses. In reflection, the issuance of managed liabilities--
especially large CDs--should fall off from the recent elevated pace,
contributing to a moderation of M-3 growth. At thrift institutions, residen-
tial mortgage credit flows likely will be somewhat smaller than in the past
couple of months. Average rates on new S&L commitments for conventional
fixed rate loans are expected to move higher in the weeks immediately
ahead, but then to move downward only moderately. Although thrift institu-
tions are projected to continue to experience ample deposit inflows, the
funds will remain very costly and in an environment of significant operating
losses the institutions may tend to emphasize investment in short-term,
particularly liquid, assets.
(19) To attain the somewhat higher monetary targets of alterna-
tive A total reserves would have to increase at a 2¾ percent, at an annual
rate, between November and March and by a 3½ percent rate in the two-month
December-January period. The federal funds rate may fall to around 16
percent in the intermeeting period, and, given the present discount rate
structure, borrowing could be in a range around $1 billion. Other
short-term rates may drop 3 percentage points or so, tending to
lessen the financing and cash flow difficulties of many businesses
and households. The reduction in deposit costs at thrift institutions,
while substantial, would still leave them facing severe earnings pressures
over the next several months. Even though short rates drop more under
this alternative than under alternative B, long rates may be little
different, particularly if inflationary expectations remain high--as they
may if a substantial easing in short rates occur well before signs of a
weakening in price pressures or before there are clear signs of a significant
drop-off in economic activity.
(20) Alternative C is the most restrictive of the three short-run
options presented. Under this alternative, M-1A in March would be just below
the lower end of the tentative long-run growth cone for 1981--on both an
adjusted and unadjusted basis. The alternative C monetary targets are
consistent with virtually no growth in total reserves. Borrowing over the
next few weeks might decline only a little from the recent $1.8 billion
level, and the federal funds rate might remain in the 18 to 20 percent area.
However, as the first quarter progresses, federal funds and other short-term
rates are likely to drop somewhat as evidence of economic weakness emerges and
demands for credit and money soften. Credit conditions on the whole would
remain quite taut, though. Mortgage markets in particular would show little
or no easing and this, together with continued consumer credit stringencies,
would inhibit household spending.
Directive language
(21) Given below are suggested operational paragraphs for the
directive consistent with the form of the directive adopted at recent
meetings. Because December figures for the monetary aggregates are
largely projected, the language calls for expansion of reserve aggregates
at a pace consistent with the desired rate of monetary growth over the
four-month period ending in March 1981, provided that the weekly average
federal funds rate remains within a specified range. The specifications
adopted at the November meeting are shown in strike-through form.
In the short run, the Committee seeks behavior of reserve
aggregates consistent with growth of M-1A, M-1B, and M-2 over the
FOUR-MONTH period [DEL: from September to December] ENDING IN MARCH
[DEL: 7¾] ____ percent respectively, [DEL: or somewhat less,] provided that in
the period before the next regular meeting the weekly average
federal funds rate remains within a range of [DEL: 13 to 18] ____ TO
If it appears during the period before the next meeting that
the constraint on the federal funds rate is inconsistent with the
objective for the expansion of reserves, the Manager for Domestic
Operations is promptly to notify the Chairman, who will then decide
whether the situation calls for supplementary instructions from
the Committee.
