Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
January 30, 1981
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) January 30, 1981
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent develcoments
(1) Rather than posting a small increase as expected at the time
of the last FOMC meeting, the narrow monetary aggregates fell sharply
in December. In the early weeks of January, actual M-1A and M-1B were con-
siderably affected by shifts into NOW accounts, which were much larger than
anticipated. Other checkable deposits (OCD) in January--the first month of
nationwide NOW accounts--appear to be increasing by about $16¾ billion,
some $13 billion more than expected at the time of the last Committee
meeting.1/ Surveys of commercial banks and inspection of reported data
suggest that in early January four-fifths of the net OCD growth came from
demand deposits rather than the two-thirds previously estimated. Adding
back that proportion of OCD growth to M-1A, and reducing M-1B by estimated
shifts from other assets to OCD, provide an estimate of the "adjusted"
growth in these aggregates, that is, growth as if nationwide NOWs had
not occurred. This adjusted growth can then be compared with the target
paths that were specified to abstract from NOW account shifts. As shown
by the first two rows of each panel in the table on the next page, the
rebound in "adjusted" growth of M-1A and M-1B in January still left these
MONETARY AGGREGATES
(December-January)
Levels Growth Rates
(S billion) (SAAR)
Dec. Jan..1/ Dec. Jan.!/ Dec. -Jan...!
(2) M-2 growth accelerated considerably in January, as M-1B
strengthened and as money market mutual funds, whose posted yields came
to exceed market rates, increased by a record amount. However, growth
in M-2 for the December-January period was at only about a 5 percent
annual rate, less than expected at the time of the last meeting. Total credit
growth at large banks appears to have been strong in the early weeks of Jan-
uary, but business loans at these institutions grew at the lowest rate
since July. Although nonfinancial businesses in January relied considerably
more on the commercial paper market as the spread between the paper and prime
rate widened further, total short-term borrowing by these firms appears to
have moderated; on the other hand, their capital market financing increased
from the depressed levels of recent months.
(3) Growth in nonborrowed reserves was substantial over the past
two months. About two-thirds of the expansion was offset by a decline
in adjustment borrowing, despite the continuation generally of a wide
spread of the federal funds rate over even the surcharge discount rate;
total reserves and the monetary base grew much less than nonborrowed
reserves. Excess reserves remained higher than expected over the past
Recent Growth in Reserve Aggregates
(SAAR)
Total reserves 18.1 1.6 6."
Monetary base 7.3 4.9 L.0
Memo: (S million)
Average level of adjustment 7/3/
borrowing $2,059 $1,690 $1,362
Average level of 3/
excess reserves $498 S552 $617 "
S1/
several weeks.- The persistently large excess reserve levels are somewhat
puzzling, but appear to be related to implementation of the Monetary Control
Act. The larger excess reserve holdings have been concentrated at member
banks, with no indications of a concentration in particular Districts or by
size of institution. Only a very small part of the higher excess reserves
that emerged beginning in November was held by nonmember commercial banks and
(4) In the first three weeks of January, despite the further
decline in adjustment borrowing, the federal funds rate remained high,
trading generally in the 19 to 20 percent zone. More recently, the funds
rate has been in the 17 to 19 percent area, even as borrowing ran markedly
above earlier levels. Short-term rates fluctuated considerably over the
intermeeting period, responding to published money stock data and other
economic news. On balance, money market yields are 2 1/2 to 4 percentage
points below their highs in mid-December prior to the last FOMC meeting.
(5) Bond yields have moved in a pattern similar to short rates in
recent weeks and are currently 3/4 to 1 percentage point below their December
highs. Corporate bond issuance has recovered from the low November-December
level. The Treasury has continued to raise substantial amounts of new
money with coupon offerings--$11 1/4 billion over the past two months. In the
February mid-quarter financing just announced, the Treasury will raise another
$3 billion. Mortgage commitment rates have changed little since mid-December,
remaining around 14-7/8 percent.
(6) The dollar has risen more than 4 percentage points on a weighted
average basis since the last FOMC meeting, with most of the increase in the
last week; small declines against sterling and the yen were more than offset
by rises against continental European currencies. Developments surrounding
the Iranian settlement appeared to have little net effect on exchange
markets. U.S. authorities
sold $1.3 billion in official intervention over the period.
(7) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for selected monetary and financial flows over
various time periods.
Dec. '80 Jan. '31
/ 1/ over over
1978- /  19"91 1980-' Seat. 'SO Dec. 'S0
Concents of Monev
(6.5)-
M-13 (M,-1A plus other checkable
Bank Credit
Managed Liabilities of Banks
(Monthly average change in
billions)
repurchase.
5/ Adjusted for nationwide NOW accounts.
NOTE: All items are based on averages of daily figures excepc for data on total loans
and investments of commercial banks, comercial paper, and thrift institutions--which
are derived from either end-of-month or Wednesday statement date figures. Growth
rates for reserve measures in this and subsequent tables are adjusted to remove the
effect of discontinuities from breaks in the series when reserve requirements are
changed.
Alternative Longer-Run Targets
(8) The December Bluebook contained a discussion of alternative
longer-run monetary strategies for the 1981-83 period, and their implications
for economic activity and prices. Against that background, this Bluebook
focuses on possible alternative growth ranges for 1981 (QIV '80 to QIV '81)
which must be reported to Congress in February. Various ranges that might
be considered are shown in the table below, where the ranges abstract from
impacts of shifts during the year into NOW accounts (to be discussed in
paragraph 11).
Alternative Memo:
Target Tentative target target ranges Actual
ranges ranges for 1981 for 1981 growth
for 1980 announced in July I II in 1980
M-1B 4 to 6½ 3½ to 6 3½ to 6 3 to 5½ 7.3 1/
M-2 6 to 9 5½ to 8½ 7 to 10 6¾ to 9¾ 9.8
M-3 6½ to 9½ 6½ to 9½ 7½ to 10½ 7¼ to 10¼ 10.0
Bank Credit 6 to 9 6 to 9 6½ to 9½ 6¼ to 9¼ 7.9
(9) The tentative target ranges for 1981 adopted by the Committee
in July, shown in the second column of the table, incorporate one-half
percentage point reductions in the announced 1980 ranges for M-1A, M-1B, and
M-2. Alternative I also involves ½ percentage point reductions in the ranges
for 1981 for M-1A and M-1B, but presents higher ranges for the broader
aggregates than tentatively adopted. These higher ranges reflect the staff's
current estimates of growth rates consistent with the M-1A and M-1B targets
and associated GNP and interest rate projections. Alternative II specifies
a one percentage point reduction from 1980 in target ranges for M-1A and M-1B
as well as associated estimates of consistent growth ranges for the other
(10) Alternative I underlies the staff's GNP projection for the
current year. It implies the continuation of considerable restraint on
economic activity, with real output projected to show little change over
of the year (though for the year as a whole remaining near the 1980 pace).
Interest rate levels that might be associated with that alternative are
shown in the table below, which assumes that nominal GNP over the year
expands by about 9½ percent.1/
Projected Interest Rates for 1981
Associated with Alternative I
(Quarterly Averages, Except as Noted)
Dec.-Jan. Q1 QII QIII OIV
Federal funds
rate 19¼ 18½ 16 18 18¾
Corporate bonds 14¼ 14 13-7/8 14-1/8 14¼%
Mortgage rate 14¾ 14-7/8 14-7/8 15 15-1/8
(11) The longer-run alternatives presented in paragraph (8)
abstract from the impact of nationwide NOW accounts, which will, of course,
depress actual M-1A growth and inflate M-1B expansion. Implied ranges for
the actual growth in the narrow aggregates under alternatives I and II that
take account of the expected amount of shifting into NOW accounts are shown
in the table below; shifts would not affect M-2 and M-3 to any significant
extent. The size of NOW-account distortion depends on the assumed growth in
QIV '80 to QIV '81 Alternative Targets
(Including the effect of ATS/NOW Accounts Shifts)
Alt. I Alt. II
M-1A -4½ to -2 -5 to -2½
M-1B 6 to 8½ 5½ to 8
OCD and is also highly sensitive to the proportion of shifts from demand
deposits and other assets, mainly savings accounts. In the December Bluebook,
the staff had assumed that the midpoint of the range of likely growth in OCD
over 1981 was about $23 billion and that about two-thirds of the growth of OCD
would represent shifts from demand deposits and one-third shifts from other
assets. In view of the very large inflows into NOW accounts during January,
the staff has raised the midpoint of the range of likely growth in OCDs to
about $40 billion (on the assumption that about half of the shift for the year
has already taken place). In addition, the staff now assumes that, by early
spring, the proportion of NOW growth representing shifts from demand deposits
will be gradually reduced from the 4/5 estimated for January to the 2/3
originally assumed; this reflects an expectation that the bulk of large demand
deposit holders will have shifted by the end of the first quarter. Given
these assumptions, the actual growth ranges for M-1A and M-1B over 1981
consistent with those that abstract from shifts to OCD should be about
M-13. As additional information becomes available about the extent and
sources of NOW account growth, adjustments will be made to keep the actual
ranges consistent with the "effective" targets set by the Comittee.
Short-run alternatives
(12) Alternative policy approaches to the first three months
of the year are shown below for Committee consideration. Growth rates for
M-1A and M-1B are specified abstracting from the impact of nationwide NOW
accounts. Actual growth rates that would be consistent with these targets
will of course depend on flows into NOW accounts. The staff's current
estimates of such actual measured growth are shown in parentheses in the
table on pp. 10 and 11, which also contains additional and more detailed
data on the various aggregates.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from December to March
M-1A 7½ 6¾ 4¼
M-1B 7½ 6¾ 4¾
M-2 8¾ 8½ 8
Implied growth for January-March
M-1A 8 6¾ 3
M-1B 7¾ 6½ 3¾
M-2 8¾ 8½ 7½
Intermeeting federal funds
rate range 14 to 20 15 to 21 16 to 22
(13) As shown in the upper panel of charts 1 and 2 on the following
pages, alternative A is based on growth in M-1a and M-1B at a rate that would
bring the level of these aggregates by March to the midpoints of their
tEntative longer-run ranges adopted in July. This implies growth in M-1B
Chart 1
Actual and Tentatively Targeted M-1A
CONFDENTIAL (FR)
Class II FOMC
Abstracting from NOW Accounts Impact
- L cnger-RuLn Range
S.... Shcr-Run Alternatives
A
- a1
I I I I I I I I Ii
O N D J F M A M J J A S
Including Assumed NOW Accounts Impact
-Longer-Run Range
.... Short-Run Alternatives
sa!'icns Cr csi.05
L05
-- ~ :00C
Billions of dollars
-- 3S
- 385
- 375
/ 11 1 III!
J F M A M J
_ ___I , I
Chart 2 CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Class II FOMC
Actual and Tentatively Targeted M-1B
Abstracting from NOW Accounts impact E.ilhcns ct Collars
- LcPger- un Range
* Short-un Alternatives 5
- -- 1
- 445
I _ ________ I I I _ I J I 403
O N O J F M A M J J A S 0 N 0
Including Assumed NOW Accounts Impact Billions of dollars
463
- Lcnger-Run Pange
- 457*** Short-Run Alternatives
- - 451
S - 445
-- .. 6% - 439
A l - 427
SI i403
J F M A M J
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Crowth Rates
Monthly
December '80 -
March '81
January '81 -
March '81
Quarterly Average
(10.3)
2.9
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M-2 M-3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
over the first three months of the year at about a 7½ percent annual rate,
given the shortfall that developed in December. Alternative 3 achieves
the midpoint of the alternative II longer-run path by March, and implies
growth in M-1B at a 6¾ percent annual rate over the first three months of
first quarter, and specifies from that lower base the same growth rate in
the narrow aggregates over the first three months of the year that had been
adopted by the Committee at its December meeting. This alternative implies
relatively slow growth in February and March, as shown in last column of the
middle panel of the table on page 9.
(14) We have assumed that funds will flow into OCD at a progressively
slower pace in February and March--increasing about $1½ billion and $750 million
per week in those months, respectively. (In the first week of January OCD
increased by about $9 billion, but in the last week of the month such accounts
are estimated to have risen only about $2¼ billion.) On these assumptions
actual growth in M-1A would be reduced by about 13 percentage points over
February and March and M-1B growth would be increased by about 4½ percentage
points. This would mean, for instance, that under alternative A actual M-1A
would decline at a 5½ percent annual rate, and actual M-1B increase at a
relatively large degree of shifting in the early months of 1981 results in
a temporary deviation of actual M-1A and M-1B growth from their expected
ranges for the year.
(15) Under all three alternatives, the growth of M-2 over the
first quarter would offset the December shortfall and leave this aggregate
in March at a level in the middle to upper part of the Committee's tentative
long-run growth range for 1981. (See the upper panel of chart 3.) Growth
in the non-transactions component of M-2 over the next two months is expected
to be buoyed by the growth of money market funds, which is projected to be
relatively strong as MMMF yields remain high in comparison to market rates.
Growth of bank credit and, consequently, the issuance of large CDs is
expected to moderate in the months ahead from the recent very rapid pace,
contributing to some deceleration of M-3 expansion in February and March.
Nonetheless, as shown in the lower panel of chart 3, owing to the relatively
high current level of M-3, such growth will leave this aggregate in March
above the upper end of the tentative longer-run range under all of the
short-run alternatives.
(16) All of the alternatives imply a substantial slowing in
growth of the transactions-related aggregates on a quarterly average basis
in the first three months of 1981. For example, implied quarterly average
growth in M-1B ranges from a high of 3¾ percent under alternative A to a low
of 2 percent under alternative C. This suggests substantial monetary
restraint against a projected expansion in nominal GNP for the quarter at an
annual rate of more than 13 percent. The sizable implied velocity increases
would indicate little room for further short-term interest rate declines.
Under alternative A, rates might be near, or perhaps a bit below, current
levels over the balance of the quarter. Alternative B might involve somewhat
higher interest rates, while alternative C seems quite likely to entail an
increase in interest rates over the balance of the quarter. Of course,
great uncertainty attaches to these interest rate projections, with market
reaction to the forthcoming economic program of the new Administration
likely to be a critical factor in near-term rate movements.
(17) The aggregate specifications of alternative A would appear
to involve growth in total reserves at a 1/1½ percent annual rate from January
to March, and, as noted earlier, only a small decline, if any, in the funds
rate from the recent trading range of 17 to 19 percent. While an average
level of borrowing at the discount window of about $1¼ billion might be
associated with attainment of the alternative A specifications, borrowing
demands have been erratic recently--with the funds rate first staying high
as borrowing declined and then falling as borrowing rose. Over the next
two months total reserve growth under alternative B would be only percent
at an annual rate and reserves would decline at a 3 percent annual rate
under alternative C. Under both alternatives relatively more reserves
would be expected to be provided through borrowing at the discount window,
given the current discount rate structure and assuming that these alterna-
tives involve some upward short-term interest rate pressure. Under
alternative 3, borrowing might be $1½ billion, or a little less, and under
alternative C $1¾ billion or a little more.
(18) Credit demands over the months immediately ahead are expected
to remain substantial. Business credit demands are projected to be well
maintained; however, relative to the fourth quarter of last year, more of
the borrowing may be shifted to bond markets with less occurring at banks. But
should interest rates again begin rising, business firms could once more
postpone capital market financing and temporarily increase reliance on banks
and the commercial paper market. The market will also have to absorb a
sizable amount of new Treasury issues for cash over the next two months
(perhaps $8½ billion of new bills and $10 billion of intermediate-term bonds)
before the seasonal swing to budget surplus in the second quarter.
(19) Given these credit demands, longer-term bond yields are not
likely to decline significantly over the weeks ahead. And there could be
some increase if short-term rates were to rise in consequence of restraint
on reserve growth in line with short-run money targets. Any rise in bond
rates under such conditions may be limited if borrowers backed away from the
market in anticipation of more receptive conditions later. Reactions to the
Administrations' forthcoming economic program will also strongly influence
longer-term rates. The possibility of a significant rise in longer-term
rates cannot be discounted if tax cuts are in prospect without accompanying
near-term expenditure cutbacks, but a rally in markets may develop if con-
vincing signs of a move to fiscal restraint emerge or if evidence of economic
weakness begins to cumulate.
(20) Should market rates remain near current levels, or even fall
slightly, conventional home mortgage rates likely would remain around 15
percent; if market rates were to move back toward the recent peak levels,
however, mortgage rates could well move significantly higher. In any
event, housing activity and mortgage credit flows would be expected to
moderate in the current quarter from the pace of the fourth quarter of 1980.
Commitment activity at S&Ls declined over the final months of last year,
and it is expected that continuation of the high mortgage rates recently
attained will cut further into housing demand. At the same time, the
willingness of thrift institutions to extend new mortgage commitments
probably will be limited by their concern about the cost and size of
prospective deposit flows. The severe pressure on earnings margins of the
thrift institutions would continue even if market interest rates were to
drop appreciably in the next several months; the higher average cost of funds
created by recent rollovers of MMCs has effectively ensured aggregate losses
for S&Ls and MSBs in the first half.
Directive language
(21) Given below is a suggested operational paragraph for the
directive. The language calls for expansion of reserve aggregates con-
sistent with desired rates of monetary growth over the three-month period
from December to March. The language used in December to specify the federal
funds rate constraint is retained. The specifications adopted at the
December meeting are shown in strike-through form.
In the short-run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve
aggregates [DEL: associated] CONSISTENT with growth of M-1A, M-1B, and
M-2 [DEL: over the first quarter] FROM DECEMBER TO MARCH AT ANNUAL RATES
OF ____ PERCENT, ____ PERCENT, AND ____ PERCENT RESPECTIVELY, ABSTRACTING
FROM THE IMPACT OF FLOWS INTO NOW ACCOUNTS [DEL: along a path consistent
with the ranges for growth in 1981 contemplated earlier, which
will be reviewed in February 1981. These ranges, abstracting from
the effects of deposit shifts connected with the introduction of NOW
accounts on a nationwide basis, imply growth in these aggregates
centered on 4½ percent, and 7 percent respectively.] It
is recognized that [DEL: the introduction of] SHIFTS INTO [DEL: NOW and ITS] SUCH
accounts [DEL: nationwide at the beginning of 1981 is likely to widen the
discrepancy between] WILL CONTINUE TO DISTORT MEASURED growth in M-1A
the money market. If it appears during the period before the next
meeting that fluctuations in the federal funds rate, taken over a
period of time, within a range of [DEL: 15 to 20] _____ TO ____ percent are
likely to be inconsistent with the monetary and related reserve paths,
the Manager for Domestic Operations is promptly to notify the Chairman,
who will then decide whether the situation calls for supplementary
instructions from the Committee.
