Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
July 2, 1981
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) July 2, 1981
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY AGGREGATES AND
MONEY MARKET CONDITIONS
Recent Developments
(1) M1-B, adjusted for shifting into NOW accounts, contracted
at about a 7¾ percent annual rate on average in May and June.1/ This
aggregate fell well short of the April-to-June growth path set by the
Committee at its May meeting (of 3 percent or lower) and also of the
original target for the March-to-June period set in March at 5 percent
or somewhat less. The weakness in transactions balances extended to
NOW accounts, which declined slightly on balance over the last two months.
With sustained moderate expansion of its nontransactions component, M2
grew at a 4¾ percent rate on average in May and June and at a 7¾ percent
annual rate from March to June, also below paths set for this aggregate.
Brisk expansion of large CDs, especially at commercial banks, maintained
M3 growth at about a 9¾ percent average annual rate in May and June.
Growth in Monetary Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates)
April March
Ma June to June to June
(2) Bank credit increased at an 11¾ percent annual rate in
May. Growth in business loans accelerated, but only to an 8 percent annual
rate (net of acceptances); many firms satisfied their short-term credit
revisions, as described in Appendix I.
needs by selling commercial paper as the prime rate lagged the downward
movement in market yields. In June, credit expansion at large weekly
reporting banks evidently was rapid, but partial data for smaller banks
suggest that total bank credit may have increased at only half the May
(3) Total reserves contracted in June, following a substantial
rise in May, and over the past three months increased at only about a 3½
percent annual rate. Nonborrowed reserves showed only a slight increase
last month, after declining considerably in the previous two months.
Over the second quarter nonborrowed reserves declined by about a 7¼ per-
cent annual rate. For the first half of the year nonborrowed and total
reserves showed little net change, while the monetary base expanded at a
relatively low 5 percent annual rate.
Growth of Reserve Aggregates
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates)
March Dec.
April May June to June to June
Memo: ($ millions, n.s.a.)
Average level of:
Discount window borrowing 1,338 2,228 2,038
Excess reserves 144 263 331
(4) Given the Committee's decision that, in light of the April
surge in the monetary aggregates, some shortfall from its 3 percent April-
June growth target for M1-B would be acceptable, the initial operating
path for nonborrowed reserves was lowered in the first part of the inter-
meeting period as this aggregate weakened.1/ Borrowing consequently
remained around $2 billion or above, and federal funds generally traded
in an 18½ to 19 percent range. By mid-June, M1-B had weakened consider-
ably, and in a telephone consultation, the Committee indicated that,
consistent with the directive, the emerging weakness should be allowed
to show through in reduced borrowing at the discount window. M1-B sub-
sequently exhibited greater weakness, but borrowing demand at first
remained surprisingly strong and it was not until the last few days of
June that borrowing fell noticeably. The federal funds rate nonetheless
averaged about 18¾ percent in the most recent statement week.
(5) Despite the firmness of the federal funds rate, most other
short-term market interest rates have declined ¾ to 1¾ percentage points,
on net, since the May FOMC meeting. Indications of weakness in the money
stock and of reduced inflationary pressures encouraged market partici-
pants in the view that rates might have reached a cyclical peak, but this
bullish attitude has more recently been held with less conviction. The
Treasury paid down, net, about $3¼ billion of regular weekly and monthly
bills and $4 billion of cash management bills over the intermeeting
period, but foreign official institutions sold around $4¼ billion of
Treasury bills over this span largely to finance exchange market
intervention activity.
(6) Yields on most long-term securities trended downward
through much of the intermeeting period, but have firmed noticeably in
recent days. Corporate bond yields are still about 3/4 point lower than
at the time of the last Committee meeting, but yields on longer-term
Treasury coupon issues are up slightly. Interest rates in the primary
mortgage market have remained close to their peaks; S&Ls remain cautious
lenders, given their weak deposit flows, negative operating margins, and
concerns about liquidity.
(7) The dollar has appreciated almost 4 percent, on a trade-
weighted basis, since the May FOMC meeting. The dollar reached its
highest level since mid-1976 in the first week of June, moving higher
against all major foreign currencies despite a decline of U.S. interest
rates relative to foreign rates (which generally rose). The sources of
the dollar's strength in the first part of the intermeeting period
included political developments in Europe and, in the case of the pound,
the softness of international oil prices. The dollar fluctuated after
early June, as dollar interest rates first fell further and then rebounded
while foreign rates changed little.
(8) The table on the next page shows seasonally adjusted annual
rates of change, in percent, for selected monetary and financial flows
over various periods.
June '81 June '81
over over
Concepts of Money
M-lA (Currency plus demand 5/ 5/
(2.1) (-7.9)
Bank Credit
Loan and investments of all
Managed Liabilities of Banks
(Monthly average change in
unadjusted for shifts.
The Money and Credit Targets for 1981
(9) Under the Humphrey-Hawkins Act, the Federal Reserve must
report to the Congress by July 20 its updated objectives for money and
credit growth in 1981 and its preliminary views about the appropriate
objectives for calendar year 1982. This section of the Bluebook focuses
on the aggregates for 1981, while the next section discusses longer-run
strategy. The table below summarizes the growth of the monetary aggregates
and bank credit over the first half of this year. As may be seen from the
middle column of the table, the M1 measures at midyear stand below the
lower boundaries of their ranges, while M2 is at, and M3 above, the upper
limits of their respective ranges.
Money and Credit Growth in the First Half of 1981
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates, percent)
M1-B (shift
adjusted) 2.2 0.6 3½ to 6
(10) It was anticipated when the Committee set its target for
at rates around the upper ends of their ranges if narrow money grew at
its midpoint rate. Thus the divergence in the first half between growth
of M1-B and of M2 is somewhat larger than the staff projected would be
the case for the year. This divergence mainly reflects lower than
expected growth in M1. Given the stronger increase in GNP for the first
half than was projected last February, the slower M1 growth was accompanied
by an unusually rapid two-quarter rise in its velocity--on the order of
downward shift in the public's demand for transactions balances in the
early part of the year, perhaps associated with the stimulus to more intense
cash management provided by extraordinarily high interest rates and the
introduction of NOW accounts nationwide. The standard formulation of
money demand behavior in the Board's quarterly econometric model suggests
that, given actual GNP and interest rates, the velocity of M1-B should
have grown around 5 percentage points (annual rate) slower in the first
half. The 2 percent, annual rate, increase in the velocity of M2 in
the first half was also somewhat faster than anticipated for the year.
(11) The behavior of the aggregates relative to target in the
first half of this year raises the question of possible adjustments of
the current ranges for 1981. The table below presents what we believe
to be internally consistent alternative sets of growth rates for monetary
aggregates and bank credit over the year ending in the fourth quarter
of this year. In alternative 1, M1-B is assumed to grow at the 4¾ per-
cent midpoint rate of the Committee's present long-run target range; in
alternative 2, M1-B is assumed to grow by 3 percent, equal to the lower
bound of the existing 1981 range. As may be seen, attainment of 4¾ per-
cent M1-B growth is projected to involve M2 and M3 growth above the
upper ends of the present target ranges for those aggregates, while
of the broader monetary aggregates (just within the present range for M2
and just above for M3).
M1-B (shift ad
Bank Credit
Projected Growth of Money and Credit in 1981,
Given Alternative M1-B Assumptions
(percent)
Exis
Alt. 1 Alt. 2 80
justed) 4¾ 3
ting Target for
-IV to 81-IV
(12) Alternative 1 is the basis for the staff's Greenbook fore-
cast, which shows nominal GNP growing at a 9 percent annual rate over the
next two quarters. The staff also has assumed that there will not be a
further downward shift in the demand for M1-B over the remainder of the
year. Given those assumptions, market interest rates appear likely to be
a bit higher on average in the next six months than they were in the
quarter just ended.1/ Under the more restrictive monetary assumption of
alternative 2, short-term interest rates would be under more upward
pressure, and nominal GNP growth would be reduced somewhat in the second
half. There also would be substantially greater risk of financial dis-
locations. The economic and financial outlook under either alternative 1
or alternative 2 is, it should be stressed, quite sensitive to the
assumption about M1-B demand. Should something like the downward shift
of money demand over the first half be continued, alternative 1--or
perhaps even alternative 2--could be associated with declining short-term
rates and noticeably stronger growth of nominal GNP and the broader
monetary aggregates.1 /
(13) The July Humphrey-Hawkins report will provide an occasion
also for updating the projection of actual (i.e., not shift-adjusted)
M1-A and M1-B growth for 1981. Given the behavior of other checkable
deposits since April, a question can be raised about whether the shift to
to new NOW accounts may be near completion. The staff believes that at
this time the over-all evidence does not justify a conclusion that the
shift is over, but is consistent with a considerably slower movement into
NOW accounts in the second half of the year than in the first. Thus far
a further increase of $10 billion over the remainder of the year. Recent
evidence on the proportions of new OCDs coming from various sources suggests
that the percentage coming from demand deposits should be assumed to remain
in the 70 to 75 percent area; in February it had been assumed that the
proportion would fall to two-thirds. These assumptions would mean that
actual M1-B would grow by 3 percentage points more than shift-adjusted M1-B.
The present range for actual M1-B of 6 to 8 percent assumes a 2 per-
centage point impact. A point higher actual range would technically
be justified if our assumptions about the second half of this year are
actual range is -4½ to -2 percent. On current assumptions about
OCD growth and proportions coming out of demand deposits, this range
might be lowered by 2 percentage points.
Preliminary Target Ranges for 1982
(14) As background for preliminary assessment of the ranges
for money and credit growth in 1982, the table on the next page presents
economic projections for a few different sequences of monetary growth.
Estimates of the differential impact of the various monetary strategies
rely heavily, though not entirely, on the Board's quarterly econometric
model. All the projections require certain caveats--in particular, they
largely reflect the average behavioral relationships of the past and do
not allow for marked short-run "supply-side" effects of the prospective
fiscal initiatives, for radical changes in inflationary expectations
based on alterations of monetary policy, or for the impact on markets or
psychology from extraordinary financial dislocations. Moreover, all of
the projections implicitly assume a significant degree of continuing
"downward drift" in the public's demand for M1-B, as currently defined--
roughly 2 to 3 percentage points per year, measured with the standard
quarterly model.
(15) The first longer-run strategy for money growth shown
in the table is the basis for the Greenbook forecast through 1982. It
assumes achievement of the midpoint of this year's M1-B range (shift
adjusted), and assumes further point reductions in 1982 and 1983.
Strategy 2 assumes that M1-B growth this year is held to the low end
of the current range (which still involves an acceleration of growth
over the second half of this year to a 4¾ percent annual rate), and
that growth in the next two years is the same as in strategy 1 (but of
course involving lower levels of money throughout the period). Strategy
Economic Implications of Alternative
Money Growth Strategies
Adjusted M-1B (Percent
Change, Q4 to Q4)
Strategy 1
Strategy 2
Strategy 3
Real GNP (Percent Change,
Q4 to Q4)
Implicit Deflator (Percent
Change, Q4 to Q4)
Unemployment Rate (Q4)
of the current range for 1981 and further decelerations of ½ point per year
from that. All these strategies entail substantial declines in the rate
of inflation, but at a cost within the projection period of a considerable
rise in the unemployment rate. Progress toward price stability could come
more rapidly if such restrictive monetary strategies themselves led to
a substantial reduction in inflationary expectations, but it is an open
question whether expectations can be reduced more quickly without even
greater weakness in output, at least for a time, than has been projected.
(16) Alternative sets of 1982 monetary growth ranges are shown
in the table below for Committee consideration. Alternative I calls for
a 1982 range for M1-B that is point lower than the current 1981 range, and
alternative II calls for a range that is 1 point lower.1/ The growth rates
presented for M1-B can be considered as shift-adjusted, or, if the shift
to NOW accounts is close to completion by the end of this year, as repre-
senting ranges for growth in actual M1-B. Alternatives I and II retain
a 3-point range for M1-B growth should the Committee wish to widen the
range to take account of uncertainties in the behavior of this variable
related to, among other things, the significant changes in its composition.
The range shown under alternative III--2½ to 5½ percent--reduces the upper
limit of the present 1981 range by point and the lower limit by 1 point.
A 3-point range of 3 to 6 percent for M1-B would have the disadvantages
of an upper limit that does not show a reduction from 1981 and of involving
less restraint on growth of the broader aggregates than any of the
alternatives presented.
Projected Consistent Ranges for Money and
Credit Aggregates in 1982
Present
Alt. I Alt. II Alt. III Range for 1981
M1-B 3 to 5½ 2½ to 5 2½ to 5½ 3½ to 6
M2 7 to 10 6½ to 9½ 6½ to 9½ 6 to 9
M3 7 to 10 6½ to 9½ 6½ to 9½ 6½ to 9½
Bank Credit 7 to 10 6½ to 9½ 6½ to 9½ 6 to 9
(17) Proposed ranges for 1982 for the broader aggregates are
centered on the staff's point estimates of growth rates consistent with
attainment of the midpoints of the associated M1-B ranges. Thus, these
ranges are equal to, or higher, than ranges for 1981. However, if the
Committee wished to continue indicating that growth in the broader aggre-
gates would be in the upper part of their ranges, it could retain the
present ranges for M2 and M3, or possibly lower them by ½ point; for M2,
however, such a lowering seems more feasible under tighter alternatives II
and III.
Short-run Targets for the Monetary Aggregates
(17) The table below provides three alternative short-run
targets for the monetary aggregates. These have been formulated in
terms of growth rates from June to September. Possible intermeeting
ranges for the federal funds rate also are provided. More detailed data
on these and other aggregates may be found on pages 16 and 17, and charts
indicating the relationship of the alternative targets to the Committee's
existing ranges for 1981 may be found on the next two pages.
Alternative Short-run Targets for the Monetary Aggregates
(Growth from June to September, in percent, SAAR)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M1-B 10½ 8½ 6½
M2 9½ 8½ 8
Federal funds range 14 to 20 16 to 22 18 to 24
(18) Alternative A was designed to return M1-B to the lower
end of its longer-run range by September. This requires a 10 percent
annual rate of growth, which would, if continued, result in a fourth-
quarter average level in line with the midpoint of the 1981 range. Assuming
a fairly smooth month-by-month trajectory, the quarterly average growth of
M1-B under alternative A would be 4 percent at an annual rate, as compared
to a projected third-quarter growth of nominal GNP of about 7½ percent.
M2 would be expected to accelerate from the relatively slow growth rates
of the past two months, reflecting not only the faster growth of M1-B but
also some strengthening of the nontransactions component. To achieve the
specified monetary growth, total reserves might have to expand at a 13
percent annual rate from June to August.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
June '81 - September '81
June '81 - August '81
Quarterly Average
(5.0)
9.7
(5.3)
10.3
(5.4)
10.5
(2.7)
7.3
(2.6)
8.0
(3.0)
8.3
(-0.3)
5.9
(0.7)
6.5
(13.2)
10.0
(11.6)
9.9
(11.0)
10.4
(12.1)
10.5
(12.5)
(11.2)
8.0
(9.7)
7.6
(8.8)
8.3
(10.0)
8.3
(7.8)
5.1
(6.4)
6.3
(8.0)
6.3
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates (cont'd)
M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
Quarterly Average
(19) Whether so rapid a growth in total reserves would entail
a drop in interest rates from current levels of course depends on the
demand for money. If money demand were to be quite weak relative to GNP,
as has been the case for much of this year, substantial downward pressures
on interest rates would probably develop. They also would if economic
activity were to become even weaker than in the second quarter. If,
however, as the staff currently projects, real GNP does not decline, and
the demand for money behaves in a relatively "normal" fashion, a con-
siderable rebound in M1-B growth could occur with little, if any, downward
pressure on interest rates. Under those conditions the federal funds rate
over the next few weeks might center around the 17 to 18 percent area, and
borrowing at the discount window be in a $1¼ to $1¾ billion range.
(20) With the funds rate in the 17 to 18 percent area, other
market rates would probably tend to decline from recent levels. However,
if the relatively rapid monthly money growth specified in this alternative
actually developed, the extent of any decline in other rates might be
limited by the expectational consequences of the rapid money growth. More-
over, interest rates will be influenced by relatively sizable credit
demands in the months ahead. The Treasury is expected to sell about
$15 billion, net, of marketable debt in the third quarter, and borrowing
will be much larger in the fourth. Business credit demands are expected
to expand, as internally generated funds do not keep pace with capital
(21) Under alternative B, M1-B would grow at a rate that would
leave it below the lower end of the FOMC's 1981 range until November.
If this growth rate were continued through year-end, it would result
in growth for the year just marginally above the low end of the 3 to
higher interest rates would tend to hold M2 growth down. Growth of total
reserves of about 10½ percent, at an annual rate, from June to August,
would be consistent with the alternative B monetary target. Given the
present discount window structure, borrowing likely would run $2 billion
or a bit more.
(22) The federal funds rate probably would be around the 19 to
interest rates would probably rise from recent levels, perhaps substantially
as the market is disappointed in its expectations that the funds rate would
decline gradually as the summer progresses. The 3-month Treasury bill yield
might approach, and possibly exceed, 16 percent. Business demands on
commercial banks could surge for a time, partly in response to higher
bond market yields, possibly requiring heavy CD issuance and/or Eurodollar
(23) Alternative C calls for more constraint on reserve growth
over the next three months than alternative B--with total reserves growing
at an 8 percent annual rate--should the Committee wish, for example,
to take an approach that provided greater assurance that broader aggregates
would come within current longer-run ranges. This alternative involves
M1-B growth at a 6½ percent annual rate over the next three months, which
would leave this aggregate still well below its present longer-run range
by September. Sizable upward pressure on interest rates over the period
ahead is likely to be generated under this approach, with the funds rate
moving above 20 percent and borrowing at the discount window probably
moving over $2½ billion. The dollar likely would rise rather substantially
on foreign exchange markets, possibly reaching levels that would generate
considerable intervention by foreign countries and related sales of
U.S. Government securities. The financial market pressures associated
with this alternative might not be long sustained, though, as high financing
costs and added strains on key financial intermediaries lead to a marked
near-term weakening in aggregate demand.
(24) Even under alternatives A or B, the earnings problems
of thrift institutions would remain intense, although they obviously would
be greatest with the higher interest rates implied by alternative C.
The liberalization of deposit rate ceilings tentatively set by the DIDC
to take effect in August should bolster thrift deposit flows; the degree
is impossible to anticipate with any precision at this point, especially
because there will be unconstrained bank-thrift competition in the 4-year-
and-over time deposit category. But earnings pressures on the thrifts
would be at best relieved only a little, and concerns that liquidity diffi-
culties may emerge as a result of such pressures will encourage the
thrifts to maintain cautious mortgage lending postures.
Directive Language
(24) Given below is a suggested operational paragraph for the
directive consistent with the form of the directives adopted at recent
meetings. The specifications adopted at the meeting on May 18 are
shown in strike-through form.
In the short run the Committee seeks behavior of reserve
aggregates consistent with [DEL: a substantial deceleration of] growth
in M-1B from [DEL: April to] June to SEPTEMBER AT an annual rate of [DEL: 3] ____
percent [DEL: or lower,] after allowance for the impact of flows into NOW
accounts, and with growth in M-2 at an annual rate of about [DEL: 6] ____
percent. [DEL: The shortfall in growth of M-1B from the two month
rate specified above would be acceptable, in light of the rapid
growth in April and the objective adopted by the Committee on
March 31 for growth from March to June at an annual rate of 5½
percent or somewhat less.] It is recognized that shifts into NOW
accounts will continue to distort measured growth in M-1B to an
unpredictable extent, and operational reserve paths will be
developed in the light of evaluation of those distortions. The
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary
objectives and related reserve paths during the period before
the next meeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds
rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 16 to 22] ____ TO ____
