Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
May 14, 1982
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 14, 1982
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) M1 growth in April on average was at a relatively sub-
stantial 11¾ percent annual rate, but weakness in late April and early
May brought the level of this aggregate below the path consistent with
the Committee's 3 percent (annual rate) growth objective for the March
to June period. The NOW account component of M1 declined in late April,
mainly reflecting collection of mid-April tax payments, and has shown
little net change thus far in May. Given its recent weakness, M1 has
moved down somewhat more rapidly than targeted toward the upper end of
the FOMC's longer-run range.
(2) M2 has been running close to the FOMC's March-to-June
path in April and early May as variations in its M1 component have been
about offset by compensating changes in its nontransactions component.
Thus, it is approaching the long-run path about as planned.
(3) Bank credit growth in April continued at an 8¾ percent
annual rate, as lending to businesses slowed somewhat further while
acquisitions of Treasury securities picked up. Virtually all of the
business loan expansion last month was at large banks; data for early
May suggest a strengthening of loan growth at such banks. Business
borrowing from other sources also has moderated in April, with issuance
of commercial paper slowing substantially and offerings of new stocks
and bonds remaining sluggish.
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rate of growth)
Money and Credit Aggregates
Reserve Measures 2/
Memo: (Millions of
Dollars)
Adjustment Borrowing 4/ 1,321 1,557 1,248 1,323
(4) Total reserves expanded at a modest 2-3/4 percent seasonally
serves was provided through the discount window. As M1 accelerated above
target levels in the first part of April, the demand for total reserves
rose, and adjustment (including seasonal) borrowing increased above the
During the first four weeks of the intermeeting period such borrowing
averaged about $1,330 million. However, with the monetary aggregates
beginning to weaken in late April, the demand for reserves has dropped,
and banks most recently have borrowed close to $1 billion from the discount
window on average.
(5) The recent easing in bank reserve positions was not immediately
reflected in a corresponding drop of the funds rate. Until today's drop into
the 14¼ to 14 percent area, the funds rate had been trading around 15¾ per-
cent on average in the first part of May, little different from its trading
area at the time of the last meeting. Other short-term rates, however,
tended to decline somewhat through the intermeeting period as market parti-
cipants assumed the funds rate would drop in the future with an expected re-
versal in the April bulge in money growth, especially in view of indications of
continuing weak economic performance. Short-term interest rates have fallen
by ½ to 1¼ percentage points since the March FOMC meeting, and long-term
rates have declined similarly. It is doubtful that recent developments in
the Congress on the budget, in view of the general uncertainties surrounding
the process, have had an appreciable effect on recent market rate
(6) After rising further following the last FOMC meeting, the
dollar declined sharply in the exchange markets, mainly reflecting some
easing of U.S. interest rates and a belief in foreign exchange markets
that U.S. interest rates would recede further. Over the entire period
since the FOMC meeting, the dollar is off about 4 percent on a weighted
average basis.
Alternative near-term targets
(7) The upper panel of the following table shows three alter-
native targets for M1 and M2 for the second quarter. The middle panel
indicates the implied two-month April-to-June targets for each alternative,
given the April growth rates that have already occurred, and the last
row of the table shows associated intermeeting federal funds rate ranges.
More detailed and longer-run data for the alternatives are shown in the
table and charts on the following pages, and the quarterly interest rate
path underlying the staff's GNP projection for the balance of 1982 is
contained in Appendix II.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from March to June
M1 4½ 3 1½
M2 8½ 8 7½
Implied growth from April
to June
M1 -1¼ -3½
M2 7¾ 7 6¼
Federal funds rate range 10 to 14 11 to 15 12 to 16
(8) Alternative B represents the Committee's current March-to-
June target of 3 percent (annual rate) growth of M1 and of 8 percent for
M2; the M1 target implies a contraction at about a 1 percent annual rate
in the remaining two months of the quarter, while M2 would expand at about
a 7 percent annual rate. By June, M1 would still be a bit above the
upper end of its long-run range, but M2 would be about at the upper
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rates
Monthly
Growth Rates
Quarterly
Growth QIV '81
to June '82
end of its range. Alternative A, calling for M1 growth from March to
June at a 4 percent rate, would be consistent with a slower approach
of both M1 and M2 toward the upper ends of their ranges. Alternative C
calls for more restrictive short-run targets than either A or B, and both
aggregates would be within their long-run ranges by June.
(9) Under alternative B, we would expect some further downward
drift in short-term rates between now and mid-year. The transactions
demand for money is expected to be more moderate than anticipated at the
time of the last meeting, with projected growth in nominal GNP in the
second quarter revised down to only a 6½ percent annual rate. In addi-
tion, we would anticipate the relatively strong precautionary demands
of early this year and late 1981 to begin to moderate as economic prospects
(10) The small decline in M1 over May and June called for by
alternative B would appear to be consistent with a 6 percent growth in
total reserves over the two months. With short-term interest rates
expected to decline--indexed by the federal funds rate drifting down to
the 13½ percent area--depository institutions might be expected to
borrow about $800 million at the current 12 percent discount rate. On
that assumption, nonborrowed reserves would expand by 14 percent at an
annual rate over the two months.
(11) The 3-month bill rate under this alternative is likely
to decline to around the 11½ to 12 percent area. Business credit demands
are expected to remain moderate, given the continued inventory liquidation
and a scaling down of fixed investment outlays. The prime rate under this
alternative would probably drop from its current 16 percent level. Reduced
private credit demands should leave room for the Treasury's remaining
financing needs over the quarter of $8 to $10 billion to be readily met
in short- and intermediate-term markets--the required maturity range
unless the Congress authorizes additional leeway for the Treasury to issue
bonds. Bond yields would probably decline further, with the extent of
decline depending in part on the fiscal outlook and in part on the extent
to which any short rate declines are viewed as reflecting the beginnings
of a longer-run trend toward lower rates as inflation abates. Declines in
U.S. short-term interest rates could extend the recent reduction in the
foreign exchange value of the dollar from its current relatively high
(12) Alternative A, which calls for a 4 percent annual rate of
growth in M1 from March to June, probably would result in appreciable
interest rate reductions along the maturity spectrum. While relatively
little money growth is implied by this alternative in May and June on
average, money demands are expected to be quite weak over the balance of
the quarter, given the build-up in money balances through April. The
funds rate might move to a level somewhat above the current discount rate,
with borrowing dropping to around $500 million. Total reserves would
expand over May and June at about an 8 percent annual rate and nonborrowed
reserves at a 20 percent rate. Growth in M2 could be expected to be
somewhat higher than under alternative B, largely reflecting the stronger
growth in M1 and possibly greater interest in MMCs and MMMFs, both of
whose yields lag declines in market rates.
(13) The 3-month bill rate under alternative A would probably
drop below the current discount rate, and range around 11 percent. A
substantial bond market rally might well ensue, especially if it appeared
that Congress was in process of significantly reducing federal budget
deficits. A considerable depreciation of the dollar on exchange markets
might also take place, although this trend would be limited if foreign
monetary authorities took the opportunity to permit their interest rates
to decline further. Reduced deposit costs would diminish earnings
pressures over time on thrifts, work toward making them more willing
mortgage lenders, and contribute to further declines in mortgage rates.
(14) Alternative C, which calls for limiting M1 growth to a 1½
percent rate from March to June, implies an increase in total reserves
over the latter period at a 4 percent rate. Assuming adjustment borrowing
at around $1.1 billion, nonborrowed reserves would increase at only a
funds rate would probably be around the 14 to 14½ percent area, below
its range of recent weeks. Short- and long-term rates would likely show
little net change, since some easing in money market conditions has
probably been anticipated, and on balance the exchange rate would also
change little.
(15) The staff is projecting an appreciable expansion in GNP in
the second half of the year under the impetus of the mid-year tax cut and
an end to the current inventory liquidation. Underlying this projection
is the assumption that a marked acceleration of the growth of nominal GNP
to about a 9¼ percent annual rate can be financed by relatively modest
growth of narrow money--keeping Ml growth within the upper portion of its
longer-run range--without upward interest rate pressures in the second half.
Under alternative B, for example, growth in M1 in the second half of the
year of 3 to 4¾ percent, as shown in the table below, would be consistent
with growth for the year at the upper limit or just below. The implied
velocity expansion, with no rise of interest rates, depends not only
on increased willingness to draw on previously accumulated liquidity to
finance spending but also on a downward impact on money demand from the
continued spread of financial innovations, such as sweep accounts.
Alternative A would provide less room for growth of M1 in the second
half of the year, assuming the present longer-run target range is retained.
Alternative C, of course, provides the most scope for monetary expansion
in the second half, but has a slightly greater risk of delaying the onset
of economic recovery.
Growth Rate in
Second Half of 1982 to Obtain
QIV '81 to QIV '82 M1 Expansion at
Midpoint
March of Middle
to June Top Upper Half of the
Growth of Range of Range Range
Rate of M1 (5-1/2%) (4-3/4%) (4%)
Alt. A 4-1/2 4 2-1/4 1/2
Alt. B 3 4-3/4 3 1-1/2
Alt. C 1-1/2 5-3/4 4 2-1/4
Directive language
(16) The Committee could simply reaffirm the directive adopted
at the previous meeting, since the behavior of the aggregates has not been
far off track and since many of the same problems of interpretation of
aggregate behavior remain. That directive is shown below. The language
would be most consistent with alternative B, although it also could be
adapted to alternatives A and C. If the Committee adopted alternative B,
it might wish to note that it has reaffirmed objectives adopted at the
last meeting (with possible language shown in brackets).
In the short run [,reaffirming its decision at the previous
meeting,] the Committee seeks behavior of reserve aggregates con-
sistent with growth of M1 and M2 from March to June at annual
rates of about [DEL: 3] ____ percent and [DEL: 8] ____ percent respectively. The
Committee also noted that deviations from these targets should be
evaluated in light of the probability that M2 would be less
affected over the period than M1 by deposit shifts related to the
tax date and by changes in the relative importance of NOW accounts
as a savings vehicle. Some shortfall in growth of M1, consistent
with progress toward the upper part of the range for the year as a
whole, would be acceptable in the context of appreciably reduced
pressures in the money market and relative strength of other
aggregates. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if
it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit
of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the
period before the next meeting is likely to be associated with a
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 12 to 16]
____ TO ____ percent.
