Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
December 14, 1984
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC December 14, 1984
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) M1 increased at an 8.6 percent annual rate in November,
offsetting the sharp October contraction; transactions deposits surged last
month, but currency growth again was sluggish. Preliminary data for early
December suggest at this point moderate growth for the month, leaving expan-
sion of this aggregate over the September-to-December period a little under
the 3 percent minimum rate specified by the FOMC. On a quarterly average
basis, M1 in the fourth quarter will grow at only about a 1-1/2 percent
annual rate, well below predictions of econometric models given estimates
of income and the recent decline in interest rates, and velocity would in-
crease at an annual rate of about 4 percent. For the year 1984, M1 likely
will expand by about 5 percent on a fourth-quarter to fourth-quarter basis,
in the lower half of its 4 to 8 percent longer-run range, as shown in the
table below.
M1 M2 M3 Debt
e/ Estimated.
(2) M2 surged in November at a 15 percent annual rate, reflecting
strengthening of its nontransactions component as well as of M1. The non-
transactions component was swelled by very heavy inflows to MMDAs and money
funds, whose yields lagged declines on market rates. M2 appears to be
expanding in December at close to the November pace, and growth over the
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Sept. QIV QIV
to to to
Oct. Nov. Nov. Nov. QIV1
Money and Credit Aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve Measures 2
Nonborrowed reserves 3
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
September-to-December period is likely to be well in excess of the FOMC's
that M2 will have increased by about 7-1/2 percent, at the middle of its
longer-run range.
(3) M3 grew at a 16 percent annual rate in November, spurred by
expansion in its non-M2 as well as M2 components. The non-M2 component was
dominated by flows into institution-only money funds. Issuance of new CDs
by commercial banks virtually ceased, given the robust expansion in core
deposits and a large inflow of Treasury deposits, but thrift institutions
remained heavy issuers of large time deposits. Although partial data suggest
some moderation in M3 growth in December, this aggregate is running consider-
ably above its short-run September-to-December path of 9 percent, and for the
year will grow around 10 percent, above its 6 to 9 percent range.
(4) Expansion in domestic nonfinancial sector debt is estimated
(on the basis of partial data) to have accelerated to about a 14 percent
annual rate in November, reflecting a pick-up in federal government borrowing
and continued rapid growth in the debt of nonfederal sectors. Corporate bond
offerings in the domestic and Euromarkets were at record levels, and business
borrowing in short-term markets also was sizable, in part to finance new
mergers; sales of municipal revenue bonds continued heavy as year-end
approached. Borrowing by households is estimated to have remained near the
substantial third-quarter volume, but down from the very rapid pace of the
first half of the year. Total nonfinancial sector debt is expected to grow
at about a 13-1/4 percent rate in 1984; perhaps about one percentage point
of this growth can be attributed to financing of corporate mergers, share
repurchases, and buyouts in excess of the usual volume of such activity.
(5) Nonborrowed reserves paths for the intermeeting period were
initially constructed assuming $575 million of adjustment and seasonal bor-
rowing at the discount window; in view of the weakness in M1, as well as
further evidence of sluggish economic expansion, subdued price increases,
and the continued strength of the dollar on exchange markets, the borrow-
ing assumption was reduced to $500 million, and then to $400 million in the
course of the intermeeting period. Actual borrowing came in somewhat above
the amount assumed in the latter part of November, but free reserves increased
about as implied by reserve paths, as excess reserves were higher than antici-
pated. The actual average level of borrowing fell $180 million in November,
contributing to an increase in nonborrowed reserves of 17-1/2 percent at an
annual rate; total reserves grew 11-1/4 percent in November. So far in the
current reserve period borrowing has averaged under $300 million.
(6) The decline in borrowing along with a reduction in the dis-
count rate from 9 to 8-1/2 percent on November 21 led to a drop in the federal
funds rate from about 9-3/4 percent at the time of the November FOMC meeting
to around 8-3/4 percent recently, with trading in the last two days below
down. Short-term interest rates have declined another 45 to 60 basis points.
Declines were smaller in intermediate- and long-term credit markets, which
have been affected by uncertainties about future federal budget deficits and
at times by economic indicators that were stronger than expected. Since the
November meeting, rates in the note and bond market are down only a little
at the long end, while dropping about 50 basis points at the shorter end.
The prime rate was trimmed by a total of 75 basis points during the period,
but remained high relative to the cost of funds.
(7) The dollar has appreciated, on a weighted average basis, by
about 4-1/2 percent since the last FOMC meeting and is currently only one
percent below its October peak, even though short-term interest differentials
in favor of dollar assets have narrowed.
Prospective developments
(8) The table below presents three alternative specifications
for growth of the monetary aggregates from November to March, along with
associated federal funds rate ranges. A November base is suggested in
view of the considerable uncertainties this early in the month about the
December level. (More detailed data, including implied growth rates to
March from projected December levels and from the estimated QIV '84 level,
can be found on the charts and table on the following pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from Nov.
to March
M1 8 6-3/4 5-1/2
M2 9-1/2 8-1/2 7-1/2
M3 9 8-1/2 8
Federal funds
rate range 6 to 10 7 to 11 8 to 12
(9) The aggregates specifications of alternative B, which are
expected to be consistent with maintenance of about the current degree of
pressure on reserve positions, would place all of the money supply measures
in March close to the upper limits of their tentative longer-run ranges
for 1985 established last July. Growth of M1 under this alternative from
November to March would be expected to be at about a 6-3/4 percent annual
rate. The acceleration of M1 growth from the slower pace that has pre-
vailed on average since around mid-year reflects strengthened transactions
demands, given the projected pickup in GNP growth, as well as the lagged
effects of the sizable drop in short-term rates over recent months. The
income velocity of M1 would be about unchanged in the first quarter.
Some models, on the other hand, suggest a drop in income velocity, associ-
ated with higher money growth at current interest rates, because they
embody greater responsiveness of M1 to earlier interest rate declines.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2 M3
------------------------------------ ------------------------- -------------------------
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Monthly Levels -- ---- ------ ------ -- --
Growth Rates
Monthly
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average.
- ACTUAL LEVEL
--- ESTIMATED LEVEL
* SHORT RUN ALTERNATIVES
We have assumed, however, a more moderate M1 growth partly because its
recent behavior suggests the possibility that the demand for narrow money
may have become a little less responsive to interest rate changes.
(10) Despite the pickup in M1 growth under this alternative
during the first quarter, the broad monetary aggregates are expected
to decelerate from their unusually rapid rate of late 1984 to a pace more
nearly in keeping with growth rates prior to the fourth quarter of this
year, and in the case of M3 somewhat below such rates. Inflows to MMDAs
and MMMFs should drop off considerably as the first quarter progresses as
yields on these instruments decline into more normal alignment with
market interest rates. As a partial offset to reduced growth in core
deposits, CD issuance by banks is expected to pick up, after showing
virtually no growth late this year. We do not expect the broad aggregates
to be affected to any significant extent by the reduction from $2,500 to
$1,000 in the minimum balance requirement for MMDAs and super-NOW accounts.
Transfers into these accounts are likely to be relatively small, with the
great bulk coming from other components of M2. We have also assumed a
minimal net effect on M1 as inflows from non-M1 deposits into new super-
NOWs may be about offset by shifts out of smaller transactions accounts
into new MMDAs.
(11) The growth of debt of nonfinancial sectors in the first
quarter of next year, although slowing somewhat from the pace of late 1984,
may also be around the top of its tentative 8 to 11 percent range. In
part, the moderation in credit growth projected for early next year
reflects a drop in tax-exempt borrowing by state and local governments
and businesses, following a surge in the fourth quarter in advance of
various legislative year-end deadlines. In addition, growth of Treasury
debt, while remaining large, is expected to moderate sane from its recent
advanced pace. Underlying business needs for credit are expected to
continue at close to the level of the last half of 1984, and recent
announcements seem to indicate that borrowing to finance corporate mergers
and share retirements will remain sizable in the months ahead. The pace
of mortgage lending to households, which had been slowing since the spring
of 1984, is projected to stabilize in response to the easier conditions
that have developed in that market.
(12) Discount window borrowing under alternative B is expected
to average around $400 million. That level of borrowing appears to be
somewhat in excess of the likely "frictional" level, which now is probably
around $150 to $250 million. Seasonal borrowing has declined to close to
$100 million since the last FOMC meeting in accord with its normal seasonal
pattern and in response to the slimmer spread between market and discount
rates. Under these circumstances, federal funds might average mostly in
a range around 8-3/4 percent. Nonborrowed reserves would be expected to
increase at a 16 percent annual rate, and total reserves at a 12-1/2 percent
rate over the November-to-March period.
(13) Short-term rates are not likely to show much change on
balance over the intermeeting period under alternative B, with the 3-month
Treasury bill rate generally in an 8-1/8 to 8-3/8 percent range; the prime
rate may drop a little further, given current rate relationships. In
long-term markets, yields could move somewhat higher should there be no
real progress toward putting together a credible deficit reduction package,
if there were signs of strengthened economic activity, and if M1 growth
were sustained as expected under alternative B. Mortgage rates may
stabilize in the period immediately ahead, and could begin to rise, parti-
cularly should bond rates turn up as the first quarter progresses.
(14) Alternative A involves growth in the aggregates that
would bring them above the upper limits of their tentative longer-run ranges
(the width of the ranges of course being narrow early in the year). This
alternative may also be viewed as compensating in some degree for the
recent shortfall in M1 growth. For instance, the 8 percent growth of M1
over November to March that is specified would bring it by March to a
level that would be near the midpoint of the FOMC's tentative long-run
growth range if that range were based not on the actual fourth-quarter
average but on the fourth-quarter midpoint level of the 1984 long-run
range. The more rapid growth of M2 under this alternative would reflect,
in addition to faster expansion of its M1 component, continued strong
inflows to MMDAs and money market mutual funds, given the further drop
assumed in market rates and the lag in reduction of yields on these
(15) The money supply specifications of alternative A are
expected to entail an increase in total reserves of about 15 percent at
an annual rate from November to March, accompanied by a drop in the funds
rate to 8 percent or a little below. Absent a decline in the discount
rate, discount window borrowing is likely to be at a bare minimum, and
excess reserves perhaps somewhat higher than usual, with nonborrowed
reserves rising at about a 21 percent annual rate through March. If
the discount rate were reduced from the present 8-1/2 percent level,
reserve growth consistent with this alternative could be accomplished
with somewhat less expansion in nonborrowed reserves than otherwise.
Under this alternative, the 3-month Treasury bill rate may drop to around
The dollar probably would come under downward pressure in foreign exchange
markets, although any depreciation would be moderated if foreign monetary
authorities allowed their domestic rates to fall as well under the circum-
(16) Alternative C is designed to hold growth of M1 and M2 to
rates close to the midpoints of their tentative long-run ranges and is
expected to involve some tightening of reserve conditions. Borrowing
might rise back toward $800 million, with the federal funds rate returning
to the 9-1/2 to 10 percent area. Nonborrowed and total reserves would
increase at rates of around 10 percent from November to March. Such a
change in reserve conditions at this time would be quite unexpected by
market participants, and both short- and long-term rates would back up
considerably, with Treasury bill rates rising almost a percentage point
to 9 percent or a bit higher. Rates on private instruments might increase
by even more should investor concerns about creditworthiness be revived.
The dollar would probably rise further on foreign exchange markets.
Directive language
(17) Proposed language for the operational paragraph, with
alternatives, is shown below. The language in brackets is proposed
should the Committee wish to provide flexibility on the up side for
growth in M1 in light of the currently estimated shortfall over the
fourth quarter relative to the FOMC's original expectation for that
period, as was done in the November directive. The bracketed language
would seem to be more relevant to alternatives B or C, since alternative
A contains a growth rate for M1 from November to March that, as de-
scribed in paragraph (14), already takes more account of the shortfall.
In the implementation of policy in the short run, the
Ccmmittee seeks to reduce somewhat (alt. A)/MAINTAIN (alt. B)/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT (alt. C) existing pressures on reserve positions.
This action is expected to be consistent with growth of M1, M2, and
M3 at annual rates of around [DEL: 7-1/2 and 9] ____, ____, and ____ percent,
RESPECTIVELY, during the period from [DEL: September to December] NOVEMBER
TO MARCH. [DEL: M1 is expected to grow over the period at an annual rate
of around 3 percent, less than anticipated earlierin view of the
decline in October. In light of that decline, more rapid growth of
M1 would be acceptable.] [SOMEWHAT MORE RAPID GROWTH OF M1 WOULD BE
Conversely, greater restraint might be acceptable in the event of
substantially more rapid monetary growth and indications of significant
strengthening of economic activity and inflationary pressures. The
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives
and related reserve paths during the period before the next meeting
is likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently
outside a range of [DEL: 7 to 11] ____ TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent December 17, 1984
Shofrt Term
Treaury bills CD comm m bank
l secondary market secoMndacy market rie
funds market PaPer mulual p
Apr.
Kay
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Daily--Dec. 7
13
14
Long Term
U.S. govemmmnt constant corporate munl homeot
maturlty yields A ulillly cipal conven. FHu A FNMA
recently Bond lional 1 yu
3-year &yea 30-y olered Buyer at S&ALs ARM
FR I"lli(44
_L ^L - -- ---- , ---------- - . - ----- ,- -----^L
Security Dealer Positions
Millions of dollars December 17, 1984
Cash Positions Forward and Futures Positions
Treasury coupon* I Treasury couponSPeirod ,Nel Treasuiy under over federal prlvate Tresury under ovr lederal private
Total bills 1 yeu 1 year agency short-term bills 1 a 1 y1ar ayency short-ten
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
securltes.
* StriVly confldOntlal
-,.182
i
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
December 17, 1984
Treasury Treasury coupons net purchases
3  Federal agencies noe purchases
heri
o d
within within 1-5 510 ooer 10 to tal
Ich I 1-year 1-5 5-10 over 10 total 1-5 510 1over 10 total ot 1
July
Aug.
Sept.
siPt.
12
19
26
Level--Dec. 14
.4 8.4 I 170.6
-. 2
I Change from end-of-period to end of period. 6 In addition to the net purchases of securties. also reflects changes in System holdmg of bankers'
2 Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts, and redemptions I-) in bill auctions. acceptances, direct Treasury borrowing from the System and redemptions (- of agency and Trea-
3 Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts, and short-term notes acquired in ex sury coupon issues.
change for maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon 6 Includes changes in RPs (+), matched sale purchase transactions (-), and matched purchas4ale
ssues, and direct Treasury borrowing from the System. transactions (*).
