Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
August 17, 1984
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) August 17, 1984
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) M1 contracted in July at a 1-1/2 percent annual rate. It
appears to be rebounding moderately in August, based on data for the early
part of the month, but remains below the 5-1/2 percent path for the June-
to-September period adopted at the last Committee meeting. Expansion in
currency moderated somewhat in July and other checkable deposits registered
a rare, though small, decline; however, most of the weakness in M1 occurred
in demand deposits, following a sharp expansion in June.
(2) M2 also appears to be growing more slowly than the 7-1/2
percent rate specified by the FOMC for June to September, reflecting the
sluggishness in M1 and also somewhat slower growth than expected in its
nontransactions component. In July M2 expanded at a 5 percent annual rate,
and may grow only a little faster in August. With interest rates high and
the yield curve sharply upward sloping through much of the month, savings
and money market deposit accounts continued to run off, but the less liquid
small time deposit category remained quite robust, surging at a 24 percent
annual rate.
(3) M3 growth was relatively well maintained in July at a rate
close to the FOMC's specification of 9 percent for the June-to-September
period. Credit growth at banks and thrifts seems to have been fairly sizable
last month, and expansion of total domestic nonfinancial sector debt is
estimated to have remained around a 13 percent annual rate. A pickup
of growth in federal debt offset some slowing in nonfederal debt, as
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV to
QI QII June July July
Money and Credit Aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve Measures1
Nonborrowed reserves 2
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
averaged $1,011 million and excess reserves $618 million.
take-over activity lessened. M3 and domestic nonfinancial sector debt
remain above their longer-run ranges.
(4) Total reserves decreased in July at about a 2 percent annual
rate, after expanding rapidly over the preceding two months. The slowdown
last month reflected a marked deceleration in growth of required reserves,
given the weakness in transactions accounts, and a reduction in excess
reserves from the relatively high June level. Nonborrowed reserves plus
extended credit grew by about 1-1/4 percent in July. In the two complete
reserve maintenance periods since the July meeting, adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing has averaged close to the $1 billion level that has prevailed for
some time and was used in constructing nonborrowed reserve paths. The
federal funds rate, however, has tended to drift higher, averaging a little
over 11-1/2 percent recently as compared to 11-1/4 percent at the time of
the July FOMC meeting. In light of the difficulties of Continental Bank and
strains in the financial system more generally, depository institutions--
especially large banks that are dependent on managed liabilities--seem to
want to avoid borrowing at the discount window as much as possible, and
instead are bidding more aggressively for funds in the market.
(5) Despite rather taut money market conditions and sustained
strong credit demands, prices in stock and bond markets rose sharply during
the intermeeting period. Yields on long-term bonds have fallen by 5/8 to
percent on record trading volume, as the market reacted positively to
interpretations of the future course of monetary policy in connection
with the Humphrey-Hawkins hearing and to incoming econonic, price, and
money data. With long-term markets more receptive, new-issue activity in
the corporate bond market has increased and the Treasury's mid-quarter
refunding was relatively well received. In shorter-term markets, yields
have generally declined except at the shortest end of the spectrum.
Moreover, the spread of private over Treasury rates has narrowed, apparently
reflecting at least in part some strengthening in investor confidence in
banks. Very recently, though, spreads have again tended to widen, as
investor nervousness has been rekindled by the difficulties of a large West
Coast S&L that had been quite active in the large CD market.
(6) The dollar has risen by about 2/3 percent on a weighted aver-
age basis since the last Committee meeting. Exchange markets have been quite
volatile amid shifting market perceptions about the implications of U.S.
economic activity and Federal Reserve policy for U.S. interest rates and
uncertainties about the sustainability of the new highs for the dollar that
occurred during the intermeeting period. Short-term interest differentials
showed little change over the period, while U.S. long-term nominal rates
(though perhaps not real rates) fell significantly relative to foreign
long-term rates.
Prospective developments
(7) The table below provides three alternative specifications for
growth in the monetary aggregates for the June-to-September period and
associated ranges for the federal funds rate. (More detailed data, including
implied growth rates for July to September, can be found in the charts and
table on the following pages.) All of the alternatives involve slower
growth in M1 over the three months than specified at the last FOMC meeting,
given the contraction of that aggregate in July and the relatively short
time before the end of the quarter. Of the alternatives, the aggregate
specifications of A, which involves some easing of money market conditions,
generally come closest to those adopted at the last meeting. Alternatives
B and C contemplate unchanged and tighter market conditions respectively,
with somewhat greater deviations of M1 and M2 from the July specifications.
M3 growth would be broadly consistent with its July short-run path under
all of the alternatives.
Memo:
July
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C FOMC
Growth from June
to September
Ml 4-1/2 4 3-1/2 5-1/2
M2 7-1/4 7 6-3/4 7-1/2
M3 9-1/4 9 8-3/4 9
Federal funds
rate range 7-1/2 to 11-1/2 8 to 12 8-1/2 to 12-1/2 8 to 12
(8) Under alternative B, M1 growth would be expected to pick up to
around a 6-3/4 percent annual rate in August and September, with growth
larger in the latter month. The transactions demand for M1 is expected to
be somewhat less than earlier anticipated given the somewhat slower growth
in nominal GNP now projected for the third quarter. While M1 growth from
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Monthly Levels
July
August
September
Growth Rates
Monthly
July
August
September
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
June to September would be only about 4 percent at an annual rate under
this alternative, it would grow about 5-1/2 percent on a quarterly average
basis. M1 velocity would increase at a 2-1/2 percent annual rate in the
third quarter, considerably below the rate of increase in the first half
of the year, but still probably slightly above the underlying trend at
unchanged interest rates. Looking ahead to the fourth quarter, demand
for M1 might be expected to pick up and velocity growth to moderate a bit
further as the restraining effects of previous interest rate increases on
money demand diminish. With interest rates remaining roughly around
current levels into the fourth quarter, as assumed in the staff GNP
forecast, M1 growth for QIV 1983 to QIV 1984 might be around 6-1/2 percent.
(9) The more rapid growth expected for M1 over the balance of
the quarter would also be reflected in sme acceleration of M2 from its
recent reduced pace. But for the June-to-September interval M2 growth is
expected to remain somewhat below the 7-1/2 percent rate specified by the
Committee. M3 growth, meanwhile, should remain around the 9 percent rate
of June and July, following its unexpectedly rapid growth in the spring.
(10) Debt of nonfinancial sectors is likely to grow less in
the current quarter than in the first half of the year, in part because
of reduced merger-related financing. However, underlying needs of
businesses for external finance should increase as capital spending
outstrips internal cash generation, and federal government credit usage
will remain high. Consumer and mortgage credit demands appear to be
moderating, though. We are assuming that mortgage markets and confidence
in thrift institutions generally will not be adversely affected to any
significant extent by repercussions from the Financial Corporation of
America (FCA) situation.
(11) The specifications of alternative B assume borrowing at
the discount window remains around $1 billion. Given the recent attitudes
of banks toward the discount window, this is expected to be consistent
with federal funds trading around 11-1/2 percent or a bit higher. Should
uncertainties in connection with FCA raise broader questions about the
stability of the banking and financial system, even more conservative
reserve management might be expected, and the funds rate could run higher
relative to the level of borrowing or to free reserves. If the FCA
situation is well contained, though, and incoming economic data suggest a
moderation of credit demands, the funds rate could fall back some, given
prevailing levels of borrowing, as market uncertainties diminish. Over
the July-to-September period total reserves can be expected to increase
at about a 2-1/2 percent annual rate, while nonborrowed reserves would
rise less.
(12) There is little reason to expect the average level of
short-term rates to change much over the balance of the quarter under
alternative B, but the structure of these rates could well vary, depending
on such factors as the evolution of the FCA situation and the progress of
negotiations with Latin American borrowers. It seems most probable that
lingering uncertainties would keep quality spreads, which have narrowed
modestly on balance since the last meeting, from improving further.
Long-term bond markets, too, are unlikely to continue the improvement
that was seen in the early part of the intermeeting period, unless
economic activity appears to be much weaker than anticipated. A noticeable
back-up in rates cannot be ruled out in the weeks ahead, particularly
should money growth accelerate more rapidly than projected in the context
of strong economic indicators.
(13) The specifications of alternative A are designed to bring
M1 and M2 closer to the path adopted at the previous Committee meeting,
while not leading to much more rapid M3 and credit growth. They involve
an easing of bank reserve positions, with borrowing dropping to around
$750 million. Nonborrowed reserves would be expected to increase at about
a 6 percent annual rate, and total reserves at about half that pace, over
the July-to-September period. Federal funds may trade between 10-1/2
and 11 percent, perhaps not immediately but over time as the lower level
of borrowing persists. Such a reduction in bank reserve pressures does
not appear to be anticipated by the market, and probably would extend the
recent rally in bond and stock markets, as well as lead to a decline in
short-term rates and a narrowing of quality spreads. The Treasury bill
rate is likely to fall below 10 percent, and 3-month CDs to around 11 per-
cent. The decline in interest rates would relieve some of the immediate
pressures on thrift earnings and reduce tensions generally in the financial
system. As interest rates fell, the dollar would tend to depreciate on
foreign exchange markets.
(14) The easier reserve and market conditions that are expected
to develop under alternative A would probably have their greatest impact
on money growth in the final months of the year. The demand for money
would be stimulated by the lagged effect of lower market interest rates and
by transactions needs associated with somewhat faster expansion in nominal
GNP than in the staff forecast. Thus, alternative A seems most consistent
with Ml growth more clearly in the upper portion of its range for this
year and M2 growth around its midpoint. Expansion of both M3 and debt is
more likely to be somewhat further above the upper ends of their respective
long-run ranges than under alternative B as private credit demands respond
to the stronger economy.
(15) Alternative C calls for sane tightening in money market
conditions over the period ahead, should it be desired to place even more
constraint on the growth of credit. Borrowing at the discount window
would be expected to increase to $1-1/4 to $1-1/2 billion and nonborrowed
reserves to decline at around a 6 percent annual rate. The federal
funds rate would probably rise to the 12-1/4 to 12-1/2 percent area, and
other market interest rates also would adjust upward, with Treasury bill
rates climbing into the 10-1/2 to 11 percent range, and CD rates perhaps
rising even more rapidly to around 12 to 12-1/2 percent as strains on the
financial system increased. The associated increases in the prime rate,
bond yields, and mortgage rates would probably soon restrain credit
growth and spending relative to the staff's current projection. The
dollar would tend to appreciate further on exchange markets, at least
(16) Such an approach would be expected to lead to growth
of M1 and M2 significantly below the short-run path specified at the last
Committee meeting. For the year as a whole, though, M1 growth would
probably be around the midpoint of its long-run range. M2 over the year
would likely be well in the lower half of its long-run range, while M3
could be expected to fall back faster toward the upper limit of its
range as the tightening of credit markets led to reduced credit demands.
In addition, M3 might be restrained by shifts out of CDs into Treasury
securities if rising interest rates worked to undermine public confidence
in the financial position of banks and thrifts.
Directive language
(17) Proposed language for the operational paragraph is shown
below, with alternatives for describing the degree of pressure on reserve
positions and the symmetry of any adjustment in reserve pressures to
variations in the aggregates.
In the short run, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SLIGHTLY
(ALT. A)/maintain (ALT. B)/INCREASE SLIGHTLY (ALT. C) existing
pressures on reserve positions. This action is expected to be
consistent with growth in M1, M2, and M3 at annual rates of around
[DEL: 5-1/2, 7-1/2, and 9] ____, ____, AND ____ percent respectively during
the period from June to September. Somewhat greater reserve restraint
would be acceptable in the event of more substantial growth of the
monetary aggregates, while somewhat lesser restraint might [WOULD]
be acceptable if growth of the monetary aggregates slowed signifi-
cantly. In either case, such a change would be considered only in
the context of appraisals of the continuing strength of the business
expansion, inflationary pressures, financial market conditions,
and the rate of credit growth. The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations
that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths
during the period before the next meeting is likely to be associated
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 8 to 12]
____ TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
aTreasury bills CDs c money bank
secondary market secondary pom markel
funds ~r papret mutual
3-month -month 1-year 3.nonth 1-month fund loan
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
Kay
June
August I
8
Dilly--Aug. 1
ll.
8
___ Auguas 20, 1984
Long Term
U S. government constant corporate muni- home motgages
maturity yields A utility cipal conven- FHAVA FNMA
recently Bond blonal 1 year
3-year 10year 30-year oered Buyer at S&Lo lling M
FR 367(4/84)
Nov.
Dec.
hay
June
July 4
11
Aug 1
8
Security Dealer Positions
Millions of dollars
August 13. 1984
Cash Positions 2 Forward and Futures Positions
pi Treasury coupons Teur¢y coupons I ' -Period Net Treasury under over federal private Tresury under over fderal private
Total bills 1 yea 1 year agency short-term bills ye 1 year agency short.lrm
I -
** L,-,. than $500,000.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted August 20, 1984
Treasury Treasury coupons net purchases
3  Federal agencies net purchases
Period bills outrght Net RP
change2  wthin 1-5 5-10 over 10 total with 1-5 5-10 over 10 total hns
Feb. -1,060 - -- - -- -- -- - - - -- -1,098 -8,347
Mar. 3,159 - - -- -- -- -- -- - - - 3,149 6,807
July -1,497 - - - - - - -- -- -- -- -1,499 -656
FR 1368 (7181)
