Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
November 2, 1984
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) November 2, 1984
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) Preliminary data for October indicate that M1 declined last
month at an annual rate of around 6-1/2 percent, following growth in September
that turned out to be 4-3/4 percent (or about 2 percentage points less than
expected at the time of the previous FOMC meeting). The estimated level
of M1 in October was well below the growth path adopted at the last FOMC
meeting for the September-December period and in the lower half of its
longer-run target range. Both demand deposits and other checkable deposits
were drawn down last month, while currency continued to grow at a slower
pace than in the first half of the year.
(2) The nontransactions component of M2 grew a bit faster in
October than the advanced September pace, boosted particularly by strength-
ened inflows to MMDAs and money market funds, whose yields lagged declines
in short-term market rates. But with the drop in M1, growth of M2 for
October is estimated to have been around 6 percent, somewhat below the
Committee's three-month objective of 7-1/2 percent. M3 growth, on the
other hand, appears to have picked up in October to a 10-1/2 percent
annual rate, somewhat above the Committee's short-run path. CD issuance
strengthened considerably in October, as the runoff at the thrift subsi-
diary of FCA stopped and as banks stepped up sales of CDs in part to off-
set declining Treasury deposits; in addition, institution-only money mar-
ket funds expanded by a very substantial amount.
KEY MONETARY POLICY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV to
Aug. Sept. Oct.pe Oct. pe
Money and Credit Aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve Measures1
Nonborrowed reserves 2
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
-. 3
(3) Expansion of the debt of private domestic sectors moderated
further in September to an estimated annual rate of 11-1/2 percent, and with
borrowing by the federal sector temporarily slowing at the same time, growth
in total nonfinancial debt fell to 11-1/4 percent from over 13 percent in
the previous two months. At banks, a slackening in the pace of consumer
lending and slower growth in business borrowing, as merger financing dropped
off and declines in bond yields encouraged greater reliance on long-term
finance, contributed to a moderation in credit growth. Partial data for
October suggest some additional slowing in bank credit, but with bond
issuance by business and state and local governments strengthening con-
siderably further and Treasury borrowing rebounding, total credit growth
probably was at least as rapid as in September.
(4) Total reserves fell at about a 13 percent annual rate in
October, reflecting a decline in required reserves mainly in response to
the weakness in transactions deposits in October and the runoff of CDs in
September. Nonborrowed reserves plus extended credit also declined
sharply. Use of the discount window was especially heavy early in each
of the two maintenance periods ending in October, particularly by large
banks, which appear to have become more willing to borrow after the
increasingly cautious approach that had developed since last spring.
Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaged $762 million over the four
Wednesday-ending weeks since the last Committee meeting. A level of
borrowing of $700 million most recently has been assumed in constructing
the reserve paths.
(5) The greater willingness of banks to use discount window
credit, market expectations of monetary easing as M1 weakened, and a drop
in other short-term rates contributed to a decline in the federal funds
rate from around 11 percent just before the October FOMC meeting to the
neighborhood of 10 percent most recently; funds traded below that level on a
number of days in the latter part of October. Rates on Treasury bills have
dropped about 120 basis points and on short-term private instruments by 125
to 150 basis points during the intermeeting period, bringing the 3-month bank
CD rate to about 9-1/2 percent; most major banks reduced their prime rates to
by about 80 basis points, responding as well to the apparently improved out-
look for inflation from the weakness in oil prices and to information suggest-
ing a more moderate pace of economic activity.
(6) Exchange market conditions were fairly volatile over the
period since the last Committee meeting. The dollar has dropped about 2-1/2
percent on balance, after first rising to a new record high in mid-October.
The Desk intervened on one day in the period, selling $95 million.
Prospective developments
(7) The table below gives two alternative specifications for
growth in the monetary aggregates over the period from September to December,
along with associated federal funds rate ranges. (More detailed data, in-
cluding implied growth for the QIV 1983-to-QIV 1984 period and for October
through December, can be found on the table and charts on the following
pages.) Given the substantial weakness of M1 in October, both alternatives
contemplate growth in this aggregate over the three-month September-to-December
period well below the short-run objective specified by the Committee at its
last meeting, but growth of M2 and M3 would be expected to be near their
short-run objectives. Alternative A involves an initial easing in bank
reserve positions, while no substantial change is contemplated by alternative
B. No alternative that would initially tighten bank reserve positions is
presented in view of the size of recent shortfalls in M1 and M2, with both
aggregates now in the lower halves of their ranges for 1984.
MEMO: Current
Alt. A Alt. B FOMC specifications
Growth from
September to
M1 3-1/2 2-1/2 6
M2 7-1/2 7 7-1/2
M3 9-1/2 9-1/4 9
Federal funds
rate range 7 to 11 8 to 12 8 to 12
(8) Under alternative B, M1 is expected to grow fairly rapidly
over the last two months of the quarter-at about a 7 percent annual
rate. Some of the unusual factors that depressed M1 in October-such as
the possible pull of relatively high-yielding MMDA accounts on funds that
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Monthly Levels
October
November
December
Growth Rates
Monthly
October
November
December
Growth Rates
Quarterly Average
'83 Q4 to Sept.'84
'83 Q4 to Oct. '84
'83 Q4 to '84 Q4
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
Chart 3 CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II FOMC
Actual and Targeted M3
Billions of dollars
*A-
*B- 2960
/9% 2940
-- ACTUAL LEVELS /
-- ESTIMATED LEVELS //
SSHORT RUN ALTERNATIVES - 2920
// 2900
/
/V- 2880
/ -2840
/ -2800
S- 2780
S- 2740
I 11 1I I I I 2640
D J F M A M J J A
might have otherwise gone into transactions balances and possible shifts
out of cash into longer-term market instruments as expectations of
declining rates became more widespread--are expected to abate. Moreover,
demand for this aggregate will be boosted over coming months by increases
in nominal income and spending and by the usual lagged effects of the
sizable declines in short-term interest rates since early September. The
expected pickup in M1 growth in November and December would yield only
about a 2-1/2 percent annual growth rate over the last three months of the
year and only 1-1/2 percent on a quarterly average basis. For the year
as a whole (QIV to QIV), M1 growth would be around 5 percent.
(9) Assuming GNP grows as projected in the Green Book for the
fourth quarter, the velocity of M1 would rise by about 5-3/4 percent at an
annual rate in that period. Such a relatively rapid rise in velocity
appears unusual, looking back over previous experience for periods when
interest rates have dropped. In part, it reflects the shifts out of
cash that have already occurred. But still, such a large implied velocity
growth does raise questions about whether the actual outcome might instead
involve more money growth and/or less GNP expansion, given the interest
rates contemplated in this alternative.
(10) The pickup in M1 growth is expected to lead to more rapid
expansion in M2 over the balance of the quarter. For the quarter as a whole,
M2 should grow about in line with nominal GNP, bringing its growth for
the year to around 7 percent, somewhat below the mid-point of its longer-term
range. M3 is expected to increase in November and December at somewhat
less than its October pace, in part as yields on institution-only money
funds adjust to market rates; growth for the year would be a bit above the
upper end of the Comittee's longer-run range. Outstanding CDs at banks
are expected to grow at a moderate rate over the balance of the year,
with expansion restrained in part by efforts of a number of larger banks
to manage their balance sheets more conservatively in the wake of the
summer's banking difficulties and issuance of proposed new capital guide-
(11) Credit is projected to expand more slowly in the fourth
quarter than in the third, owing entirely to a drop-off in private borrow-
ing, while federal government borrowing is expected to be substantially
stronger in the current quarter than during the summer. Business borrowing
for mergers and the like is expected to continue to decline, and needs for
credit to fund outlays may edge lower from the third quarter pace as
inventory accumulation slows. In the household sector mortgage takedowns
should continue to slow, as housing expenditures weaken a little further
in reflection of the increase in interest rates earlier this year. Consumer
credit will probably continue to expand at a pace well below the extra-
ordinary rate of earlier this year.
(12) The aggregate specifications of alternative B are thought
to involve pressures on bank reserve positions indexed by discount window
borrowing of around $700 million. This is expected to be associated with
a federal funds rate averaging around 10 percent, given the apparent
considerable diminution in banks' reluctance to borrow over recent weeks
and also assuming that the "frictional " level of borrowing is, at $300
to $400 million, somewhat higher than usual. Such an assumption for
"frictional" borrowing appears consistent with the recent sustained level
of seasonal borrowing at an unusually large $300 million. After declining
sharply in October, nonborrowed and total reserves would be expected to
expand at annual rates of around 9 and 6 percent, respectively, over the
last two months of the year.
(13) Interest rates are not likely to change substantially
under this alternative, although they could back up somewhat from current
levels, given apparent expectations in the market of a further easing in
pressures on bank reserve positions. The 3-month bill rate may be in a
range if funds trade persistently around 10 percent. Long-term markets,
too, remain sensitive to expectations about the near-term stance of
monetary policy, as well as to incoming data on inflation and economic
activity. The pressure of credit demands on longer-term markets may
moderate, though, as the effects of the previous relatively steep declines
in rates on corporate and state and local issuance wear off.
(14) Alternative A contemplates a more expansive reserve posture
that would encourage more rapid growth in M1 and M2. Growth of M1 over
the last two months of the year would be anticipated to be around 8-1/2
percent, encouraged by growth of nonborrowed reserves at a 15 percent annual
rate. Over the three-month September-to-December period, M1 would expand
at a 3-1/2 percent annual rate and M2 at a 7-1/2 percent rate-still below
objectives set at the last meeting for M1 but on target for M2. Growth
of M3 may turn out to be somewhat further above the currently specified
credit expansion.
(15) The behavior of monetary aggregates and aggregate re-
serves under alternative A is expected to be consistent with borrowing
at the discount window of around $400 million, near the currently esti-
mated "frictional" level. The federal funds rate would decline to close
to the 9 percent discount rate, probably just above it. Other interest
rates, both short- and long-term, would decline sharply, with the 3-month
Treasury bill rate falling to the 8-1/4 to 8-3/4 percent area; the dollar
would probably decline substantially further on exchange markets. Expecta-
tions of a discount rate cut would become widespread. In credit markets,
bond issuance would be enlarged, and mortgage commitments and borrowing
could begin to pick up in late fall and winter in response to the lower
rates and the greater willingness of thrifts to supply credit aggressively
as their financial condition improved. The decline in rates in November
and December would tend to boost money demand in 1985 both through its
direct effect on opportunity costs and indirectly by fostering somewhat
faster growth of income and credit demands than currently projected.
This would increase the odds of some backup in rates in the first part of
next year in the process of restraining money growth to around the mid-
points of the Committee's tentative long-run ranges for 1985.
Directive language
(16) Two alternative operational paragraphs for the directive
are given below. Alternative I represents the current paragraph, with
updating modifications (shown in the usual way). This approach involves
a potential drawback that, based on the staff's current estimates of
relationships, the directive would specify an M1 growth for the fourth
quarter that is well below the previously adopted target. That drawback
might be avoided by showing M1 as a range, possibly encompassing the
previous decision. A second possibility would be to show a growth rate
for M1 near that of the earlier decision-which, however, would tilt the
directive toward ease over the intermeeting period (if staff estimates
are near correct). The language under alternative II partially restructures
the existing directive as another approach to resolving the difficulties.
ALTERNATIVE I
In the implementation of policy in the short run, the Committee
seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (alt. A) /maintain (alt. B) EXISTING PRESSURES
[DEL: the lesser degree of restraint] on reserve positions [DEL: sought in recent]
weeks. This action is expected to be consistent with growth of M1, M2,
and M3 at annual rates of around [DEL: 6] ____, [DEL: 7-1/2], ____ and [DEL: 9] ____ percent during
the period from September to December. [DEL: A somewhat further lessening of]
LESSER restraint on reserve positions would be acceptable in the event of
significantly slower growth in the monetary aggregates, evaluated in
relation to the strength of the business expansion and inflationary
pressures, domestic and international financial market conditions, and
the rate of credit growth. Conversely, greater restraint might be acceptable
in the event of substantially more rapid monetary growth and indications
of significant strengthening of economic activity and inflationary pressures.
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives
and related reserve paths during the period before the next meeting is
likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a
range of [DEL: 8 to 12] ____ TO ____ percent.
ALTERNATIVE II
In the implementation of policy in the short-run, the Committee
seeks to decrease somewhat (alt. A) /maintain (alt. B) existing pressures
on reserve positions. This action is expected to be consistent with
growth of M1 at around ____ percent at an annual rate over the last two
months of the year; more rapid growth would be acceptable in view of the
substantial decline of M1 in October which brought that aggregate into
the bottom half of its long-run range. Growth of M2 and M3 is expected
to be generally consistent with the 7-1/2 and 9 percent growth paths for
the September-to-December period set at the last Committee meeting.
Lesser restraint on reserve positions would be acceptable in the event of
significantly slower growth in the monetary aggregates, evaluated in
relation to the strength of the business expansion and inflationary
pressures, domestic and international financial market conditions, and
the rate of credit growth. Conversely, greater restraint might be acceptable
in the event of substantially more rapid monetary growth and indications
of significant strengthening of economic activity and inflationary pressures.
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives
and related reserve paths during the period before the next meeting is
likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside
a range of [DEL: 8 to 12] ____ TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent November 5, 1984
Apr.
HKey
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
October 3
10
Daily--Oct. 26
Nov. I
Lon -Term
U.S government constant copoate munl home moiga
maturity yields A ultlty cipal conne FHA/VA FNMA
recently Bond tlon l I year
Security Dealer Positions
Millions of dollars
SI Cash Posltions
Treasury coupons
Treasury under over federal
bills 1 year 1 year agency
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
private
short-term
Forward 
and Fut
eCash.. P i-on Fra ad u --- -Posiions
Treasury coupons
Treasury under over
bills 1 year I year
SStrictly confidential
**LA s,. h n 5 $500),00()1.10
federal
agency
private
short-term
i - - i - i - i -- . i
November 5, 1984
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
November 5, 1984
Treasury Treasury coupons net purchases
3  Federal agencies net purchases
change2 within within 1-5 10 over holdinchange 1-year 1-5 5-10 over 10 total 1-year 1-5 510 over 10 total total
s
July -1,497 - - -- -- - - -- -- -- -- -1,499 -656
Aug. -2,104 - - -- - - -- - - -- -2,110 4,951
Sept. 3,178 600 - - - - - - - - 3,777 -2,312
change for maturing bills Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon
issues, and direct Treasury borrowing from the System
FR 1'FR (71/1)
