Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
March 22, 1985
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) March 22, 1985
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) M1 expanded during January and February at an 11-1/2 percent
average annual rate, but partial data suggest that growth in that aggregate
is moderating in March to about a 3 to 4 percent pace. Growth of M1 over the
December-to-March period is currently estimated at around 9 percent, com-
pared with the 8 percent rate specified by the FOMC. All components of M1
contributed to strength in January and February. Demand deposits were parti-
cularly robust in February, but such deposits began to contract in early
March. Inflows to Super NOW accounts have slowed following a pick-up in
January when their minimum balance requirement was reduced; M1 as a whole
does not appear to have been affected by this change.
(2) As with M1, M2 and M3 are apparently decelerating markedly in
March. For the three months, expansion of these two aggregates is estimated
at 9-1/2 and 7-1/2 percent, respectively, compared with the 10 to 11 percent
rates of growth set by the Committee. Over the course of the quarter,
interest rate relationships became less favorable for retail deposits and
money market funds. In addition, there was a considerable weakening in large
CDs at thrifts in February and early March.
(3) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is estimated to
have expanded at about a 12 percent annual rate on average during the first
quarter, based on partial data. About 1-1/2 percentage points reflects
substitution of debt for equity in mergers and corporate restructuring,
assuming that the debt for equity swap of Phillips takes place by the end of
March. Federal sector debt has continued to expand rapidly this quarter,
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Dec. QIV
to to
Jan. Feb. Mar. 1 Mar.1 Mar. 1
Money and Credit Aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve Measures 2
Nonborrowed reserves 3
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
although at a pace somewhat below that of the fourth quarter. Bond offerings
by nonfinancial corporations in January and February were held substantially
below the pace of the fourth quarter, while business borrowing from banks and
in the commercial paper market picked up last month after showing little
growth in January; business loans at large banks remained strong in early
March. Expansion of household sector debt is estimated to have slowed
slightly in the first two months of the year.
(4) Reflecting the rapid growth of transactions deposits, total
reserves are estimated to have expanded at a 17-1/2 percent annual rate
from December to March, though growth decelerated month by month over the
period. With borrowing at the discount window little changed, nonborrowed
reserves increased at about the same pace. The nonborrowed reserves path for
the intermeeting period was constructed on the assumption of $350 million of
borrowing; as M1 strengthened relative to path, the Desk conducted its
operations with a view to tilting the odds somewhat toward borrowing
coming in above rather than below this level. Nonborrowed reserves generally
have been close to target, but with the demand for excess reserves unex-
pectedly high, borrowed reserves have averaged around $600 million in the
two complete maintenance periods since the last FOMC meeting; thus far in
the current statement period borrowing has averaged around $500 million.
(5) Federal funds traded mainly between 8-3/8 and 8-3/4 percent
during most of the intermeeting period, averaging close to 8-1/2 percent,
about the same level as in the first half of February. Other short-term
rates have risen from 25 to 60 basis points, however, and bond yields are
as much as 60 basis points higher. Lack of progress in deficit reduction
efforts contributed to market expectations that credit markets would be
tightening as the year progressed. In addition, continued strength in
money growth over the first two months of the year led many to anticipate
that monetary policy might soon have to tighten, if it was not already
in process of doing so. The closing of non-federally insured Ohio thrift
institutions had relatively little impact on domestic credit markets-
or so far on the national pattern of deposit and currrency flows. Treasury
bill rates dropped some 30 to 40 basis points relative to yields on private
instruments immediately following the Governor's announcement in Ohio,
but quality spreads subsequently moved back to around previously prevailing
(6) Since the last FOMC meeting, the weighted-average value of
the dollar has declined, net, by 1-1/2 percent. Fluctuations have been
wide in often volatile market conditions. The dollar rose sharply early
in the intermeeting period when U.S. economic and monetary data proved
stronger than anticipated.
. The dollar subsequently retraced most of its earlier
decline, but again depreciated very sharply in mid-March largely in response
to concerns stemming from difficulties at Ohio thrift institutions and less
favorable economic indicators.
. The United States sold around $323 million of which $306 million
was against marks and the remainder against sterling.
Prospective developments
(7) The table below provides three alternative specifications
for growth in the monetary aggregates from March to June, along with
associated ranges for the federal funds rate. (More detailed data, in-
cluding implied growth from the fourth quarter to June, can be found on
the table and charts on the following pages.) Alternative B, which appears
consistent with roughly unchanged pressures on reserve positions, calls
for money growth that would keep M1 in June around the upper limit of the
parallel band that extends back from the endpoints of the longer-run
range for the aggregate. A more marked slowing of money growth is
specified in alternative C, keeping M1 within the band though still above
the upper limit of the cone; alternative A contemplates somewhat more
rapid money growth than B that would pull M1 above the upper limit of
the band.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from March
to June
M1 7-1/2 6-1/2 5
M3 8-3/4 8 7
Associated
federal funds
rate range 5-1/2 to 9-1/2 6 to 10 7 to 11
(8) M1 growth at around a 6-1/2 percent annual rate from
March to June under alternative B represents a fairly considerable modera-
tion from the average pace of the past three months. Growth on a quarterly
average basis would probably be around 6-3/4 percent, slightly higher than
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2 M3
----------------------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Monthly Levels ---- ---- ---- - -- ---- ---- ---- --
Growth Rates
Monthly
Growth Rates
projected expansion in nominal GNP, reflecting some remaining lagged
effects on money demand of earlier interest rate declines. The pattern of
M1 growth over the quarter could be affected by the timing of tax refunds.
The amount of such refunds to date has lagged considerably behind disburse-
ments in comparable periods during the past two years. Refunds are
expected to run 10 percent less in total this year, but payments thus far
have been well below that pace. That may have been a marginal factor
restraining M1 growth in recent weeks, and as the Treasury catches up
could boost growth a bit.
(9) The specified growth of M1 for the March-to-June period
would imply expansion from QIV to June at an 8-1/4 percent annual rate
(assuming growth in March in fact turns out to be at the 3-1/2 percent
rate currently estimated). For M1 growth for the year to be just below
the upper limit of the FOMC's longer-run range--for example, to be around
over the June-to-December period, to about a 3-3/4 percent annual rate.
Such a slowing would imply a return to rising velocity on the order of
a velocity rise that suggests the possibility of some little increase
in interest rates as the second half progresses.
(10) Growth in M2 and M3 is expected to be subdued over the
second quarter, reflecting the anticipated slowdown in M1 and relatively
moderate expansion in their nontransactions components. Nontransactions
components have recently grown quite modestly, and little further change
is expected, except for greater CD expansion in the spring to compensate
in part for slower growth in core deposits. M2 would move close to the
upper limit of its long-run cone by June under such conditions, and M3
would be within its cone.
(11) Growth in the debt of nonfinancial sectors in the second
quarter is projected to remain close to the pace of the first quarter.
With expansion at around an 11-1/2 percent annual rate, the increase in
nonfinancial debt would continue to outstrip growth in GNP, and for the
first half of the year would be just below the 12 percent upper limit
of the Committee's monitoring range. We have assumed that equity retire-
ments related to mergers and corporate financial restructuring will
account for approximately 3/4 of a percentage point of debt growth over
the March-to-June period, somewhat less than in the first quarter.
Underlying business needs for funds, however, may edge higher as capital
expenditures increase moderately while internally generated funds show
little change. For households, mortgage borrowing may rise, reflecting
the pick-up in expenditures following the decline in mortgage rates late
last year, but consumer installment credit should slow somewhat, although
remaining quite rapid. Federal government borrowing is projected to
increase (after seasonal adjustment), mirroring to some extent swings in
its cash balance over the first two quarters rather than a fundamental
shift in credit market pressures.
(12) The money growth objectives of alternative B are expected
to involve continuation of about the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions, with reserve paths based on adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing at the discount window averaging around $350 million and
federal funds expected to trade around 8-1/2 percent. Seasonal borrowing
has averaged around $80 million in recent weeks, and with the spread of
the federal funds rate over the discount rate likely to remain fairly
narrow under this alternative, seasonal borrowing would ordinarily be
expected to increase only moderately further over the intermeeting period.
If availability of the temporary simplified seasonal borrowing program or
liquidity pressures at some agricultural banks were to result in an
unusual rise in seasonal borrowing over the intermeeting period, or if
adjustment borrowing rose substantially for special reasons, such as the
situation in Ohio, such borrowing increases above normal could be treated
as in effect "nonborrowed" reserves in the conduct of open market opera-
tions. Nonborrowed reserves are anticipated to expand at about a 10
percent annual rate over the next three months, and total reserves by
about 9 percent, to meet the money objectives of this alternative and if
demands for excess reserves are in the $600 to $700 million range.
(13) Interest rates could fall a little on balance over the
intermeeting period under this alternative, although some near-term
pressures could be evident at month end, owing to statement-date
pressures and the process of distributing the Treasury's current end-of-
quarter financing that raises about $12-3/4 billion of new cash in coupon
issues. The 3-month Treasury bill rate might decline toward 8-1/4 percent,
as continued moderate growth in money and discount window borrowing
around the $350 million level further allayed concerns about a tightening
of monetary policy. Significant downward movements in long-term rates
are unlikely in the absence of any substantial progress on deficit reduc-
tion measures or a noticeable weakening of economic activity. In general,
domestic credit, as well as foreign exchange, markets are likely to
remain unusually skittish over the weeks ahead, having been sensitized by
recent problems in the government securities market and with thrift
institutions. Thus, interest rates and foreign exchange rates may be
prone to particularly sharp day-to-day movements. In foreign exchange
markets the dollar might decline a little further, on balance, if interest
rates tend a bit lower or if uncertainties about the strength of the U.S.
economy or the stability of financial markets become more prevalent.
(14) Alternative A contemplates some easing of pressures on
reserve positions, with borrowing dropping to around $200 million and the
federal funds rate declining to close to the 8 percent discount rate.
Total and nonborrowed reserves might increase at rates of 10 and 13 per-
cent, respectively, over the next three months. Other short-term interest
rates might fall sharply under this alternative, with the 3-month Treasury
bill rate dropping below 8 percent. The easing of money markets would
also tend to relieve the sensitivity of markets to the condition of
financial institutions. Bond yields, too, would drop, and in foreign
exchange markets, the dollar would fall substantially further.
(15) M1 growth would slow relatively little from the December-
to-March pace under this alternative and would move above the upper limit
of the band. M2 and M3 growth rates are expected to be relatively moder-
ate, though M2 is expected to remain above the long-run cone in June
under this approach. Moreover, there is potential for quite rapid growth
for a while in the broad aggregates, particularly if market rates were to
decline abruptly in face of lagging institutional rates.
(16) From the fourth quarter to June, M1 would increase at an
to about a 3-1/4 percent annual rate over the last six months of the
year, if growth for the year (QIV-to-QIV basis) were to be just below the
upper limit of the long-run range. This would increase the odds that
interest rates will rise in the second half of the year.
(17) Under alternative C, the 5 percent pace of M1 growth from
March to June would keep this aggregate below the upper limit of the
band. And the slower growth specified for M2 and M3 would place both of
these aggregates within their respective long-run cones in June. Such a
deceleration of money growth would likely involve a significant tighten-
ing of reserve conditions. Borrowing might increase to around $750 mil-
lion, and the federal funds rate would probably rise to around 9-1/2
percent. Nonborrowed and total reserves would increase at 4-1/2 and 7
percent annual rates, respectively.
(18) Other short-term interest rates also would rise under
this alternative, although the extent of the increase might be damped
a bit given existing expectations for some tightening in policy. The
Treasury bill rate might rise to around 9 percent or higher, with private
rates increasing a little more as the tightening of money markets accentu-
ated concerns about credit quality. The rise in bond rates might be
relatively small on balance, as slower money growth and the potential for
less robust economic activity lay the groundwork for a possible decline
in rates in the second half of the year. The dollar would probably
regain some of its recent loss in exchange markets.
Directive language
(19) Proposed language for the operational paragraph is shown
below, with alternatives for describing the degree of pressure on reserve
positions. The bracketed phrase in the first sentence, which is drawn
from the previous directive, seems more appropriate if the Committee opts
for alternatives A or B rather than the tightening of alternative C.
Also, if the Committee were to adopt something like the proposed language
in caps in the body of the paragraph beginning with the phrase "IN EITHER
CASE ... ", that might address the issues implicit in the bracketed
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future,
taking account of the progress against inflation, [DEL: remaining]
uncertainties in the business outlook, and the EXCHANGE VALUE
[DEL: strength] of the dollar [DEL: in the exchange markets,] the Committee
seeks to REDUCE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain (Alt. B)/INCREASE
SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) THE EXISTING DEGREE OF PRESSURE ON reserve
POSITIONS. [DEL: conditions characteristic of recent weeks. Should]
THIS ACTION IS EXPECTED TO BE CONSISTENT WITH growth in M1,
[DEL: appear to be exceeding an annual rate of around 8 percent and]
M2, and M3 AT ANNUAL RATES [DEL: a rate] of around [DEL: 10 to 11] ____, ____,
AND ____ percent RESPECTIVELY during the period from [FRL: December to
March TO JUNE, [DEL: mondest increases in reserve pressures would be
sought, particulary if business activity is rising at a satis-
factory rate and exchange market pressures diminish.] SOMEWHAT
SOMEWHAT lesser restraint [DEL: on reserve positions] would (MIGHT) be
acceptable in the event of substantially slower growth [DEL: in the
monetary aggregates, particularly.] IN EITHER CASE SUCH A CHANGE
WOULD BE CONSIDERED ONLY in the context of APPRAISALS OF THE
STRENGTH OF THE BUSINESS EXPANSION, PROGRESS AGAINST INFLATION,
AND CONDITIONS IN DOMESTIC CREDIT AND [DEL: sluggish growth in economic
activity and continued strenght of the dollar in] foreign exchange
markets. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the
monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the period
before the next meeting is likely to be associated with a federal
funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 6-to-10]____ TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Daily--Mar. 15
21
22
of contract Interest rates on new commitments for conventional first mortgages with 80 percent loan-to-value both fixed- and adjustable-rate mortgages with the same number of discount points.
March 25, 1985
Security Dealer Positions
Millions of dollars March 25, 1985
Cash Positions Forward and Futures Positions
TreasY coupons Treasuy coupon* I
Period Net 1  Tresuy under over federal private Treasury under over edral private
Total bills 1 year 1 year agency shor-term bills 1 yewr 1 year agency short-term
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Mar. 6
13
20
Strictly confidential
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Mar. 6
13
20
LEVEL--Mar. 21
Treasury
bills net
change2
Treasury coupons net purchases
3
Federal agencies net purchases
4
within 1-5 5-10 over 10 total within 1-5 5-10 over 10 total1-year 1-year I
-- -100
- -300
!77 1,484
-- - -100
- -100 - -- -100
March 25, 1985
Net change
outright Net RPss
-- -- -- -17
