Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
May 17, 1985
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) May 17, 1985
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Growth of M1 in April was around 6 percent, but data for
early May suggest somewhat stronger growth this month, bringing M1 a
little above the 6 percent annual rate path adopted by the Committee at
its last meeting. Flows associated with refunds and final payments around
the April tax date appear to have had little net impact on recent M1
growth. Refunds probably added to growth in April and perhaps in early
May, as the Treasury greatly accelerated processing, but larger-than-
expected tax payments reflected in a corresponding rise in the Treasury's
cash balance may have had an offsetting effect.
(2) In contrast to M1, growth in the broad aggregates has been
running well below the FOMC's March-to-June paths of 7 and 8 percent for
M2 and M3. In April, these aggregates showed little net change, and data
for early May suggest only a modest rebound. Weakness in the broad
aggregates stemmed in large part from managed liabilities. The substantial
rise in the Treasury's balances at banks along with a sizable liquidation
of inventories of Treasury securities at large banks in April reduced the
need to raise funds in the market. In addition, it is possible that
larger-than-usual nonwithheld tax payments out of MMDAs and MMMFs may have
held down growth in the broad aggregates to a degree. Finally, strong
inflows to IRA and Keogh accounts--excluded from monetary measures--may
also have retarded growth of M2 and M3 in April by a small amount.
(3) Domestic nonfinancial debt is estimated to have increased
at an 11-3/4 percent annual rate in April, the same as its March pace,
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV to QIV to
Mar. Apr. QI Apr.
Money and Credit Aggregates
Reserve Measures1
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing 534 455 -
Excess reserves 766 746
reserves and borrowing,
reserve maintenance
as lower nonfederal borrowing offset a pick-up in federal government debt
expansion. Still, growth in this aggregate from the fourth quarter of
range. Business borrowing has moderated a little so far this year, but
with merger-related debt issuance running close to the average pace of
consumer installment credit, also have remained quite strong.
(4) The nonborrowed reserve path for the intermeeting period
initially was constructed assuming $400 million of adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing at the discount window. In late April, however, the borrowing
assumption was raised to $450 million as special situation borrowing by a
number of thrift institutions increased. Over the three complete reserve
maintenance periods (ending May 8) following the last Committee meeting,
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaged about $475 million, with excess
reserves averaging somewhat higher than expected. Excluding special situa-
tion borrowing by thrifts, the borrowing average was around $380 million.
Seasonal borrowing has also been somewhat stronger than might have been
expected, given the prevailing configuration of the discount and money
market rates, perhaps reflecting the liberalized provisions of the regular
seasonal program as well as liquidity pressures at small banks. Thus far
in the current maintenance period adjustment plus seasonal borrowing has
averaged $830 million, boosted by a substantial further increase in special
situation borrowing by thrifts as well as borrowing by large banks faced
with unexpected funds needs late in the day. On May 16, special thrift
borrowing totaled $496 million (of which $22 million are now being reported
as extended credit).
(5) The federal funds rate has declined about 1/4 percentage
point since the previous FOMC meeting, with the rate averaging a shade
over 8-1/8 percent during the past two weeks. Other market interest rates
declined by about 3/4 to 1-1/4 percentage points, prior to announcement
of the reduction in the discount rate from 8 to 7-1/2 percent late Friday.1/
The sizable drop in market rates reflected in part abatement of previously
held expectations that Federal Reserve policy might take a firmer turn and,
as the intermeeting period progressed, a perception that some slight easing
might be under way or at least in prospect as the federal funds rate
declined somewhat. Markets were also affected by incoming evidence
indicating that the economy was not strengthening significantly from the
weak first quarter, by slowing in growth of the monetary aggregates, and by
the agreement in the Senate on reducing federal budget deficits. The
exchange value of the dollar depreciated, on balance, by 5 percent since
the last FOMC meeting in volatile markets;
The failures of two small government securities dealers and the problems of
privately-insured Maryland thrifts during the intermeeting period appear to
have had little systemic impact on domestic credit or foreign exchange markets;
although no general "flight to quality" appears to have emerged, there seems
to be some added caution in attitudes toward RPs of smaller dealers.
Prospective developments
(6) The table below gives three alternative specifications for
growth in the monetary aggregates over the March-to-June period, along with
the growth rates for this period chosen by the Committee at its March
meeting and the growth implied by each alternative for the two-month April-
to-June period. It also shows ranges for the federal funds rate associated
with each alternative. (More detailed data can be found on the charts
and table on the following pages).
Growth from March
to June
Implied growth
from April to
Associated federal
funds rate range
Alt. A
Alt. B
(7) The specifications of alternative B involve slightly
faster M1 growth over the three-month March-to-June period than adopted
at the last Cmmittee meeting, but much slower growth in the broader
Alt. C
March
FOMC
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Monthly Levels -- - -- --- - - --- ---- - -
Growth Rates
Monthly
Growth Rates
aggregates, given their weak performance in April. This behavior of the
aggregates is expected to be consistent with seasonal plus adjustment
borrowing at the discount window of $300 to $350 million, assuming that
borrowing by privately-insured thrift institutions experiencing persistent
liquidity difficulties is in effect extended credit. Total reserves
might increase at a 6 percent annual rate over May and June under
alternative B, with nonborrowed reserves (including extended credit)
increasing at 8 percent rate.
(8) The federal funds rate will probably trade around 7-3/4
percent, given the current 7-1/2 percent discount rate. Although the
discount rate cut was partly anticipated, market interest rates generally
are likely to settle somewhat below recent levels, with the 3-month Treasury
bill probably trading mostly around 7-1/4 percent. The exchange rate
may also decline somewhat, although some foreign authorities might take
advantage of the opportunity to allow their domestic interest rates to
decrease further.
(9) The decline in interest rates over the past several weeks
will be tending to boost money demand in May and June, and M1 under this
alternative is expected to increase at a 6-1/2 percent rate over the
March-to-June period, despite some weakening in projected nominal GNP
growth for the second quarter. On a quarterly-average basis, M1 would
increase at a 7-1/4 percent rate in the second quarter, which implies a
second consecutive quarterly decline in velocity, although at a somewhat
slower rate than in the first quarter; such a decline is roughly consistent
with model results. By June, M1 under alternative B would be about
$1-3/4 billion (or 0.3 percent) above the upper parallel line of the
band drawn from the fourth quarter end points of the 4 to 7 percent range
for 1985, with growth from QIV '84 to June at around an 8-1/2 percent
annual rate.
(10) Growth of M2 and M3 under alternative B would be expected
to pick up in May and June to a 6-1/2 to 7-1/2 percent annual rate on
average. Much of the pick-up would be expected in RPs and the other
managed liability components of the broader aggregates, partly as Treasury
deposits at banks drop after late May. Core deposits in the nontransactions
M2 are likely to expand more rapidly than the 6 percent pace of April,
and net inflows to MMMFs are likely to pick up, given the usual lagged
adjustments in changes in returns on these instruments relative to declines
in market rates.
(11) The debt of nonfinancial sectors is expected to increase
in the second quarter at a little under its pace of the first quarter, and
for the first half of 1985 would be right around the 12 percent upper limit
of the FOMC's monitoring range. Growth in U.S. government debt, seasonally
adjusted, will be a little larger in the second quarter than in the first,
although most of the Treasury's cash requirements for the current quarter
have already been met following the mid-quarter refunding. Credit raised
by businesses is projected to increase slightly in the second quarter.
Underlying needs for funds are being held down by relatively restrained
inventory accumulation, but borrowing totals continue to be swelled by
financing for mergers and stock repurchases; over the first half of the
year unusual issuance of debt for such purposes is estimated to account
for around 1-1/4 percentage points of total debt expansion of domestic
nonfinancial sectors. Mortgage borrowing is expected to continue at about
the first-quarter pace, but consumer credit growth likely will moderate
somewhat as spending on consumer durables increases more slowly.
(12) As compared with alternative B, alternative C involves
tighter reserve conditions thought more likely to be consistent with
constraining M1 growth to the 6 percent path for March to June chosen
by the Comittee at its last meeting. Expansion at this rate would leave
M1 quite close to, though still a bit above, the upper limit of its band.
This alternative, which contemplates M1 growth of a little under 5 percent
in June, would be expected to entail adjustment plus seasonal borrowing,
excluding that by thrifts in special situations, of around $450-$500
million. The pick-up in growth of the broader aggregates would be somewhat
less rapid under this alternative, with M2 and M3 expanding in a 5-3/4 to
(13) The federal funds rate would probably remain around
counter to market expectations given the cut in the discount rate, other
interest rates would rise appreciably from recent levels, retracing a
good part of the decreases since the last FOMC meeting. The dollar would
probably rise on foreign exchange markets.
(14) Alternative A contemplates lesser restraint on reserve
conditions than B. Borrowing would be expected to drop to around minimum
levels--perhaps around $200 to $250 million--and the federal funds rate
to fall to somewhat under the current 7-1/2 percent discount rate. Growth
of M1 from March to June would be expected to be around 7 percent, bringing
this aggregate to a level about 1/2 percent above the upper parallel band.
The further drop of interest rates expected under this alternative could
lead to substantial inflows into deposits and money funds, and growth in
M2 and M3 over May and June would probably pick up into a 7 to 8 percent
range. Interest rates and exchange rates would decline further, with the
three-month bill rate probably falling to near 7 percent.
Directive language
(15) Draft language for the operational paragraph, with
alternatives, is shown below with suggested deletions from the current
directive indicated in strike-through form and proposed additions in
caps. As in the past, it is assumed that the "degree of pressure
on reserve positions" is indexed primarily by the level of borrowing at
the discount window, excluding borrowing classified as extended credit.
In the proposed directive it is also assumed that the "degree of pressure
on reserve positions" excludes any special situation borrowing at thrifts
that has not yet been classified as extended credit. On that basis,
alternative B is suggested as consistent with maintaining the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions, although the associated funds
rate is likely to be lower than during the past several weeks owing to
the cut in the discount rate.
Bracketed alternative language with respect to the aggregates
is suggested for consideration in view of the substantial shortfall in
growth of the broader aggregates from expectations at the time of the
March meeting.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, taking
account of the progress against inflation, uncertainties in the
business outlook, and the exchange value of the dollar, the Committee
seeks to REDUCE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain (Alt. B)/INCREASE SOMEWHAT
(Alt. C)/the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. This
action is expected to be consistent with growth in M1, M2, and M3 at
annual rates of around [DEL: 6, 7, and 8] ____,____, AND ____ percent,
respectively, during the period from March to June. [Alternative:
This action is expected to be consistent with growth in M1, [DEL: M2 and
M3] at AN annual [rates] RATE of around [DEL: 6, 7, and 8] ____ percent,
[DEL: respectively,] during the period from March to June. M2 AND M3,
AFTER SHOWING LITTLE CHANGE IN APRIL, ARE EXPECTED TO GROW AT
ANNUAL RATES OF ____ AND ____ PERCENT, RESPECTIVELY, OVER MAY AND
JUNE ON AVERAGE.] Somewhat lesser reserve restraint might (WOULD) be
acceptable in the event of substantially slower growth of the mone-
tary aggregates while somewhat greater restraint might (WOULD)
be acceptable in the event of substantially higher growth. In
either case such a change would be considered in the context of
appraisals of the strength of the business expansion, progress
against inflation, and conditions in domestic credit and foreign
exchange markets. The Chairman may call for Committee consulta-
tion if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that
pursuit of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths
during the period before the next meeting is likely to be asso-
ciated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range
of [DEL: 6-to-10] ____ TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent May 20, 1985
.I aLono- erm
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr. 3
10
17
May I
8
Daily--May 10
16
17
week averages Data In column 7 are taken from ratios at a sample of savings and loan associations on the Friday following the end of the statemnt week.
Doroghue' Mony Fund Report Columns 12 and 13 are 1day uote for Friday and Thursday. respeclvely. After November 30. 1963, column 15 relets only to VA guaranteed loans Column 16 is the average iniial con-
following the d o the statement week. Column 13 Is the ond Buy revenue Index. Column 14 is an average tract rate on new commitments or one year ARM s at those institutions offering both fixed- and adjustable-
of contract Intet rates on new commltmnt for conventlonal flrst mortgages wih 80 percent loan-to-value rate mortgages with the same number of discount points
FR 1367 (446)
Security Dealer Positions
Millions of dollars
.;asn rosiulons
Treasury coupo
Treasury under over federal
bills 1 year 1 year agency
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Hay I
8
private
short-term
Forward and Futures Positions
I Treasury cupons
Treasury under over
bills 1 year I year
* Strictly conlidentlal
III
-327
Netl
Total
federal
aoencyao . ..... enc
private
shrS.rm
shnri.i.n,,
* 1,939
nay 20. 1985
Net Changes In System Holdings of Securities1 STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted CLASS II-FOMC
May 20, 1985
change for maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon 6 Includes changes in RPs (+), matched sale purchase transactions (-), and matched purchase sale
issues, and direct Treasury borrowing from the System transactions (+).
