Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
September 27, 1985
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) September 27, 1985
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) M1 accelerated in August to a 20-1/2 percent annual rate and,
based on preliminary data, growth appears to have remained rapid in September
at around an 11 percent rate. Expansion from June to September has been
well above the Committee's current 8 to 9 percent short-run path for M1.
From its second-quarter base, M1 has increased at about a 15 percent pace,
leaving it well in excess of its longer-run range. Based on the staff esti-
mate for nominal GNP in the third quarter, it appears that M1 velocity
declined at around an 8-1/2 percent annual rate--the sharpest drop since the
fourth quarter of 1982. The strength in M1 has been widespread by component.
Currency growth has averaged more than 8 percent since June, while demand
deposits have increased at a 7-1/2 percent rate after two months of double-
digit growth in late spring. Other checkable deposits grew most rapidly,
accelerating in August for the fourth consecutive month before slowing
appreciably in September.
(2) Normal lagged responses to declining interest rates explain
some of the strength in M1, but by no means all. The rapid increase of M1
in the third quarter particularly has been well in excess of model predic-
tions--by about 8 to 11 percentage points at an annual rate. The model
misses have been spread across all of the components of M1. While the
public appears to have increased its preference for M1-type assets
relative to income and interest rates, it has been difficult to identify
specific factors--such as heightened uncertainties or more cautious cash
management practices--that would lead to such a large shift in attitudes.
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
June QIV
to to
July Aug. Sept.Pe Sept.pe Sept.pe
Money and Credit Aggregates
Reserve Measures 2
Meno: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing 600 503 5884
Excess reserves 855 829 6294
pe--preliminary esti-ate
NOTE: Monthly reserves measures, including
calculated by prorating averages for
that overlap months.
excess reserves and borrowing, are
2-week reserves maintenance periods
(3) Developments within M2 tend to confirm an enlarged demand for
liquidity in recent months. The savings component of M2 continued to expand
unusually rapidly in August and early September, and growth in MMDAs also has
remained robust. At the same time, the runoff in small time deposits that
began at midyear has persisted into September. However, as the month pro-
gressed, there were indications that these trends could be diminishing.
Growth of M2 in the aggregate has been nearer the Committee's range than in
the case of M1. Between June and September, M2 grew at around a 9 percent
annual rate, somewhat above the Committee's short-run target path of 8-1/2
percent; the aggregate currently stands just above the parallel band
associated with its long-run range.
(4) M3 growth averaged more than 7 percent over the June-to-
September period, above its 6-1/2 percent short-run path. M3 was near the
middle of its long-run range in September. Growth picked up in August and
September, as commercial banks stepped up their use of managed liabilities,
including RPs, Eurodollars, and large CDs, in part to fund a runoff in
government deposits. Thrift institutions were net issuers of large time
deposits in September for the first time since late spring.
(5) Growth in domestic nonfinancial sector debt remained generally
brisk in August at about an 11-1/4 percent annual rate; debt expanded at
a 12-3/4 percent annual rate from the fourth quarter through August, above
its 9 to 12 percent annual growth range. Business borrowing was substantial
in August, concentrated in longer-term debt markets, but appears less heavy
in September. Tax-exempt financing has been quite strong, owing in part to
anticipated changes in tax law. The moderating trend in consumer credit
growth may have been interrupted in late August and September by special
financing programs by captive auto finance companies. Treasury debt
issuance has been constrained in late September by the lack of Congressional
action to raise the debt limit; the end-of-quarter financing auctions were
postponed and the size of weekly bill auctions has been cut back.
(6) Total reserves expanded at an 11-1/2 percent annual rate on
average in August and September, with a deceleration in the latter month
reflecting some slowing in M1 growth and a drop in the average level of
excess reserves. Nonborrowed reserves (including extended credit) followed
a similar pattern. The nonborrowed reserve path for the intermeeting period
was initially constructed allowing for $425 million of adjustment plus
seasonal borrowing at the discount window, at the center of the $350 to $500
million range indicated as the Committee's preference at the August meeting.
With M1 diverging further from the FOMC's path, and M2 and M3 also strong
relative to objectives, the allowance was raised to $500 million in early
September. Actual borrowing, after being boosted substantially by a wire
transfer problem in early September, averaged $515 million in the most recent
maintenance period.
(7) The federal funds rate averaged close to 7-7/8 percent in
each week since the August FOMC meeting, little changed from its level prior
to the meeting. The funds rate was expected to average around 8 percent
following the minor adjustment in borrowing in early September. Reserve
pressures did not show through until late on the settlement day of the most
recent reserve period, as money market trading was dominated by market
expectations that underlying restraint on bank reserve positions would be
unchanged. Such attitudes in recent days were perhaps reinforced by inter-
pretations reported in the press of the significance for monetary policy
of the G-5 announcement last weekend that implied concerted action con-
sistent with a decline in the exchange value of the dollar. Treasury bill
rates have declined about 10 to 35 basis points since the last FOMC meeting,
influenced in part by the large paydown of bills occasioned by debt ceiling
problems. Interest rates on Treasury bonds, meanwhile, have shown little net
changes, while yields on federal agency securities have advanced rather
sharply in the wake of the reports that the Farm Credit System might need
substantial financial assistance. Spreads of Farm Credit securities over
comparable Treasury issues are averaging about 60 to 100 basis points, com-
pared with more normal levels of 5 to 25 basis points.
(8) The weighted average foreign exchange value of the dollar has
declined on balance about 4 percent since the last meeting. In the first
three weeks of the intermeeting period the dollar rose by more than 5 per-
cent in reaction to apparently more favorable data on economic activity,
particularly August employment figures. Subsequent economic indicators
looked less buoyant, however, and the dollar began to retreat. Then, on
September 23, following the G-5 announcement, the dollar dropped more than
the next four days, the dollar declined a little further on average, reflect-
ing in particular weakness against the yen.
. The Desk has sold (for Treasury and System account) a
total of $310 million-$214 million against yen and the remainder against
Policy Alternatives
(9) The table below provides three alternative specifications
for growth of the monetary aggregates from September to December along
with associated federal funds rate ranges. (More detailed data, including
growth implied for each alternative from the base periods for the long-
run ranges to the fourth quarter, are presented in the table and charts
on the following pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from
September to December
Ml 7-1/2 6-1/2 5-1/2
M2 7-1/2 6-3/4 6
M3 7 6-1/2 6
Associated federal
funds rate range 5 to 9 6 to 10 7 to 11
(10) Each alternative involves a marked slowing in M1 growth,
but at the same time all would lead to growth over the second half of the
year well above the FOMC's target range for that period. For M1 to reach
the top of its cone by December would require a decline at a one percent
annual rate from September, and a much sharper drop of about 5-1/2 percent
at an annual rate would be necessary to produce a fourth-quarter average
consistent with the upper bound of the Committee's range. Although M1
demand can be expected to abate following its extraordinary surge since
late spring, a decline in outstanding M1 over a three-month period seems
unlikely, given the upward tilt provided by inflows of savings funds into
NOW accounts at around current or even somewhat higher interest rates.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Ml M2 M3
------------------------------------- ------------------------ ---------------------
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
October 614.6 614.2 613.9 2543.2 2541.7 2540.2 3178.7 3177.3 3175.9
November 618.8 617.8 616.9 2560.2 2556.5 2552.9 3198.0 3195.0 3192.0
December 622.9 621.3 619.8 2575.6 2570.9 2566.1 3215.2 3211.2 3207.3
Growth Rates
Monthly
Growth Rates
Chart 4
DEBT
BIll Ione of do) Ir
1 6800
- ACTUAL LEVEL
--- PROJECTED LEVEL -- 6600
a - 6400
-- 6200
-- 6000
-- 5800
S I 1 I I I I I I I I I I I I
SN D J F M A M J J A S 0 N D J
Thus, a very sharp tightening of reserve pressures would appear necessary
to bring M1 within the current longer-run range by year-end. On the other
hand, M2 and M3 are likely to be near or within their respective ranges for
the year without so substantial a tightening.
(11) Alternative B assumes unchanged pressures on reserve positions,
with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window between $450
and $550 million and federal funds trading around 8 percent, or a bit higher.
Ml growth would be anticipated to slow to a 6-1/2 percent annual rate from
September to December. Available data for September suggest that some abate-
ment of the pronounced shifting to highly liquid monetary assets, including
transactions deposits, already is in train. This process would be further
encouraged if public expectations of higher interest rates on market instru-
ments and small time deposits, which seemed to contribute in a degree to the
earlier liquification, began to give way in the face of essentially stable
short-term interest rates through year-end. In addition, M1 could be rela-
tively weak in October if its unusual contraction in October 1984 indicated
the emergence of a new seasonal pattern (not yet reflected in seasonal
factors). Even with the slowing of M1 in caning months anticipated by
this alternative, growth on a quarterly average basis, at about 8-3/4
percent for the fourth quarter, implies a further decline in velocity on
the order of 3 percent, given the staff GNP forecast. Such a decrease
would bring the drop for the year to around 5-1/2 percent, about matching
the decline over 1982 that was unprecedented over a four-quarter period
in the postwar years.
(12) Growth of M2 and M3 is also expected to slow in the
September-to-December period under alternative B, owing primarily to the
deceleration of their M1 component. This slowing would bring M2 to the
upper bound of its annual range by the fourth quarter, implying average
growth in the fall quarter more in line with, though still above, the
projected expansion of nominal GNP. M3 should remain around the middle
of its long-run range. Issuance of managed liabilities is anticipated
to pick up as core deposit growth slows. Banks may more actively offer
such liabilities, however, should they decide to enlarge their securities
portfolios greatly given the unusually heavy fourth-quarter issuance of
Treasury debt and tax-exempt securities.
(13) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected
to grow faster over the final three months of the year as Treasury bor-
rowing surges far above the third-quarter pace to finance an enlarged
deficit and to make up for postponements related to debt ceiling problems.
Heavier issuance of debt by the business sector also is expected, re-
flecting a resumption of inventory accumulation and a bit weaker cash
flow, while net equity issuance is assumed to remain deeply negative as
the pace of merger and other financial restructuring activities continues
substantial. Slower growth of consumer credit over the quarter as a
whole, related to a weakening in household spending on durable goods, is
likely to more than offset an edging up of mortgage borrowing. Overall,
growth of domestic nonfinancial debt for the year is projected at more
than 12-1/2 percent, compared with the 12 percent upper bound of the
FOMC's monitoring range. Roughly one percentage point of the growth
reflects unusual merger and financial restructuring activity and another
small amount (perhaps 1/4 percentage point or so) represents acceleration
of tax-exempt borrowing in anticipation of possible tax law changes.
(14) Both total and nonborrowed reserves are likely to grow at
around a 7 percent annual rate over the final three months of the year,
given reserve pressures assumed under alternative B. With federal funds
trading persistently around 8 percent, other private short-term rates
would rise from current levels. A relatively larger upward adjustment of
bill yields could occur once the debt ceiling is raised and net issuance
of bills is resumed. The 3-month bill rate might increase to the 7-1/4
percent area. Bond yields would also rise, at least temporarily, as the
Treasury, partly because of debt ceiling problems, markets about $47
billion of notes and bonds ($26 billion for new cash) within a short
period in the latter part of October and early November. The firming of
interest rates that appears possible under this alternative could exert
sane upward pressure on the dollar in foreign exchange markets. Under
those conditions, a continued decline in the dollar would depend in part
on the timing and extent of exchange market intervention activity. The
interaction between the dollar and interest rates is, of course, two-way.
As the dollar declines, interest rates could come under further upward
pressure, reflecting market concerns that more attractive returns would
be required on U.S. securities at a time when external financing needs
remained large and foreign investors may come to expect further exchange
(15) Alternative A assumes a reduction of adjustment plus sea-
sonal borrowings to a $250 to $350 million range, or a cut in the discount
rate. The federal funds rate would drop to around 7-1/2 percent. The
percent range, around the low reached briefly in mid-June. Private short-
term rates would also decline. Quality spreads, which have tended to
widen in recent months, would probably narrow somewhat as debt servicing
burdens are lessened by lower market rates and in reflection of more
favorable odds of a strengthening in real economic growth. Market edginess
about Farm Credit System and FHLB securities is likely to persist, however,
until resolution of the problems of these agencies seem more clearly in
prospect. The international value of the dollar could be expected to move
lower, perhaps substantially given the context of the recent G-5 announce-
ment and intervention policy. In that case bond yields might not decline
in sympathy with short-term rates, partly for reasons noted in paragraph
(14) but also partly because of possible concerns about inflationary impli-
cations of a rapid drop in the dollar occurring in tandem with an easing of
money markets and relatively rapid M1 growth.
(16) An easing of reserve pressures would be expected to keep M1
farther above its upper bound than under alternative B and increase the
likelihood that M2 would remain slightly above the upper end of its range
through December. The fall in market rates under alternative A could retard
a movement by the public away from highly liquid monetary assets. Deposits
subject to interest prohibitions or ceilings would become relatively more
attractive, while because of adjustment lags on offering rates, spreads for
super NOWs, MMDAs, and money funds relative to market instruments would
temporarily improve. In contrast, M3 would very likely stay well within its
annual range, moving only slightly more above its midpoint by December, as
reduced reliance by depository institutions on issuance of managed liabilities
partly offsets the greater influx of core deposits.
(17) Alternative C assumes some tightening of reserve conditions
consistent with a marked slowing of M1 growth over the next three months
to around a 5-1/2 percent annual rate and with enough moderation of M2 growth
possibly to move just within the target range for the year. Borrowing is
assumed to average $650 to $750 million, with federal funds moving up to
around 8-1/2 percent. Such a firming of policy would tend to surprise
markets. The 3-month bill rate might rise to around 7-3/4 percent, and
bond yields would also show a substantial increase, particularly during
the Treasury financing periods. Private interest rates may rise somewhat
more than comparable Treasury yields because of market concerns about the
health of certain sectors and financial institutions. Some upward pressure
on the exchange value of the dollar may also be expected, partly as the
efficacy of intervention operations in that context is brought into
question. However, more favorable investor attitudes toward the dollar
would be tempered if expectations about U.S. economic activity worsened
in the wake of higher interest rates.
Directive language
(18) Proposed language is shown below not only for the
operational paragraph of the directive but also for a paragraph dealing
with the long-run ranges for the monetary aggregates for 1985, should
the Committee wish to reconsider them at this time. Such a re-evaluation
may be needed in particular because of developments affecting M1. The
proposed paragraph on the long-run ranges, shown immediately below, could
be placed in the directive just before the operational paragraph.
PROPOSED ADDITIONAL PARAGRAPH ON 1985 RANGES
At its October meeting the Committee reviewed the long-run
ranges for the monetary aggregates for 1985, particularly the range
for M1 established in July. Taking account of the further sharp drop
in M1 velocity in the third quarter, and evidence of a shift in pre-
ferences by the public toward highly liquid assets, the Committee
agreed that growth of M1 above the 3 to 8 percent range covering
the period from the second quarter to the fourth quarter of 1985
would be appropriate [acceptable]. The Committee reaffirmed its
earlier views with respect to the other aggregates.
(19) With regard to the operational paragraph, two variants
are presented. The first closely follows the format of the previous
directive, and includes suggested deletions from the current directive
and proposed additions indicated in the usual manner. A proposed option
in this variant (shown in brackets) would explicitly indicate accepta-
bility of a shortfall in the rate of M1 growth from expectations.
The second variant is presented for consideration should the
Committee wish to restructure the directive to reflect the more coordinate
treatment of money and the other financial and economic variables in the
inplementation of policy that has characterized recent Committee practice.
The word "possibly" shown in the bracketed section is intended to provide
an option for asymmetric intermeeting reserve adjustments--an option
that has been indicated in past directives by the use of "might" or
"would" in the sentences pertaining to unexpected growth in the aggre-
gates that have been superseded by the proposed wording in variant II.
The last sentence of the variant has been adjusted to conform with
the more coordinate treatment of the aggregates and other variables.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
Variant I
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/ maintain (Alt. B)/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the EXISTING degree of pressure on
reserve positions [DEL: sought in recent weeks]. This action is expected
to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 at annual rates of
around [DEL: 8-1/2 and 6-1/2] ____ AND ____ percent, respectively, during
the period from [DEL: June to] September TO DECEMBER. M1 growth is
expected to slow from its [DEL: recent] THIRD-QUARTER pace, TO AN ANNUAL
RATE OF AROUND ____ PERCENT [DEL: but given the rapid growth in
recent weeks, expansion over the June to] September TO DECEMBER
period; [EVEN SLOWER GROWTH OVER THE NEXT THREE MONTHS WOULD BE
APPROPRIATE IN THE CONTEXT OF SATISFACTORY ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE
AND GIVEN RECENT VERY RAPID GROWTH IN M1] [DEL: may be at an 8 to 9
percent annual rate.] Somewhat greater restraint would be
acceptable in the event of substantially higher growth in the
monetary aggregates. Somewhat lesser restraint would be
acceptable in the event of substantially slower growth. In
either case such a change would be considered in the context
of appraisals of the strength of the business expansion,
developments in foreign exchange markets, progress against
inflation, and conditions in domestic and international credit
markets. The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if
if appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit
of the monetary objectives and related reserve paths during
the period before the next meeting is likely to be associated
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of
[DEL: 6-to-10] ____ TO ____ percent.
Variant II
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Ccmmittee seeks to decrease somewhat/ maintain/ increase somewhat
the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. This action
is expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the
period from September to December at annual rates of ____ and ____
percent, respectively. A marked slowing of M1 growth over the
period to a ____ percent annual rate is also anticipated. Some-
what greater or lesser reserve restraint [somewhat greater or
possibly somewhat lesser/ somewhat lesser or possibly somewhat
greater] would be acceptable depending on behavior of the aggre-
gates, appraisals of the strength of the business expansion, develop-
ments in foreign exchange markets, progress against inflation, and
conditions in domestic and international credit markets. The Chair-
man may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager
for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the period
before the next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal
funds rate persistently outside a range of ____ to ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
September 30, 1985
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
July
Aug.
It26Jtly 310172431
Daly-Sept. 20
26
I1.19
8.43
FR 1387 (985
Security Dealer Positions
Millions of dollars
September 30, 1985
Csh Positions Forward and Futuree peotion
Sauy coupons I Treasury oupon IP"od Nl1e Treasury under I over federal prvate Tresury under ver I lederl privrt
Total bills year 1 year aency short-ternnm bills 1 year 1 year j gency s Mhort-lrm
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
July 3
10l;
11?
24
31
Sept. 4
II
18
25
to10
95
61
-IS-I-64
b8
-7
-I
-13
-43
-I1
-37
-42
Strictly confidential
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
September 30, 1985
Treasury Treasury coupons net purchases
3  Federal agencies net purchases
change
2  w | 15 | 0 over 10 holdin1yr 1-5 5-10 over 10 total 1-5 510 over 10 total tol
June 2,099 - -- -- -- - -- -- - - 2,039 2,766
July -200 - - -- - -- - -- -- -- -246 -1,815
Aug. 3,056 -- 6 6 -- 12 3,038 -53
Aug. 7 68 -- 6 6 - 12 - -- - - - 79 406
Sept. 4 2,615 - .. .. - -- - - - 2.615 813
change for maturing bills Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon 6 Includes changes in RPs (+), matched sale purchase transactions (-), and matched purchase sale
issues, and direct Treasury borrowing from the System transactions (+).
4 Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts only. Excludes redemptions and maturity
FR 1R8 171811
