Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
July 5, 1985
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC July 5, 1985
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) With growth very rapid in May and June, M1 expanded at about
a 13-1/4 percent annual rate over the March-to-June interval, well above the
path for that period of a little over 6 percent adopted at the last FOMC
meeting and bringing the aggregate far above the upper edge of the parallel
band associated with its 1985 growth range. The overall strength in demand
for M1, even as income growth remained moderate, probably has reflected in
some degree the effects of recent interest rate declines. The velocity of
M1 has declined by about 5 percent at an annual rate in both the first and
second quarters, in association with growth in M1 averaging 10-1/2 percent
over the two quarters.
(2) The extent of M1 growth over the past two months has been
much greater than monthly models predict. Strength has been evident
during that period in all major components of M1 and is widespread across
Reserve Districts. However, demand deposits have been particularly strong
for several weeks now. Examination of the data and contacts with banks
do not suggest any clear special factor at work-such as a change in cash
management techniques in response to the E.F. Hutton development or a
much larger rise in compensating balances than would be expected in
response to recent interest rate declines. It may be noted, though, that
the total Teasury balance dropped very sharply from mid-May to mid-June,
perhaps providing some temporary stimulus to demand deposits at the time.
(3) Growth in M2 and M3 picked up further in June to 13-3/4 and
of M2 strengthened considerably in June as flows into MMDAs and money funds
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
March
to QIV QIV
April May JuneP JuneP to QIIP to JuneP
Money and Credit Aggregates
Reserve Measures1
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing
were sizable in response to relatively favorable yields on these instruments,
whose offering rates, as usual, lagged behind the recent decline in market
rates. Over the three-month period ending in June, M2 and M3 expanded at
annual rates of 7-1/4 and 6 percent-somewhat stronger than anticipated at
the time of the last meeting, and in the case of M2 in line with earlier
expectations at the time of the March meeting. By June, M2 was slightly
above the upper end of its long-run target growth cone and M3 was still well
within its range.
(4) Growth in total domestic nonfinancial debt has slowed from
its first-quarter pace, though second-quarter expansion remains relatively
high at around an 11-3/4 percent annual rate. Both federal and private
sectors contributed to the recent deceleration in debt. Business borrowing
has continued to be boosted by unusually large debt-financed retirements of
corporate equity, which are estimated to account for around one percentage
point of total credit growth thus far this year. Issuance of debt by
state and local governments has been quite heavy as refunding issues have
(5) Total reserves grew at about a 22 percent annual rate over
May and June, on average, reflecting strength in required reserves against
transaction accounts. The nonborrowed reserve path over the entire inter-
meeting period was constructed assuming $350 million of adjustment plus
seasonal borrowing, abstracting from any borrowing still in the adjustment
category by thrifts in special situations. Excluding special situations,
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaged around $510 million over the
past six weeks--fluctuating on a weekly basis between $240 million and $850
million. Throughout the period, excess reserves ran higher than expected,
particularly during the last maintenance period containing the mid-year
statement date, and averaged around $940 million. By mid-June virtually
all special situation borrowing had been reclassified as extended credit,
and total borrowing by privately-insured thrift institutions has dropped
to $330 million most recently from $463 million at the time of the May
FOMC meeting.
(6) Federal funds since the last FOMC meeting have traded
mainly in the 7-1/2 to 7-3/4 percent range reached following the discount
rate cut, although around mid-June the funds rate fell to around 7 percent
and below. Very recently, the funds rate moved above 8 percent for a time
with the approach of the July 4 holiday and an unusually sharp reserve
drain as Treasury balances at Federal Reserve Banks soared on the settlement
date of two new Treasury issues. Other market rates generally varied within
a wide range over the intermeeting period, in response to the ebb and flow
of expectations about the proximity of further cuts in the discount rate,
incoming economic information, and at times unanticipated money supply
developments. On balance, Treasury bill rates are currently around 60
basis points below their levels at the time of the last FOMC meeting, while
commercial paper and CD rates have declined less, as risk premiums widened
somewhat in response to concerns about the health of some financial institu-
tions. The prime rate was reduced from 10 to 9-1/2 percent. In the capital
markets, Treasury and corporate bond yields are down a little more than
levels; mortgage rates have fallen by about 80 basis points in lagged
response to earlier market gains.
(7) Foreign exchange market conditions have generally been less
volatile since the last FOMC meeting than in earlier periods of the year.
The dollar has declined by about 2-1/2 percent on a weighted average basis,
with trading in a relatively narrow range. Interest differentials among
major currencies have shown little change since the last Committee meeting.
Long-run targets
(8) Two alternative long-run targets for the monetary and debt
aggregates for 1985, plus the currently established targets, are shown
below. Alternative I differs only with respect to M1. Alternative II
suggests a larger revision for M1, together with small increases in the
upper limits of the M2 and debt ranges. At mid-year, M2 was around its
upper bound and debt was running strong, so that some adjustments of the
ranges for those aggregates might be considered.
Growth Ranges for 1985
Current Alt. I Alt. II
Ml 4 to 7 4 to 8 5 to 9
M2 6 to 9 6 to 9 6 to 9-1/2
M3 6 to 9-1/2 6 to 9-1/2 6 to 9-1/2
Debt 9 to 12 9 to 12 9 to 12-1/2
(9) The table below focuses on the arithmetic of achieving
the upper bounds of the current and proposed M1 long-run growth ranges
for the year 1985, given growth of 10-1/2 percent annual rate over the
first half of 1985 (QIV '84 to QII '85). A particular problem arises
because M1 was so strong in the latter part of the second quarter. This
high jumping off point means that attainment of, say, the 7 percent upper
limit of the current long-run range would entail virtually no month-by-
month growth on average over the balance of the year-as can be seen from
the table, one-half of one percent at an annual rate. However, implied
growth over the second half measured from QII '85 to QIV '85 would be
higher-about 3-1/4 percent annual rate-owing to the carry-over effect
of the acceleration of M1 late in the second quarter. The upper limit
of the alternative II range could be achieved with 5 percent, annual rate,
month-by-month growth, which would yield substantial quarterly average
Ml Growth rate from Implied M1 Growth
QIV '84 to QIV '85 QII '85-QIV '85 June-December
(10) The staff GNP projection for 1985 assumes, given recent
developments, M1 growth above the upper limit of the current range--
increasing 8 to 9 percent for the year--with interest rates showing
little net change over the balance of the year. Growth of M2 and M3
for the year is expected to be within their current long-run ranges,
though well into the upper part for M2, while debt growth may be just
above the upper limit of the range.
(11) The alternatives presented in paragraph (8) above assume
the Committee retains the QIV '84 base for M1. However, as in mid-1983,
the FOMC may wish to contemplate shifting the base to the second quarter
of 1985; relevant economic considerations are discussed in the next
paragraph. Because of the very rapid growth of M1 toward the end of the
spring quarter, the aggregate would still be starting off high relative
to a rebased long-run path. If the Committee chose to retain the existing
that the range applied to the QII '85-QIV '85 period), the upper limit
could be attained with growth from June-to-December at a 4-3/4 percent,
annual rate, while growth around the mid-point of the range would be
consistent with month-by-month growth averaging 3 percent at an annual
rate. If an 8 percent upper limit were employed in a rebased range,
June-to-December growth of 6 percent, annual rate, would be consistent
with the upper limit.
(12) The economic argument for shifting the base is similar
to the consideration that prompted the base shift in mid-1983-the
likelihood that the rapid growth of M1 above target was needed to
accommodate to a "permanent" downward shift in the level of velocity and
thus did not entail the need to offset rapid growth by commensurately
lower growth subsequently.1/ Assuming the recent decline in velocity
represents a "permanent" adjustment, it could be appropriate to rebase,
with the new M1 target range designed to be more consistent with the
longer-run trend of velocity (abstracting from interest rate movements)
allowing for a reasonable range of actual velocity variation in light
of emerging economic and financial conditions. The target would also
need to take account of the speed with which the FOMC wishes to move to
decelerate price inflation further and assessment of the prospective
strength of the economy. It would not seem appropriate to rebase, however,
if the Committee felt that the recent burst of M1 growth would contribute
in the period ahead to undesirably strong demand pressures and to acceler-
ating inflation or felt that rebasing would be perceived as signaling
less determination to resist inflation. In those circumstances, it would
be desirable to aim at a greater slowdown of M1 growth than is implied by
rebasing, although one might still wish to consider raising the current
Ml range so as to avoid a deceleration that is unduly abrupt, given the
/ Factors behind the recent behavior of M1, in comparison with 1982-83,
and implications for monetary targeting are discussed in some detail
in the memorandum circulated to the Committee under date of July 2,
1985.
remaining lagged effects on M1 demand that can be expected from the
recent declines in interest rates.
(13) Regarding tentative money and credit targets to be set
for 1986, three alternatives are presented below. Alternative I encom-
passes a 4 to 7 percent range for M1, the same as that currently in place,
and also an unchanged range for M2. The growth range for M3 has an upper
limit that is one-half percent lower than the current one and the credit
range is lower by a full percentage point. Nominal GNP is projected by
the staff to grow about 1/2 percentage point more than this year, but
with no further worsening in the current account deficit expected,
spending and the credit needed to finance it would tend to grow less than
this year. In addition, debt growth should be damped by an abatement of
mergers and other activities associated with greater leveraging by busi-
nesses. Alternative II widens the M1 and M2 ranges to provide added
flexibility in the face of uncertainties such as those described in
paragraphs (14) to (17) below. Alternative III represents a stronger
move in the direction of attaining reasonable price stability.
Growth ranges for 1986
Alt. I Alt. II Alt. III
M1 4 to 7 4 to 8 3-1/2 to 6-1/2
M2 6 to 9 6 to 9-1/2 5-1/2 to 8-1/2
M3 6 to 9 6 to 9 5-1/2 to 8-1/2
Debt 8 to 11 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 7-1/2 to 10-1/2
(14) The staff's GNP projection for next year assumes M1 growth
on the order of 5-1/2 percent and little change in the level of market
interest rates from recent levels. That assumption is encompassed by
all of the alternatives, with alternative II representing a looser and
alternative III a tighter fit. The Committee's choice of monetary targets
would depend on, among other things, the extent to which it finds the
projected growth of GNP acceptable, the pace at which it wishes to move
toward price stability, and the extent to which it wishes to allow for
uncertainties such as the sustainability of real growth under current
credit and exchange market conditions, the course of fiscal policy, the
behavior of the dollar, and effects of institutional change.
(15) In general, money growth on the high side would likely be
needed if nominal interest rates were, contrary to our expectation, to
notch down further next year. Indeed, even the upper limit of alternative
II may not encompass developments in the event of a substantial downward
adjustment of interest rates, as the experience of 1982-1983 and from late
last year through the first half of this year tends to suggest. Nominal
interest rates could drop if the present level of real interest rates
turns out to be too high, as the expansion matures further, to sustain
real growth at a satisfactory pace (assuming the level of real rates is
not reduced by acceleration of inflation). Nominal rates could also drop
in the event of a further decline of inflation expectations. The evolution
of fiscal policy could also affect interest rates, though perhaps not
substantially given the range of probable fiscal outcomes. In principle,
a move toward greater fiscal restraint than the $50 billion federal deficit
cut in the fiscal year 1986 assumed by the staff should exert greater
downward presure on interest rates, with potential one-time feedback
effects on money demand. On the other hand, a failure to act on the
deficit would exert some upward impact on interest rates and possibly
also inflation expectations.
(16) The behavior of the dollar on exchange markets is another
area of uncertainty. The GNP outlook assumes a moderate decline, but
a very sharp decline would entail certain fundamental changes in the
underlying economic situation. Upward price pressures would be stronger,
there would be a greater stimulus to domestic output from the declining
dollar, and there would be a risk of worsening inflationary expectations.
Desirable behavior of money under these conditions would depend in part
on other surrounding circumstances. But, in general, keeping money growth
at rates earlier contemplated would involve upward pressure on interest
rates, with real GNP growth sustained over time by the positive impact
on domestic production of the dollar depreciation. The continued restraint
on money growth would work to check tendencies for inflationary expecta-
tions to rise. An increase in money growth might relieve potential
strains in financial markets, and help ensure that economic growth was
not unduly depressed by behavior of interest-sensitive domestic sectors,
but probably at the cost of worsening the long-run inflationary consequences
of a sharp dollar decline. A lessening of money growth would do most to
restrain any inflationary impact of a sharp dollar decline, but would
tend to exacerbate financial strains as added upward pressures were
placed on interest rates and would most risk a weakening, at least in the
short run, of real growth.
(17) The institutional changes known to be in prospect for next
year are the lifting of ceiling rates on regular NOW accounts and savings
deposits on March 31, 1986, and the removal of the present $1,000 minimum
balance restriction on super NOWs and MMDAs on January 1 of that year.
There will undoubtedly be some resulting deposit shifts. However, we do
not at this point expect any significant impact on growth of M1 or M2,
taking into account experience with reductions in the minimum balance
earlier this year, the availability of ceiling-free checking and savings
accounts in any event for sane time now, and the observation that most
banks currently impose minimum balance requirements above $1,000 on
regular NOW accounts (if fees are to be avoided) and on super NOWs.
Near-term policy alternatives
(18) The table below gives three alternative specifications
for the monetary aggregates over the June-to-September period along with
associated federal funds rate ranges. (More detailed data, including
growth implied under each alternative for the fourth quarter to September,
can be found on the table and charts on the following pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from
June to Sept.
M1 7 5-1/2 4
M2 8-1/2 7-1/2 6-1/2
M3 8 7-1/4 6-1/2
Associated federal
funds rate range 5 to 9 6 to 10 7 to 11
(19) Alternative B contemplates a slowing of M1 growth to a
with seasonal and adjustment borrowing at the discount window at around
the $350 million level used in constructing reserve paths since the last
FOMC meeting. Federal funds would generally trade in a 7-1/2 to 7-3/4
percent area. Growth in total and nonborrowed reserves would slow to 3-1/2
and 5-1/2 percent annual rates respectively over the June-to-September
period as the expansion of transaction deposits moderates.
(20) In part, the slowing of M1 growth under alternative B is
expected to result from a substantial weakening in the demand deposit
component, working off a portion of its recent unusually large bulge.
The rapid growth of M1 late last quarter has brought money balances to a
point where they might be considered to be sufficiently high to finance
at least some significant GNP growth in the third quarter without further
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M1 M2 M3
------------------------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
---------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
July 594.6 594.4 594.2 2490.1 2489.2 2488.3 3114.4 3113.4 3112.4
August 598.0 597.1 596.2 2508.0 2504.2 2500.4 3137.8 3133.7 3129.6
September 601.3 599.1 596.9 2524.7 2518.5 2512.4 3162.8 3157.0 3151.3
Growth Rates
Monthly
Growth Rates
expansion of M1. Indeed, if M1 remained at its June level during the
third quarter, average growth for the quarter would be more than 5-3/4
percent at an annual rate. While this suggests that transactions needs
of the third quarter may have been in some measure already satisfied, M1
growth over the months ahead is likely to be sustained by the continuing
effect on money demand of the recent declines of interest rates, if for no
other reason. On a quarterly average basis, M1 would be expected to
increase at around a 10 percent annual rate, implying another appreciable
decline in velocity of more than 3-3/4 percent at an annual rate given
the Greenbook GNP forecast.
(21) Under alternative B, M1 by September would be about 10
percent at an annual rate above the fourth-quarter 1984 long-run target
base. It would of course be less high relative to a long-run target
rebased to QII '85, with growth from that base to September at an 8-1/2
percent annual rate. M1 expansion would be expected to slow further on a
month-by-month basis in the fourth quarter, to a 3 to 4 percent annual
rate, if reserve market conditions remain essentially unchanged, as the
effects on money demand of recent interest rate declines wear off and
velocity returns to around its expected trend rate of growth (absent
interest rate changes). As a result, M1 by the fourth quarter on average
might be about 8-3/4 percent above its QIV '84 level and 7 percent,
annual rate, above a QII '85 level.
(22) Growth of M2 and M3 under alternative B would also be
expected to slow relative to their average pace of May and June. In
addition to the moderation of M1 growth, the nontransaction components of
M2 and M3 should expand less rapidly over coming months, with inflows to
money market funds and MMDAs tapering off as their yields fall into more
normal alignment with market interest rates. Moreover, issuance of
managed liabilities in the broader aggregates is unlikely to strengthen
greatly, given expectations of some weakening in bank credit growth and
continuing constraints on thrift asset expansion from capital requirements
and market concerns about the thrifts' financial condition. Under
alternative B, M2 in September would be just below the upper end of its
current long-run range, while M3 would be expected to be a little above
the midpoint of its range.
(23) Growth in the debt of nonfinancial sectors is expected
to slow slightly further in the third quarter, but expansion through
September might be around the upper end of the Committee's 9 to 12 percent
long-run range. Some of the moderation in overall debt growth is attri-
butable to less rapid expansion of federal government debt on a seasonally
adjusted basis. In addition, state and local governments' advance re-
funding of existing debt is expected to taper off. Consumer credit growth
also should slow along with the growth of consumption expenditures--
including those for durable goods. Mortgage credit expansion is expected
to edge higher, however, as housing activity responds to the previous
declines in interest rates. Underlying needs for funds by businesses may
increase, with capital spending expanding in the face of relatively flat
profits, but borrowing to finance mergers, buyouts and stock retirements
is projected to moderate a little. In the fourth quarter, growth of debt
of private nonfinancial sectors is expected to remain close to the third-
quarter pace, assuming interest rates stay around current levels. However,
federal government borrowing is likely to pick up, seasonally adjusted,
and credit growth for the year probably would be just above the upper end
of the Committee's long-run range.
(24) Unchanged reserve and money market conditions, as under
alternative B, are likely to be associated with a modest back-up in short-
term interest rates as the summer progresses, given fairly widespread
expectations of some easing of Federal Reserve policy over coming months.
The 3-month Treasury bill rate might rise to around 7-1/4 percent. Bond
yields, although increasing a bit initially in sympathy with short-term
rates, might change relatively little on balance, since long-term rates
are high in real terms and relative to short-term rates. Some upward
movement in long-term rates may develop, however, should there be sub-
stantial disappointment with Congressional action on federal deficits.
In foreign exchange markets, the dollar is expected to remain within
the trading range prevailing in the last few months.
(25) Alternative A contemplates an easing in money market
conditions consistent with somewhat more rapid money growth over the June-
to-September period. Borrowing at the discount window would drop to
minimal levels of around $150-200 million, or a more modest reduction in
borrowing might be accompanied by a cut in the discount rate to 7 percent.
The federal funds rate under this alternative would be expected to decline
toward 7 percent. Total and nonborrowed reserves would increase at 5-1/2
and 9-1/4 percent annual rates, respectively, over the summer. Other market
interest rates would fall relatively little under this alternative from
most recent levels-levels that appear to reflect anticipations of some
easing by the Federal Reserve over the near-term. The three-month bill
would probably trade in a 6-1/2 to 6-3/4 percent area. Private short-term
rates might decline more than bill rates as the lower overall level of
rates was seen as helping those financial institutions currently under
some stress. The dollar would decline in foreign exchange markets.
(26) Alternative A incorporates M1 growth at a 7 percent
annual rate over the third quarter, and at a 10-1/2 percent annual rate
from its fourth-quarter 1984 base. Growth of M2, and to a lesser extent
M3, would be bolstered under this alternative, as lower interest rates
boosted flows into MMDAs and MMFs. The lower interest rates likely to
develop, if maintained over the balance of the year, would also tend,
along with stronger growth in income, to raise money demand into the
fourth quarter. Under those conditions, growth of M1, M2 and debt for
the QIV 1984 to QIV 1985 period could be around the upper ends of the
specifications of alternative II.
(27) Alternative C contemplates a more marked slowing of money
growth over the months ahead than alternative B, with M1 specified to
grow at a 4 percent annual rate. Adjustment plus seasonal credit at the
discount window would be expected to increase to around $600 million, with
growth in nonborrowed reserves slowing to a one percent annual rate over
the coming three months. The federal funds rate would be expected to
rise to around the 8-1/4 to 8-1/2 percent area, and other interest rates,
as well as the foreign exchange value of the dollar, would increase
substantially in response to the unexpected tightening in money markets.
This greater slowing of money growth and tightening of credit conditions
would increase the odds that M1 might approach its current long-run upper
limit by late this year, although growth at the upper bound of or within
the current range would probably require a further tightening of reserve
Directive language
(28) Given below is draft directive language, with variants,
relating to the Committee's decisions on the longer-run ranges. (Draft
language for the operating paragraph is shown in paragraph (29) beginning
on p. 22.) To improve readability, the language adopted at the previous
meeting is intially shown below in crossed-out form and proposed language
is shown thereafter without the usual format of strike-throughs and
capital letters. For simplicity, the proposed language does not repeat
the first sentence containing the general statement of the Committee's
policy objectives nor the ensuing standard paragraph on policy implementa-
tion. The first proposal is structured to allow for consideration of
raising the base of the M1 range for 1985, or, as shown in brackets,
for shifting the base; the possibility of adjusting the upper limits of
certain other ranges is also provided for. The second proposal assumes all
current ranges for 1985 are retained but allows for accepting growth in M1
above the range. After the two proposals, a proposed paragraph for 1986
ranges is shown.
Current language
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster monetary and
financial conditions that will help to reduce inflation further,
promote growth in output on a sustainable basis, and contribute
to an improved pattern of international transactions. [DEL: In furtherance
of these objectives the Committee agreed-at-its-meeting in February
to- establish ranges for monetary growth of 4 to 7 percent for M1,
from the fourth quarter of 1984 to the fourth quarter of 1985.
The associated range- for- total- domestic nonfinancial debt was set
at-9-to 12 percent for the year 1985. The Committee agreed that
growth in the monetary aggregates in the upper part of their
ranges for 1985 may be appropriate, depending on developments
withe respect to velocity and provided that inflationary pressures
remain subdued.]
The Committee understood that policy implementation would
require continuing appraisal of the relationships not only among
the various measures of money and credit but also between those
aggregates and nominal GNP, including evaluation of conditions
in domestic credit and foreign exchange markets.
Proposal 1
... In furtherance of these objectives the Committee at this
meeting established a range of ____ to ____ percent for M1 for
the period from the fourth quarter of 1984 to the fourth quarter
of 1985 [for the period from the second quarter of 1985 to the
fourth quarter of 1985] and reaffirmed [established] ranges
for the year of ____ to ____ percent for M2 and ____ to ____
percent for M3. The associated range for total domestic
nonfinancial debt was reaffirmed [established] at ____ to
percent. Although growth in M1 was expected to slow in the
second half of 1985, the range for the year was raised from
that established in February to allow for the possibility that
the velocity of M1 may decline for the year as a whole, given
the substantial drop in the first half of the year. [The base
for the M1 range was moved forward to the second quarter of 1985
to be consistent with a gradual return of velocity growth toward
more usual patterns, following the sharp decline in velocity
during the first half of the year.] [The upper limit(s) of the
range(s) for (M2 and/or debt) was (were) also raised in light of
the decline(s) in its (their) velocity on average over the first
half of the year.] The Committee agreed that growth in the
aggregates generally may be in the upper parts of their ranges,
depending on continuing developments with respect to velocity
and provided that inflationary pressures remain subdued.
Proposal 2
... In furtherance of these objectives the Committee at this
meeting reaffirmed the ranges of money growth established in
February of 4 to 7 percent for M1, 6 to 9 percent for M2, and
of 1984 to the fourth quarter of 1985. The associated range for
total domestic nonfinancial debt was retained at 9 to 12 percent.
In reaffiming these ranges, the Committee recognized, with
respect to M1, that the velocity of M1 for the year may decline,
given the substantial drop in the first half. In that context,
although growth in M1 was expected to slow from the first-half
pace in the second half of the year, growth for the year as a
whole above the range would be acceptable provided that inflation-
ary pressures remain subdued. Growth of other aggregates in
the upper part of their ranges would also be acceptable depending
in part on velocity developments.
Proposal for 1986 ranges
For 1986 the Committee agree on tentative ranges of monetary
quarter of 1986, of ____ to ____ percent for M1, ____ to ____ percent
for M2, and ____ to ____ percent for M3. The associated range for
growth in total domestic nonfinancial debt was provisionally set at
____ to ____ percent for 1986. However, in establishing ranges for
next year, the Comittee recognized that account would need to be
taken of experience with institutional and depositor behavior in
response to the completion of deposit rate deregulation early in
the year.
(29) An operating paragraph structured along the lines of the
Committee's usual approach of recent months is proposed below.
Proposed operating paragraph
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, [DEL: and
against the background of the recent reduction in the discount
rate] the Committee seeks to DECREASE SLIGHTLY (ALT. A)/maintain
(ALT. B)/INCREASE SLIGHTLY (ALT. C) [DEL: about] the [DEL: same] EXISTING degree
of pressure on [DEL: bank] reserve positions. This action is expected
to be consistent with growth in M1, M2, AND M3 at [DEL: an] annual rate
RATES of around 6 ____, ____, AND ____ percent [DEL: or a little higher]
during the period from [DEL: March to] June TO SEPTEMBER, [DEL: while M2
and M3, in the light of their weakness in April, are expected
to grow more slowly over the quarter than the 7 and 8 percent
annual rates, respectively, anticipated earlier.] Somewhat lesser
reserve restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable in the event of
substantially slower growth of the monetary aggregates while
somewhat greater restraint might (WOULD) be acceptable in the
event of substantially higher growth. In either case such a
change would be considered in the context of appraisals of the
strength of the business expansion, progress against inflation,
and conditions in domestic credit and foreign exchange markets.
The Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears
to the Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the
monetary objectives and related reserve paths during the period
before the next meeting is likely to be associated with a
federal funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL:6 to 10] ____
TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Pucent July . 1985
July
Aug.
Oct.
Nov.
Apr.
May
June
Mhy I
8
July 3
Dallv--Jtme 28
July 5
FR 1367 (485)
N.A. 11.50
Security Dealer Positions
Millions or dollars July I, 1985
ash Positions Forward and utures Potllions
Treasury coupons reasury coupons
Netr  TreenuY under over federal private Treasury under over federal private
S Total bill 1 year I year agency short-term bills 1 year 1 yer I agency tort em-ti
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
May I
8
July 3
Ill-327
117
-128
and certain "when-lssued" securities for delayed delivery (more than 5 business days). Futures and for-
ward positions include all other commitments Involving delayed delivery: fulures contracts are arrang
ed on organized exchanges.
* Stctly confidential
Net Changes In System Holdings of Securities 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
July 8, 1985
Treasury Treasury coupons net purchases
3  Federal agencies net purchases
chan within within hold)a
1yr g1.5 510 over 10 total 1t5 10 over 10 total
- -- -- -- - - 10500
ay I - - - - - - - - - - - -- -7,202
July 3 75 -- - -- - -- -- -- - 75 739
change for maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon
isues,. and direct Treasury borrowing from the System.
FR 1388 (7T81)
