Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
August 16, 1985
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC August 16, 1985
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) M1 increased at an annual rate of about 9 percent in July,
down considerably from the pace of May and June but still well above the
Committee's target path of 5 to 6 percent for the June-to-September period.
Moreover, data for early August suggest stronger growth this month. The
recent strength of M1 has reflected rapid growth in other checkable
deposits (OCDs) together with the absence so far of any unwinding of the
extraordinary surge in demand deposit growth of late spring.
(2) The extent of the bulge in M1 since May appears to have
no clear single explanation. With econometric models underpredicting M1
growth in recent months, one might argue that there has been an upward
demand shift for narrow money, but it is difficult to find reasons for such
a shift to have occurred. According to surveys, consumer confidence
remains generally high, so that from that perspective precautionary
demands for cash are unlikely to have increased significantly. Nonethe-
less, the recent strength in OCDs may be an aspect of a general shift
toward more liquid deposit forms affecting the total of M1 and the
structure of M2 at a time when the opportunity cost of holding liquid
deposits is on the low side of recent experience. For instance, OCDs,
savings deposits, and MMDAs have all shown considerable strength recently,
while small time deposits have been weakening-indeed the total outstanding
of such deposits has been declining since midyear.
(3) With regard to the demand deposit bulge, examination of
individual bank data indicates that the increase in such deposits since
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Money and Credit Aggregates
Dcmestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve Measures 2
Nonborrowed reserves 3
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing total
Excluding special
situation borrowing
Excess reserves
borrowing,
maintenance periods
June July
QIV
to July
mn i
the middle of the second quarter has been distributed roughly proportionately
by size class of banks, though weighted a bit toward large banks. Very
recent contacts with selected banks experiencing large demand deposit
increases identified no consistent set of special factors to account for
the unusual strength over recent months. The decline in interest rates was
seen to be raising compensating balances of businesses, but by no more than
might normally have been expected; banks generally reported no change
in corporate cash management practices; a number indicated the increase in
deposits may have simply reflected reduced incentives to manage cash care-
fully as interest rates declined. Finally, it should be noted that the
demand deposit ownership survey sample indicated a disproportionate share
of the increase in gross demand deposits from March to June in household
demand accounts, perhaps reflecting the unusual pattern of tax refunds,
with only about one quarter of the rise in deposits of financial and non-
financial businesses.
(4) The broader aggregates also decelerated in July. Nonetheless,
M2 growth at an 8-1/2 percent annual rate was somewhat above the Committee's
above the upper bound of its range for the year. Growth of the nontrans-
actions component of M2, although slowing from June, remained strong as
rapid growth in MMDAs and savings accounts offset the decline in small time
deposits. M3 expanded at only a 4-1/4 percent annual rate in July, well
below its 3-month objective of 7-1/2 percent. With core deposit growth
still fairly robust and Treasury deposits rising while asset growth at
depository institutions remained moderate, CDs and other managed liabili-
ties in M3 fell.
(5) Growth in total domestic nonfinancial debt is estimated to
have continued at roughly a 12 percent annual rate. Federal borrowing
surged and state and local governments, responding to the decline in interest
rates since late winter, continued to issue large volumes of bonds in
anticipation of refundings. There was no net borrowing from banks and the
commercial paper market by nonfinancial businesses last month, while bond
issuance, although quite strong, receded somewhat from the June pace when
it had been boosted by several exceptionally large offerings to retire
equity. In the household sector, consumer credit growth appears to have
slowed in recent months, but mortgage borrowing seems to have continued at
around its spring pace.
(5) In July, total reserves and the monetary base decelerated
to annual growth rates of around 12-1/4 and 6-3/4 percent, respectively,
as expansion of transactions deposits and currency slowed from the rapid
May-June pace. Nonborrowed reserves (including extended credit) grew
at a 10-3/4 percent pace in July. 1 The nonborrowed reserve path over the
first two complete maintenance periods after the last FOMC meeting was con-
structed assuming $350 million of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing. With
M1 and M2 running above the Committee's short-run paths, against a background
of a weaker dollar and moderate strength in economic activity, desk operations
in the maintenance period just completed were conducted with a view to
borrowing in a $350 to $450 million range. Borrowing averaged about $605
million in the first two maintenance periods as demands for excess reserves
proved unusually strong; 2 in the most recent complete maintenance period,
borrowing averaged about $480 million.
(6) Federal funds have traded generally in a range around
recent statement period close to 7-7/8 percent. Other short-term market
rates are up about 20 to 45 basis points over the intermeeting period,
reflecting mainly a reassessment of the likelihood of near-term easing by
the Federal Reserve. Yield spreads between short-term private and Treasury
securities have widened slightly over the past couple of weeks, reflecting
adverse news about the earnings of some financial institutions; these
spreads remain well below the highs of mid-1984, though somewhat above the
very low levels reached early in 1985. Intermediate- and long-term Treasury
yields, which have risen by about 30 to 40 basis points, were also affected
by some disappointment in the budget process and the decline in the dollar
on exchange markets. Corporate bond yields have moved up a little more
than Treasury yields. The dollar has depreciated by about 4-3/4 percent,
net, on a weighted average basis over the intermeeting period, even though
yield spreads favoring foreign currencies have narrowed as U.S. interest
rates have risen some and foreign rates have declined.
Policy alternatives
(7) It seems unlikely, given recent developments, that the
Committee's June-to-September objective of 5 to 6 percent growth (annual
rate) for M1 can be attained short of a very sharp rise in the federal
funds rate to perhaps the 10 to 11 percent area. Assuming some slight
decrease in M1 in the second half of August, it would take about a 5
percent annual rate of decline in September for growth over the three
months to reach 6 percent. It is likely, however, that such a rise in
the funds rate would need to be reversed later in the year to sustain
economic activity, consistent with growth of M1 around the upper limit
of its range. The alternatives presented below are based on less extreme
movements in money and interest rates. Of the alternatives, B and C are
most consistent with moving near to or somewhat below the upper end of the
FOMC's 3 to 8 percent long-run range for M1 by the fourth quarter, although
the tighter alternative C would provide more assurance. Alternative A
would very probably involve growth for the second half above the Com-
mittee's M1 target. (More detailed data are shown in the following
tables and charts).
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from June to
September
M2 9-1/4 8-1/2 7-3/4
M3 7 6-1/4 5-3/4
Associated federal
funds rate range 5 to 9 6 to 10 7 to 11
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
July
August
September
Growth Rates
Monthly
July
August
September
Growth Rates
Long-run base
period to July 851
Long-run base
period to Sept. 851
the second quarter of 1985 for M1 and the fourth quarter of 1984 for M2 and M3.
(8) Alternative B, which assumes reserve pressures indexed by
borrowing in a $350 to $450 million range, encompasses growth in M1 from
June to September at a 9 percent annual rate. Nonborrowed and total
reserves would be expected to expand at about 8 and 5 percent annual
rates, respectively, over the last two months of the quarter. Federal
funds would probably trade mostly a little above 7-3/4 percent.
(9) We would expect rapid growth of M1 in August of around
followed by a very substantial moderation to about a 4 percent annual
rate in September. It still seems likely that the extraordinary bulge in
demand deposits of late spring and early summer will be partly reversed.
More generally, the waning impact on money demand of earlier declines in
rates, along with the effects of the more recent firming of money market
conditions, should also work to moderate growth of M1, including OCDs.
(10) On a quarterly average basis M1 growth would be at about
a 12-1/2 percent annual rate in the third quarter, implying an even
sharper drop in velocity-at about a 6-3/4 percent annual rate-than in
the first half of the year. With such a continued large build-up in
money relative to GNP, the staff expects that much of the increase in
nominal GNP in the fourth quarter will be financed, given current levels
of interest rates, out of existing cash balances. Velocity growth is
likely to turn positive, and growth of money from September to December
may be at around a 2-1/2 to 3 percent annual rate (implying a quarterly
average growth of near 4-1/2 percent annual rate). Such a development
would imply growth in M1 from QII '85 to QIV '85 at about an 8-1/2 percent
annual rate, a little above the upper limit of the FOMC's range for the
second half of the year.
(11) Under alternative B, both M2 and M3 would be expected to
diverge somewhat from the Committee's June-to-September specification
for growth at about a 7-1/2 percent annual rate set at the July meeting.
Growth of M2 is likely to be higher, around 8-1/2 percent, while growth
of M3 should be lower, about 6-1/4 percent. M2 growth has been boosted
recently by its M1 component, and it is likely to show some deceleration
as M1 growth slows. M3 growth, however, is expected to pick up a little
over the balance of the quarter as banks increase their issuance of
managed liabilities to replace declining Treasury deposits.
(12) The debt of nonfinancial sectors is projected to grow at
an 11-1/2 percent annual rate in the third quarter, a little slower than
in the second, but leaving this aggregate around the 12 percent upper end
of its 1985 range. The federal government's net need for funds, though
still quite large, is expected to moderate somewhat this quarter on a
seasonally adjusted basis. On the other hand, businesses' net external
needs for funds are projected to increase over the quarter to finance
further advances in investment spending as internal funds remain flat.
Equity retirements associated with mergers and stock buy-backs are
expected to moderate a little in the third quarter, restraining the rise
in business borrowing. In the household sector, mortgage borrowing
should continue to edge higher along with the projected pickup in housing
activity, but consumer credit growth is expected to slow.
(13) Unchanged reserve conditions, as contemplated under alter-
native B, are likely to be associated with short- and long-term interest
rates remaining close to current levels over the upcoming intermeeting
period. The 3-month Treasury bill rate would be expected to fluctuate
around the 7-1/8 to 7-1/4 percent area. The dollar might drift down a
bit more on exchange markets. Bond markets are likely to be sensitive to
Congressional actions to implement the budget resolution in September
after the recess, and to also significant changes in the foreign exchange
value of the dollar.
(14) Alternative C assumes a tightening of reserve positions,
with borrowing rising to the $750 to $850 million area. The restrained
provision of nonborrowed reserves, with little net growth over August
and September, would lead to a rise in the funds rate to about 8-1/2
percent or somewhat higher and to a more rapid slowing of M1 growth. For
the June-to-September period, growth of M1 would still be relatively high,
about 8 percent. Expansion over the fourth quarter would be expected to
drop to an annual rate of near one percent as the cumulative impact of
higher interest rates, and perhaps some slowing of transaction demands
relative to the staff GNP forecast, takes hold. For the second half, M1
growth would be a little under 7-1/2 percent.
(15) Such a move toward greater reserve restraint would
probably lead to a sharp rise in short-term rates generally, with the
may rise by a bit more as concerns about the financial condition of
certain depository institutions and financial intermediaries intensified
under current circumstances. Longer-term rates would also come under
fairly substantial upward pressure, at least for a short while, until the
large volume of corporate and municipal bonds currently overhanging the
market was worked down or withdrawn. The dollar would rise on exchange
markets, although this would probably prove to be no more than a temporary
interruption of a long-term downward trend.
(16) Growth of M2 may slow fairly substantially over the next
month or two under this alternative, partly as yields on the nontransactions
components lag, as usual, behind rising market rates. M3 also would be
expected to slow, though perhaps not as much as M2. It is probable that
bank issuance of CDs and other managed liabilities would pick up as credit
market demands shift toward banks, and also the commercial paper market,
in a rising rate environment.
(17) Alternative A involves an easing of pressures on bank
reserve positions, either through a reduction in borrowings to the $100
to $200 million area or by a drop in the discount rate of, say, 1/2
percentage point with a smaller or no accompanying decline in borrowing.
The federal funds rate would drop toward 7 percent, and the decline in
the dollar on foreign exchange markets would accelerate. Long- and short-
term interest rates would retrace their recent rise and probably fall
still further, although the drop in long-term rates may be damped by
the implications for inflation and for foreign interest in U.S. securities
of a substantial weakening of the dollar.
(18) Adoption of this alternative, which would tend to
strengthen economic activity, would probably mean that M1 growth for the
second half would cane in well above the upper limit of the FOMC's range.
Growth of M2 also may be above its range, though perhaps only marginally,
as lower market rates increase the relative attractiveness of bank and
thrift deposits. Financing demands can be expected to strengthen, though
much of this may fall on the open market rather than banks as bond yields
decline and rising stock prices increase the attractiveness of equity
Directive language
(19) Two alternative operational paragraphs for the directive
are given below. Alternative I represents the current paragraph, with
proposed updating modifications shown in the usual way. Alternative II
is suggested in case the Committee wishes to restructure the paragraph in
light of the probability that M1 growth will exceed by a substantial margin
the 5 to 6 percent rate originally anticipated at the July meeting.
Alternative I
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A), maintain (Alt. B),
INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C), the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. This action is expected to be consistent with
growth in M2 and M3 at [DEL: an] annual [DEL: rate] RATES of around [DEL: 7-1/2]
____ AND ____ percent RESPECTIVELY during the period from June to
September, and with a substantial slowing of M1 growth to an
annual rate of [DEL: 5 to 6] ____ percent. Somewhat lesser reserve
restraint might (WOULD) be acceptable in the event of substantially
slower growth of the monetary aggregates while somewhat greater
restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable in the event of substantially
higher growth. In either case such a change would be considered
in the context of appraisals of the strength of the business
expansion, progress against inflation, and conditions in domestic
credit and foreign exchange markets. The Chairman may call for
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic
Operations that pursuit of the monetary objectives and related
reserve paths during the period before the next meeting is likely
to be associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a
range of [DEL: 6 to 10] ____ TO ____ percent.
Alternative II
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future,
the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A), maintain
(Alt. B), INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C), the existing degree of
pressure on reserve positions. This action is expected to be
consistent with growth in M2 and M3 at [DEL: an] annual [DEL: rate] RATES of
around [DEL: 7-1/2] ____ and ____ percent, RESPECTIVELY, during the
period from June to September, [DEL: and with a substantial
slowing of M1 growth to an annual rate of 5 to 6 percent.]
M1 GROWTH IS EXPECTED TO SLOW MARKEDLY FROM ITS RECENT PACE,
BUT GIVEN RELATIVELY RAPID GROWTH IN JULY AND EARLY AUGUST,
EXPANSION OVER THE JUNE TO SEPTEMBER PERIOD MAY BE AT AN
____ TO ____ PERCENT ANNUAL RATE. SOMEWHAT GREATER RESTRAINT
WOULD [MIGHT] BE SOUGHT IN THE EVENT OF SUBSTANTIALLY HIGHER
GROWTH IN THE MONETARY AGGREGATES. SOMEWHAT LESSER RESTRAINT
MIGHT [WOULD] BE SOUGHT IN THE EVENT OF SUBSTANTIALLY SLOWER
GROWTH, ALTHOUGH IN THE CASE OF M1 A WEAKENING OVER THE NEAR
TERM THAT BROUGHT GROWTH FOR THE THIRD QUARTER TO THE 5 TO 6
PERCENT ANNUAL RATE ESTABLISHED AT THE PREVIOUS MEETING WOULD BE
ACCEPTABLE. In either case such a change would be considered
in the context of appraisals of the strength of the business
expansion, progress against inflation, and conditions in
domestic credit and foreign exchange markets. The Chairman
may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic Operations that pursuit of the monetary
objectives and related reserve paths during the period before
the next meeting is likely to be associated with a federal funds
rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 6 to 10] ____ TO ____ percent.
Selected Interest Rates
Percent August 19, 1985
Short Term Long-Term
Treasury bills CDs comm money bank S government constant corporate muni home mortgages
federal secondary market secondary omm market bankPeriod fundsecondary market secondary mark prime maturity yields A utility cipal conven- F NA S&L
Smarket mutua l  on recently Bond tional 1-yearmonth -month Iear 3-month fund lan 3 year 10 year 30year offered Buyer at S&Ls ce ARM
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Apr.
May
June
Aug. 7
14
Daily--Aug. 9
15
16
FR 1367 (4/85)
Security Dealer Positions
Millions of dollars
Aug. 7
14
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
SStrictly confidential
Apr.
Nay
June
August 19, 1985
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
August 19 1985
Treasury Treasury coupons net purchases
3  Federal agencies net purchases
Period bills net outright Net RPs"
change
Apr.
Hay
June
Aug. 7
14
LEVEL--Aug. 15
---- -100
qA- --' --
- -300
277 1,484
-- 1,326
-- 1,426
-- 6 6 -
change for maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon
issues, and direct Treasury borrowing from the System.
__ ~f __ ..
