Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
February 7, 1986
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC February 7, 1986
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) Ml, which continued to expand rapidly in December, grew only
a little in January. On average over the two months, M1 has increased at
about a 7 percent annual rate, the lower end of the 7 to 9 percent short-run
range for growth from November to March set by the Committee at its last
meeting.1 M2 grew at a 4-1/4 percent annual rate over the past two months,
and M3 at 6-3/4 percent, as compared with their 6 to 8 percent ranges for the
short-run period. With regard to experience in 1985 relative to long-run
ranges for the aggregates, M1 grew well above its range for the second half
of last year, while M2 and M3 were in the upper portion and near the midpoint
of their respective ranges, as shown in the last column of the table on the
following page (with the long-run ranges for last year shown in parentheses).
(2) The slowing of M1 growth in January was entirely attributable
to a decline in demand deposits, following their unusually strong expansion
during the final two months of last year. In January OCDs grew near the more
moderate December pace; the removal of the regulatory minimum balance on
Super NOW accounts did not have much effect on OCD growth, as depository
institutions generally have not liberalized terms on Super NOW accounts to
any significant extent. M2 growth was restrained by a sizable runoff of
overnight RPs that likely reflected a rundown in collateral stemming from
reductions in bank holdings of Treasury securities and a continued high level
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES 1
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Nov. QIV '84
to to
Nov. Dec. Jan.P Jan.P QIV '85
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Bank credit
Reserve measures
Nonborrowed reserves 3
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment and seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
p - Preliminary.
of Treasury balances. Hwever, M3 growth picked up, as banks' funding needs
remained sizable, and their CD issuance accelerated.
(3) The total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors continued to
advance exceptionally rapidly late last year, paced by the explosion of tax-
exempt debt issuance in advance of proposed tax law changes. Over the year,
debt grew about 13-1/2 percent; a little more than one percentage point of
this total represented the effects of unusual credit demands associated with
the retirement of equity in mergers and other corporate restructurings, and
about three-fourth of a percentage point is estimated to have resulted from
the acceleration of tax-exempt borrowing before year-end. After the turn of
the year, tax-exempt issuance virtually came to a halt. Federal government
debt issuance, which was enlarged late last year by investment of the proceeds
from advance refunding issues of state and local governments, also dropped
off in January. However, credit demands by households and nonfinancial
firms appear to have been relatively well maintained in the early weeks of
the year.
(4) Total reserves increased at a 13 percent pace over the Decem-
ber-January period, as transactions accounts continued to grow fairly rapidly,
on balance, and excess reserves were unusually high, especially around year-
end. With discount window borrowing declining since November, nonborrowed
reserves grew at an 18-1/2 percent annual rate on average over the last two
months (adjusted for borrowing by Bank of New York in November). The non-
borrowed reserves path was constructed over the intermeeting period on the
assumption of $350 million of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing. Window-
dressing pressures were unusually strong around year end, and both excess
reserves and borrowing spiked in the reserve maintenance period ended
January 1. In the two complete maintenance periods in 1986 borrowing
averaged around $260 million, and through the first eight days of the
current statement period it has averaged $225 million.
(5) The federal funds rate moved lower once year-end pressures
subsided, with trading in recent weeks generally in the 7-3/4--7-7/8 percent
area, somewhat below its level at the time of the last FOMC meeting. However,
other short-term rates rose 15 to 20 basis points since that time, mainly
reflecting the very recent market response to stronger than expected employment
figures. In longer-term markets, bond yields fluctuated fairly widely over
the intermeeting interval, showing little net change. They responded to oil
price developments and the cut in the Bank of Japan's discount rate, on the
one side, and to the strong employment figures of the past two months and
doubts about Gram-Rudman's constitutionality on the other. Tax-exempt bond
yields were down rather substantially, reflecting the dearth of issuance
early this year. Rates for both fixed and variable rate mortgage commitments
also fell below their levels at the time of the December FOMC meeting, in
lagged response to earlier market rate declines.
(6) The trade-weighted average foreign exchange value of the
dollar has fallen 3 percent further on balance since the last FOMC meeting,
for a total drop of 12-1/2 percent since the G-5 announcement of September
the mark and 5-1/2 percent in terms of the yen since mid-December, bringing
its net decline since the G-5 announcement to about 15-1/2 percent against the
mark and 20 percent against the yen. Part of the dollar's intermeeting drop
against these currencies may be attributable to statements by some G-5 authori-
ties since their January consultation suggesting that a further depreciation
of the dollar might be acceptable and perhaps welcome. Sterling, however,
depreciated 2-1/2 percent against the dollar in the intermeeting period in
response to falling oil prices.
Long-run targets
(7) Shown below for Committee consideration are alternative
longer-run ranges for the year 1986. Alternative I represents the tentative
ranges established at the July meeting. The ranges in alternative II are
generally higher, while those in alternative III are lower for M1 and M2.1
Alt. I Alt. II Alt. III
M1 4 to 7 4 to 8 3 to 7
M2 6 to 9 6 to 9-1/2 5-1/2 to 8-1/2
M3 6 to 9 6 to 9 6 to 9
Debt 8 to 11 9 to 12 8 to 11
(8) The ranges of alternative I are roughly consistent with the
staff's current GNP projection on the assumption that interest rates, if
they decline, drop only moderately. With such a decline in rates, M1 seems
likely to grow near the upper limit of the 4 to 7 percent range, and the
velocity of M1 again to drop, though only a bit and much less than last
year. The expectation that M1 expansion will slow substantially this year,
despite some projected pick-up in GNP growth, is based partly on a smaller
upward effect on the amount of M1 demanded because of interest rate behavior.
But it also depends on the thought that the substantial portion of the quite
rapid demand deposit growth of last year unexplained by usual interest rate
or income relationships will not be repeated. M1 growth could tend to be
reduced further in the degree that velocity shows more strength than expected,
either because interest rates turn out to be higher or the public's prefer-
ences for cash diminish appreciably following last year's exceptional build-
up in balances. We have assumed that the removal of minimum balances on MMDAs
and Super NOWs and, at the end of March, the lifting of ceiling rates on
savings and NOW accounts will have only minimal effects, given the wide-
spread availability for a number of years of other ceiling-free accounts
and the relatively small size of previous minimum balance requirements.
(9) Growth of M2 and M3 this year should be reasonably well
within their alternative I ranges, given the GNP projection. While slowing
from last year's pace, the growth of debt from Q4 1985 to Q4 1986 is
projected a little above the upper limit of its 8 to 11 percent range. A
range of 8-1/2 to 11-1/2 percent would include an upper limit about at the
staff's projection using quarterly averages. The moderation this year in
credit demands by domestic sectors reflects a slowing in tax-exempt bor-
rowing following last year's surge; some projected abatement of corporate
debt financing, including for mergers and buyouts, that may in part be a
product of the improved stock market; and a deceleration in U.S. government
borrowing as fiscal restraint begins to take hold.
(10) The width of the tentative ranges adopted by the Committee
last July is the same for M1 as for the other aggregates. However, experi-
ence with Ml in recent years and continuing uncertainties about its behavior
in varying circumstances, given institutional changes, suggest that consider-
ation be given to making the M1 range somewhat wider than for M2 or M3.
Also, more technically, M1 for now appears to be more interest elastic than
the broader aggregates. Thus, more scope for variation would be required
should exogenous factors--such as fiscal policy, attitudes toward the dollar,
or inflationary expectations--affect the demand for goods and services and
interest rates by more or less than anticipated. (The potential impact of
some of these elements is discussed in paragraphs (13) to (15) below.)
Assuming little need to reduce the width of other monetary ranges, a
symmetrical widening of the tentative M1 range suggests 3-1/2 to 7-1/2
percent, or possibly a range of 3 to 8 percent. The latter is the same as
that adopted for the second half of 1985, but would of course produce twice
the leeway in dollar terms over a full year than for a half year.
(11) Alternative II--with ranges allowing more growth for M1, M2,
and debt--may be viewed as consistent with a more stimulative approach to
aggregate demand than is embedded in the staff's projection. Whether such
a policy would risk leading to a significant acceleration of inflation, if
not later this year then next, depends in part on how close the present rate
of unemployment is to the so-called natural rate--the rate below which
wage pressures will increase with feedback effects on prices. It would
also depend on the growth potential of the economy. If the nation's growth
potential were below, say, 3 percent per annum--taking account of labor
force expansion and productivity--a more stimulative monetary policy that
led to higher growth would run a greater risk of setting in motion upward
price pressures, with assessment of the timing and extent of risk depending
on one's view of the level of the natural rate of unemployment.
(12) The third alternative--with lower ranges for M1 and M2--
may be thought of as consistent with taking advantage of a relatively sharp
drop in oil prices to secure greater progress in moving toward reasonable
price stability. A significant drop in oil prices would tend for a time
both to increase real growth and to curtail general upward price pressures.
If the price of imported oil declines to the $20 per barrel assumed in the
GNP projection, the policy enbodied in alternative III would probably lead
to somewhat higher real interest rates and lower real growth than under
alternative I, but with improved price performance. It would, however,
exert more pressure for a time on international and domestic debtors (and
indirectly on their creditors) by holding interest rates higher than
otherwise. Should oil prices drop noticeably more than currently assumed,
the alternative III approach might well achieve the real growth projected
by the staff, or a bit more, as well as better anti-inflationary gains,
along with downward pressure on interest rates particularly as inflationary
expectations lessen.
(13) In assessing the appropriateness of the monetary alterna-
tives for this year, account also needs to be taken of the possibility that
fiscal policy or the behavior of the dollar on exchange markets will differ
from staff assumptions, as well as the oil price. The budget stance for
fiscal year 1986 implicit in Granm-Rudman looks more certain and achievable
than is the case for later years. For fiscal 1987, the staff has assumed
a budget deficit somewhat higher than the Gramm-Rudman limit, but which
implies roughly the same swing toward fiscal restraint in terms of the
structural deficit (the bulk of the higher actual deficit level stems from
a projection of lower GNP growth). With regard to the exchange value of
the dollar, the staff has assumed a further 5 percent annual rate of decline
from its level at the end of January.
(14) If the fiscal policy and exchange rate assumptions turn out
to be wrong, the odds at this time would appear to favor their being wrong
on the side of greater upward price and interest rate pressures. The
Gramm-Rudman process could break down in practice, particularly if the
unconstitutionality of certain aspects is upheld by the Supreme Court. And
if we are in fact in the midst of an underlying downward adjustment in the
dollar to a level more consonant with something like eventual balance in
the current account, there would evidently be the potential for a greater
dollar decline this year. Both developments would, if they occurred, exert
more upward pressure on prices than in the staff projection--a larger
decline in the dollar rather directly and lesser fiscal restraint through
enhanced demand pressures. These effects would be muted if the oil price
at the same time happened to drop by more than currently anticipated.
(15) In general, to the degree that uncertainties about exogenous
fiscal and exchange market developments are more in an inflationary rather
than a deflationary direction, this would tend to argue for restraint on
the upper limits of the aggregates. Moreover, should interest rates tend
to rise over the year because of stronger demand and price pressures, the
velocity of M1 would probably increase somewhat. Thus, money growth lower in
the ranges would be required to contain excessively strong demand pressures.
On the other hand, if uncertainties were to be resolved in a deflationary
direction putting interest rates naturally under downward pressure, the
maintenance of economic growth would require greater monetary expansion.
In particular, a relatively high upper limit for M1 growth may be needed,
given its apparently enlarged interest elasticity of demand and the likeli-
hood under those circumstances of a greater decline in its velocity this
year than currently anticipated.
Short-run policy alternatives
(16) The table below presents three alternative specifications
for growth in the monetary aggregates through March, together with associated
federal funds rate ranges. Growth rates are shown from a November base, as
chosen at the last meeting. Detailed data, including growth rates from
December to March, are shown on the table and charts on the following pages.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from November
to March
Ml 7-3/4 7 6-1/2
M2 6 5-3/4 5-1/2
M3 7 6-3/4 6-1/2
Associated federal
funds rate range 5 to 9 6 to 10 6-1/2 to 10-1/2
(17) Given recent behavior of the aggregates, alternatives A and
B are reasonably consistent with the short-run ranges from November to March
adopted at the last meeting-7 to 9 percent annual rate of growth for M1 and
than A relative to those ranges. The differences in the alternatives in
that context would be reflected in the degree of near-term bank reserve
pressures--with alternative B assuming unchanged pressures and alternative A
some easing--and implications for the trajectory of money growth over the
months ahead relative to longer-run ranges. In the tightening alternative C,
both M1 and M2 would be expected to fall short of the December meeting ranges.
(18) The specifications of alternative B envision a continua-
tion of discount window borrowing in a range of $300 to $400 million, with
federal funds likely to trade around 7-3/4 percent or a little higher.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Ml M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Tentative 1986
Target Ranges: 4 to 7 6 to 9 6 to 9
Growth in M1 would be expected to pick up to near a 7 percent annual rate in
February and March, about the same as its December-January average. By March
M1 would be a little under the upper bound of its tentative 4 to 7 percent
(19) A pickup in M2 growth is expected under alternative B in
February and March, after its sluggish performance in January, as RP behavior
ceases to be a drag and core deposits advance more in line with income.
Nonetheless, M2 in March would remain somewhat below the lower bound of its
tentative growth cone for 1986. Growth in M3 over the remainder of the
quarter is expected to slow a bit from its January pace as bank credit expan-
sion moderates. M3 in March would be somewhat above the lower end of its
tentative range for this year.
(20) With current reserve pressures unchanged as assumed in alter-
native B, the 3-month Treasury bill rate would trade around 7-1/4 percent,
the yield area reached following release of January's employment figures.
Bond yields, too, would be likely to fluctuate around very recent levels,
though still sensitive to incoming news about oil prices or the strength
of economic activity. Underlying demand pressures on credit markets are
expected to show little net change this quarter. A sharp drop in the growth
of domestic nonfinancial debt is in train, but most of the slowing represents
cessation of unusual borrowing activity late last year connected with the
special situation in the tax-exempt market. The recent pace of decline in
the exchange value of the dollar may not continue under alternative B,
though if the dollar is fundamentally tending downward, a significant rise
in the exchange rate is unlikely.
(21) Alternative A assumes a reduction in reserve pressures
associated with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the discount window
lowered to around $150 million. Federal funds would probably trade around
the present 7-1/2 percent discount rate or a little less, and expectations
of a discount rate cut would probably revive. The 3-onth Treasury bill
rate would fall to around 6-3/4 percent or so, and long-term rates would
drop. Rates on large CDs might decline by even more if concerns about bank
asset quality--recently reinforced to a degree by the drop in oil prices--are
relieved a little by the general decline of interest rates. Also, bank CD
issuance would be more muted under this alternative by heavier inflows of
core deposits and some diversion of business credit demands away from banks
as long-term markets become more attractive. Additional downward pressure on
the dollar would emerge, with the extent depending in part on whether the
market comes to anticipate even further easing action--and particularly if
key foreign countries do not lower their interest rates.
(22) Under alternative A, M1 growth would be expected to pick up
to about an 8-1/2 percent annual rate over February and March, as interest
rates decline. Growth from the fourth quarter to March in this aggregate
would be at an annual rate of about 7-1/2 percent--somewhat above the
tentative longer-run range--and the lower rates would work to sustain money
growth in the ensuing months. The 7-3/4 percent growth of M2 for February
and March under this alternative would be bring this aggregate to around the
lower bound of its tentative range by quarter-end.
(23) The exact response of these monetary aggregates, especially
M1, to the lessening of reserve pressures under alternative A is somewhat
difficult to assess. There would seem to be some risk of a more pronounced
upward thrust to M1 (and perhaps also M2) growth than specified as market
rates decline under this alternative. A further decline of market rates
could bring the spread between short-term market instruments and checkable
accounts to quite low levels depending on institutional reactions, with the
potential for strong inflows as the opportunity cost of liquidity and safety
becomes less practically significant.
(24) Alternative C encompasses a modest firming in reserve condi-
tions, with discount borrowing increasing to $450 to $500 million and federal
funds trading consistently somewhat above 8 percent. The tightening assumed
under this alternative would come as something of a surprise to participants
in foreign as well as domestic markets. Short-term rates would back up
appreciably, and the exchange value of the dollar would partly reverse some
of its recent decline. Long-term rates would also rise, at least in the
short-run, particularly if the current Treasury refunding were not well
(25) Growth in the monetary aggregates through March under this
alternative would be low relative to the short-run ranges adopted at the
previous meeting. M1 would move further down in its tentative long-run
range, and M2 would remain below its range. The restraint on the aggregates
would probably continue to some degree into the spring, assuming the higher
interest rates were sustained. Thus, this alternative might be viewed as
most consistent with the long-run ranges of alternative III.
Directive language
(26) Shown below is draft directive language relating to the
Committee's decisions on the longer-run ranges (draft language for the
operating paragraph is shown in (27) below). Suggested deletions from the
current directive are indicated in strike-through form. Proposed additions,
shown in caps, refer to M1 uncertainties and the role of the aggregates in
policy implementation.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks to foster monetary
and financial conditions that will help to reduce inflation
further, promote growth in output on a sustainable basis, and
contribute to an improved pattern of international transactions.
[DEL: In furtherance of these objectives the Committee at the July-meet-
ing reaffirmed ranges for the year of 6 to 9-percent for M2 and
nonfinancial debt was reaffirmed at 9 to 12 percent. With respect
te M1, the base was moved forward to the second quarter of 1985
and a range was established at an annual growth rate of 3 to 8
percent. The range takes account of expectations of a return of
velocity growth toward more usual patterns, following the sharp
decline in velocity during the first half of the year, while also
recognizing a higher degree of uncertainty regarding that behavior.
The appropriateness of the new range will continue to be re-examined
in the light of evidence with respect to economic and financial
developments including developments in foreign exchange markets.
More generally, the Committee agreed that growth in the aggregates
may be in the upper parts of their ranges, depending on continuing
developments with respect to velocity and provided that inflationary
pressures remain subdued.] In furtherance of these objectives [DEL: for
monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 1985 to the
fourth quarter of 1986, of [DEL: 4 to 7] ____ TO ____ percent for M1, [DEL:6 to 9]
____ TO ____ percent for M2, and [DEL: 6 to 9] ____ TO ____ percent for M3. The
associated range for growth in total domestic nonfinancial debt was
[DEL: provisionally] set at [DEL: 8 to 11] ____ TO ____ percent for THE YEAR 1986.
THE COMMITTEE RECOGNIZED THAT, BASED ON THE EXPERIENCE OF RECENT
YEARS, M1 WAS SUBJECT TO SUBSTANTIAL UNCERTAINTIES, PARTICULARLY
WITH REGARD TO THE RESPONSIVENESS OF INSTITUTIONS AND DEPOSITORS TO
CHANGING MARKET AND ECONOMIC CONDITIONS, INCLUDING THE FINAL PHASE
OF DEPOSIT RATE DEREGULATION. THE COMMITTEE UNDERSTOOD THAT POLICY
IMPLEMENTATION WOULD REQUIRE CONTINUING APPRAISAL OF THE RELATION-
SHIPS AMONG THE VARIOUS MEASURES OF MONEY AND CREDIT, THEIR VELOCITY
TRENDS, AND INDICATORS OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY AND PRICES, AS WELL AS
CONDITIONS IN DOMESTIC CREDIT AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS. [DEL: With
respect to M1 particularly, the Committee recognized that uncertain-
ties surrounding recent behavior of velocity would require careful
reappraisal of the target range at the beginning of 1986. Moreover,
in establishing ranges for next-year, the Committee also recognized
that account would need to be taken of experience with institutional
and depository behavior in response to the completion of deposit rate
deregulation early in the year.]
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
(27) The proposed format follows that used at the December meeting.
It includes reference to the uncertainty surrounding the behavior of M1 and
retains the November base since subsequent developments have not been far
off expectations at that meeting. If that base is retained, the ranges
adopted at the last meeting would be generally consistent with expectations
of growth under alternatives A or B (although M1 and M2 would be near the
bottom or in the lower half of the ranges). If the base were shifted for-
ward to December, growth expectations for M1 consistent with the two
alternatives, would be lower--5 to 6 percent.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to decrease somewhat (Alt. A)/MAINTAIN (Alt. B)/
INCREASE SLIGHTLY (Alt. C) the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. This action is expected to be consistent with growth in
M2 and M3 over the period from November to March at annual rates of
about [DEL: 6 to 8] ____ percent [____ PERCENT AND ____ PERCENT,
RESPECTIVELY]; while the behavior of M1 continues to be subject to
unusual uncertainty, growth at an annual rate of [DEL: 7 to 9] ____
percent over the period is anticipated. Somewhat greater reserve
restraint might (WOULD), and somewhat lesser reserve restraint would
(MIGHT), be acceptable depending on behavior of the aggregates, the
strength of the business expansion, developments in foreign exchange
markets, progress against inflation, and conditions in domestic and
international credit markets. The Chairman may call for Committee
consultation if it appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that
reserve conditions during the period before the next meeting are
likely to be associated with a federal funds rate persist-
ently outside a range of [DEL:6 to 10]____ TO ____ percent.
