Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
October 30, 1987
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) October 30, 1987
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Immediately following the September 22 FOMC meeting, non-
borrowed reserve paths continued to be constructed assuming $600 million of
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing. Actual borrowing in the first complete
maintenance period, ending October 7, averaged somewhat above the assumed
level, owing in part to unusual borrowing related mostly to Reserve Bank
computer problems. Apart from higher levels around quarter-end, federal
funds traded mainly in a 7-1/4 to 7-1/2 percent range during that maintenance
period, about 1/4 of a percentage point higher than just before the September
meeting. Federal funds and other interest rates subsequently rose further
through mid-October as market participants appeared to anticipate another
monetary tightening in an environment of firmer policy abroad, concerns about
the dollar, and pessimism about U.S. inflation prospects.
(2) Stock prices declined appreciably in the first half of Octo-
ber and, on October 19, share prices plunged in chaotic trading. Investors
attempted to shift large amounts of funds into fixed-income assets, especi-
ally Treasury securities, driving down interest rates sharply. The Federal
Reserve pledged to provide liquidity to the economic and financial system,
and injected reserves aggressively on the following days, amid continuing
volatile market conditions. Federal funds dropped from above 7-1/2 percent
to 7 percent and below immediately following the stock market collapse.
During those days, late in the reserve maintenance period ending October 21,
the Desk sought to avoid the surge in borrowing implied by the formal reserve
path. Actual borrowing rose substantially on the final day of the period,
however, owing to sizable misses in estimates of market factors and required
reserves, boosting borrowing for the two weeks to $525 million. Reflecting
cautious reserve management by depository institutions, excess reserves in-
creased to $1.0 billion.
(3) In the current maintenance period the borrowing assumption
has been reduced to $500 million and then to $450 million, consistent with a
more generous provision of liquidity and easier money market conditions in
the unsettled market environment. The Desk has continued to provide reserves
each day through System repurchase agreements, frequently underscoring its
intentions by entering the market at an early hour. Federal funds traded
mostly in a 7 to 7-1/4 percent range over the early part of the current
maintenance period, but more recently have moved below 7 percent following
massive injections of reserves by the Desk. Total reserve growth in October
accelerated appreciably to a 12 percent annual rate, reflecting the large
increase in required reserves associated with a surge in transactions deposits,
as well as greater demand for excess reserves.
(4) Equity prices have fluctuated sharply over an extraordinar-
ily wide range following their collapse on October 19; with some recovery in
recent days, most major stock indices are now around 10 to 15 percent above
their October lows. Even so, these indices are about 25 to 35 percent below
their peaks of late August, which had implied price-earnings ratios and divi-
dend yields around record levels. Although prices of fixed-income securities
generally rose substantially in the aftermath of the stock market collapse,
these markets also were quite volatile as investor sentiment shifted rapidly
and market-makers were reluctant to take positions. Yields on long-term
Treasury and high-grade corporate bonds have fallen around one percentage
point since stock prices collapsed, reversing much of the run-up since August.
However, with concerns about credit quality accentuated, yields on some low-
rated corporate issues have risen on balance since October 16. With market
participants apparently reassessing the outlook for the economy, inflation,
and monetary policy, bond markets generally have retained their earlier gains
despite some stock market recovery and a sharp drop in the dollar in recent
days. In short-term markets, Treasury bill rates have shown net declines of
and anticipated easing of monetary policy as well as increased demands for
safe and liquid instruments, while rates on many private money market instru-
ments have fallen somewhat less. Although securities markets have been less
volatile in recent days, the uncertain effects of previous developments
apparently have led some market participants to limit exposure to some nonbank
dealers by exercising greater caution in lending securities or funds or in
when-issued trading.
(5) The dollar edged lower during the first half of October,
especially after the release of U.S. trade data intensified market concern
over the failure of the U.S. current account balance to improve. Doubts over
the status of the Louvre accord were heightened by Secretary Baker's public
criticisms of German monetary tightening. Though the dollar firmed somewhat
during the worldwide stock market collapse, by the end of that week the dol-
lar again came under downward pressure amid widespread rumors that dollar
exchange rates under the Louvre accord would be allowed to adjust downward.
In addition, interest rates in the United States had dropped substantially
relative to those in other major industrial countries. As the dollar con-
tinued to fall, U.S. monetary authorities intervened in size.
Over the entire intermeeting period, the dollar declined by about 4 percent
on a weighted average basis. U.S. intervention came to $460 million,
; the Bank of England also reduced its official
lending rates by 1/2 percentage point, and U.K. short-term market rates
dropped by about 1-1/8 percentage points from mid-October. Money market
rates in Japan were little changed during the period, while those in Germany
declined substantially very late in the period. Long-term bond rates dropped
by 70, 110, and 90 basis points in Germany, Japan, and the United Kingdom,
(6) Preliminary data indicate an acceleration in the growth of
all the monetary aggregates in October, associated in large measure with
massive portfolio adjustments in the wake of the collapse in equity prices.
Demand deposits rose sharply after midmonth as financial transactions volumes
surged. In addition, there were strong flows into currency, and money market
funds jumped reflecting shifts to more liquid assets. Managed liabilities of
banks also increased, partly to finance a sharp rise in security loans.
These loans picked up appreciably right after midmonth, perhaps to fund en-
larged stock inventories in the hands of specialists and temporary liquidity
needs of mutual funds as well as to substitute for dealer RP borrowing when
that market turned less hospitable; in addition, banks reported that some
dealers were taking down loans to test existing credit arrangements. Ml is
estimated to have increased at around a 15 percent rate in October, while M2
and M3 picked up to 6-3/4 and 7-1/4 percent rates, respectively. Growth of
the broader aggregates over September and October averaged about 6 percent,
as compared with the Committee's short-run paths of 4 percent and 6 percent
for M2 and M3, respectively. By October, M2 had increased at a 4-1/2 percent
rate from the fourth-quarter 1986 base of its longer-run range and M3 at a
(7) Growth of the aggregates had slackened in September from
their relatively strong August pace. Flows into liquid deposits generally
were subdued, extending the pattern since this spring of substitution into
higher yielding instruments as market rates rose and the bank deposit yield
curve steepened. Reflecting the effects of the uptrend in interest rates
earlier in the year, the velocities of the broader aggregates rose in the
third quarter at a pace close to their increases over the first half of the
year. M1 velocity turned up sharply in the third quarter, to a 6 percent
rate, following its 2-1/2 year drop.
(8) Growth of nonfinancial debt picked up a bit in September
to a 7-3/4 percent pace, owing in part to an increase in financial restruc-
turing activity by businesses and some strengthening of consumer credit.
September's growth left the debt aggregate near the middle of its 8 to 11
percent annual range. In October, bond offerings by well-rated firms had
been very light over the first half of the month but burgeoned following the
drop in interest rates, and hundreds of firms have announced stock repurchase
programs in light of lower share prices. Tax-exempt bond issuance, on the
other hand, had not yet picked up by month-end despite the decline in muni-
cipal bond yields. Federal borrowing ballooned in October as the Treasury
made up for offerings that had earlier been deferred owing to debt-ceiling
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'86
to
August September OctoberP OctoberP
Money and credit aggregates
Ml 5.3 0.5 15-1/4 7
Domestic nonfinancial debt 7.4 7.8 n.a. 91
Bank credit 10.8 9.7 n.a. 81
Reserve measures2
Total reserves 5.7 -1.0 12-1/4 7-1/2
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 515 531 546
Excess reserves 1032 795 1035
Policy alternatives
(9) Securities markets have been somewhat less volatile in recent
days, but investor psychology remains unsettled and financial markets are
likely to stay skittish for quite awhile. Moreover, the effects of the
stock market crash on financial institutions and nonfinancial sectors are
uncertain, and are likely to surface only gradually. In these circumstances,
a greater element of flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy would
seem appropriate, at least over the near term. In addition to standing
ready to provide liquidity should it be required in the event of particular
financial strains, the Federal Reserve also may need to be more prepared
than usual to adjust the basic stance of monetary policy as emerging economic
trends become more apparent.
(10) The three policy options presented in this bluebook embody
the staff's working assumption that conditions in financial markets will
gradually return more to normal, as the fears and dislocations that accom-
panied the plunge in stock prices subside further. Thus, as usual, the
options are keyed to the various borrowing assumptions, though, as noted
above and embodied in Variant I of the draft directive discussed in para-
graph (19), policy may well have to be implemented with greater flexibility
than under less uncertain conditions. One additional source of uncertainty
is the relationship between a given borrowing assumption and the associated
pressures in money markets. An increased reluctance by depository institu-
tions to be seen at the discount window would lead to more vigorous bidding
for funds in the market and higher federal funds rates for any particular
borrowing level. In the discussion, the staff has assumed that the return
to less turbulent conditions will be consistent with no more than a slight
drawing back from the discount window. If market conditions remain un-
settled or depository institutions are concerned about perceptions of their
safety and soundness, the assumed borrowing levels would be associated with
higher federal funds rates; alternatively in such conditions, the federal
funds and money market rates discussed under each alternative would require,
at least temporarily, somewhat lower borrowing objectives. With markets
particularly sensitive to incoming information, shifting expectations about
the course of monetary policy could also affect the federal funds rate for
a time. In these circumstances the borrowing-funds rate relationships given
in paragraph (11) are subject to considerable uncertainties.
(11) Alternative B would maintain the easier reserve conditions
that have come to prevail recently; the assumption for adjustment and sea-
sonal borrowing would remain at $450 million, with federal funds trading
expected to center at 7 percent or a bit below. Additional easing would be
sought under alternative A, either through a further reduction in the bor-
rowing assumption to $250 million or a 1/2 point cut in the discount rate;
the funds rate would be likely to fall to, or a little below, the 6-1/2
percent area. Alternative C would involve some slight firming of reserve
conditions, with borrowing being increased to $550 million and the funds
rate probably moving back to around 7-1/4 percent.
(12) The table below presents outcomes for money growth from
September to December that might be expected to accompany each of these
alternatives.1/ The margin of uncertainty surrounding these point estimates
is considerably larger than usual. The extent to which heightened liquidity
preferences together with substantial variations in the volumes of financial
transactions could affect future demands for the monetary aggregates is
difficult to gauge at present. How quickly money markets and depositories
will re-establish a more normal structure of short-term market and deposit
interest rates--and therefore the movement of opportunity costs--under each
alternative also is hard to assess.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from September
to December
Associated federal
funds rate range 4 to 8 5 to 9 5 to 9
(13) Under alternative B, persistence of the federal funds rate
near 7 percent implies that a substantial rise of Treasury bill rates would
accompany a partial restoration of normal interest rate relationships. As
exceptional demands for short-term Treasuries unwind, the 3-month bill rate
could move from the current 5-1/4 percent level to perhaps around 6 percent,
while private rates might rise relatively little. Even with a rate backup,
short-term rates would be 1/2 to 1 full percentage point below their aver-
age levels prior to the stock market crash. As a consequence, opportunity
costs of liquid deposits would still be appreciably below early fall peaks.
Interest rate incentives could thus begin to reinforce the impact of any
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in billions
1987 July
August
September
October
November
December
Monthly Growth Rates
1987 July
August
September
October
November
December
Quarterly Ave. Growth Rates
1986 Q4
1987 Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Aug. 87 to Dec. 87
Sep. 87 to Dec. 87
Sep. 87
Oct. 87
Dec. 87
Q4 87
Chart 1
ACTUAL AND TARGETED M2
Billions of dollars
- Actual Level
-- Estimted Level
* Short-Run Alternatives
.1 2900
- 2900
- 2880
-- 2800
i I I I I I i I I I I I I I
added liquidity preference in bolstering inflows to the liquid deposit and
money market fund components of the aggregates. At the same time, however,
a return toward more normal volumes of financial transactions would tend to
depress demand deposits from recently elevated levels. Under these condi-
tions, M2 might expand from September to December at around a 6 percent
annual rate. This outcome would bring M2 growth for the year to 4-1/2 per-
cent, compared with its 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent long-run range. Growth of
its M1 component would be expected to slow substantially following its
October bulge, with growth at 8 percent over the September to December
period and about 7 percent for the year.
(14) M3 growth over the fourth quarter at around 7 percent is
expected under alternative B, bringing growth for the year to 5-3/4 per-
cent, just within its annual range. Bank and thrift assets are expected
to grow at a moderate pace. The recent bulge in security loans at banks
is likely to be at least partly reversed; business loans might be fairly
strong, however, despite somewhat greater issuance of investment-grade
bonds, as inventory accumulation boosts financing needs and planned funding
with junk bonds of loans for leveraged buyouts is postponed. Overall, the
debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to grow at around an
from the fourth quarter of 1986 to the fourth quarter of 1987.
(15) Under the reserve market conditions of alternative B, most
bond yields might edge higher as the increased preference for fixed-income
securities subsides and the possibility of further near-term monetary ease
is seen as diminishing. However, market concerns about potential softness
in economic activity and the associated scaling back of inflation expecta-
tions could keep long-term rates below their levels at the time of the last
FOMC meeting. Downward pressures on the value of the dollar in foreign ex-
change markets could continue as market attention focuses on U.S. external
imbalances, and would be accentuated by any perceptions that foreign mone-
tary authorities were unwilling to adopt more expansionary policies. If
dollar weakness occurred in the context of subdued growth in the U.S. econ-
omy and, particularly around the time of the Treasury's midquarter refunding,
of continued foreign participation in U.S. securities markets, bond prices
might be little affected. But if pressures on the dollar are accentuated
by disappointing progress in federal deficit reduction or if U.S. economic
activity remains robust, an inverse relationship between the dollar and
bond yields could reemerge.
(16) Under alternative A, the further easing of the funds rate
could help allay investor concerns about immediate financial strains. Other
private rates in money markets would slip off further, although the 3-month
bill rate might rise into the 5-1/2 percent area. Precautionary demands for
liquid monetary assets might unwind more rapidly under this alternative.
But the sharply narrower spreads of market over deposit rates would seem
likely to encourage large inflows into liquid accounts. Growth in OCDs
would be especially affected, with expansion in M1 likely to average 9 per-
cent over September to December. M2 would be expected to increase at a
picked up noticeably from September when inflows had been damped by pre-
vious increases in interest rates.
(17) Under alternative A, long-term bond yields would likely
continue to decline as market perceptions of impending weakness in the
economy tended to work against a revival of inflation concerns. However,
should the dollar fall precipitously on foreign exchange markets or the
further easing of policy be seen at some point as imparting substantial
strength to the outlook for the economy or prices, any drop in long-term
yields might be quite limited. While downward pressure on the dollar
could well intensify under this alternative, foreign central banks might
be more likely to ease monetary policies as the outlook for their export
industries weakens further.
(18) Alternative C calls for a slight firming of reserve pres-
sures, indexed by an increase in borrowing of only $100 million, and a rise
in the federal funds rate to 7-1/4 percent. The small increase in reserve
pressures under this alternative would better guard against substantial
further weakness in the exchange value of the dollar, but would leave bor-
rowing and the federal funds rate a bit below levels prior to the stock
market crash. Even so, the choice of alternative C before any dollar
decline were generally linked with renewed inflation concerns would risk
further disquieting domestic financial markets. A downward movement of
prices in private credit and equity markets would be likely, although if
the tightening were seen as contributing to economic weakness or damping
any incipient inflation, the rally in the Treasury bond market could be
extended. The 3-month Treasury bill rate could move into the 6-1/2 per-
cent area, with private short-term rates also rising appreciably. Growth
in the aggregates under alternative C would be retarded a little over the
rest of the quarter by the renewed upward movement in opportunity costs
on monetary assets. M2 growth would be expected to be around a 5-3/4
percent rate over September to December, though its M1 component still
would register growth around 7-1/2 percent given its October bulge. Both
aggregates would be entering the new year on fairly slow underlying growth
paths. The restraining effect on M3 would be muted as business credit
demands shifted more to banks and other short-term sources in response to
less attractive long-term financing.
Directive language
(19) Draft language for the operational paragraph is shown
below, with two variants proposed for Committee consideration. Variant I
takes account explicitly in several ways of the possible need to continue
to implement policy with special flexibility over the coming intermeeting
period, given unusual uncertainties about conditions in financial markets
and the economy. It also addresses the potential for exceptional demands
for liquidity.
Variant II follows the language of the current directive much
more closely, with relatively minor modifications to take account of
heightened market and economic uncertainties. This variant is shown with
proposed changes and additions in the usual strike-through and capitalized
In keeping with the asymmetric specifications in the bluebook,
alternative A calls for decreasing "somewhat" and alternative C for increas-
ing "slightly" the degree of pressure on reserve positions.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
Variant I
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future,
the Committee seeks to [decrease somewhat (Alt. A)] [maintain (Alt. B)]
[increase slightly (Alt.C)] the existing degree of pressure on reserves
positions; the Committee anticipates that this approach to operations
will prove consistent with its desire to ensure the provision of
adequate liquidity in the present economic and financial environment.
The Committee recognizes that the volatile conditions in financial
markets and uncertainties in the economic outlook may call for a special
degree of flexibility in open market operations. Somewhat/slightly lesser
reserve restraint would/might, or somewhat/slightly greater reserve
restraint would/might, be acceptable depending on conditions in financial
markets, the strength of the business expansion, indications of inflation-
ary pressures, developments in foreign exchange markets, as well as the
behavior of the monetary aggregates. The outlook for monetary growth
over the months ahead is subject to unusual uncertainty. The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3
over the period from September through December at annual rates of around
____ percent and around ____ percent, respectively, but more rapid growth is
possible should preferences for liquidity be particularly strong. Over
the same period, growth in M1 is expected to be well above its average
pace in the previous several months. The Committee anticipates that
relatively frequent consultations might have to be called by the Chairman
over the coming intermeeting period, particularly if unsettled market
conditions imply the need for unusual flexibility in the implementation
of policy. The Chairman may also call for Committee consultation if it
appears to the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions
during the period before the next meeting are likely to be associated
with a federal funds rate persistently outside a range of ____to ____ per-
Variant II
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future,
the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain (Alt. B)/
INCREASE SLIGHTLY (Alt. C) the EXISTING degree of pressure on reserve
positions [DEL: sought in recent weeks]. Somewhat (slightly) greater reserve
restraint or somewhat (slightly) lesser reserve restraint would (might)
be acceptable depending on CONDITIONS IN FINANCIAL MARKETS, indications
of inflationary pressures, the strength of the business expansion, develop-
ments in foreign exchange markets, as well as the behavior of the MONETARY
aggregates. This approach is expected to be consistent with growth in M2
and M3 over the period from [DEL: August] SEPTEMBER through December at annual
rates of around [DEL: 4] ____ percent and around [DEL: 6] ____ percent, respectively. OVER
THE SAME PERIOD, GROWTH IN M1 is expected to [DEL: continue to grow relatively
slowly] BE WELL ABOVE ITS AVERAGE PACE OF THE PREVIOUS SEVERAL MONTHS. The
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager
for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the period before
the next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal funds rate
persistently outside a range of [DEL: 5 to 9] ___ to ___ percent.
Short-Term
--- Treasury bills--
-- secondary market--
cds
sec mkt
3-month
paper
1-month
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
money
market
mutual
fund
-U.S. Gov't. constant--
--- maturity yields--
bank
prime
loan
corp. A
utility
rec off
Bond
Buyer
November 2, 1987
-- conventional home-
m-or tgages-
sec mkt primary market
fixed- fixed-
rate rate ARM
Monthly
OCT 86
NOV 86
DEC 86
JAN 87
FEB 87
MAR 87
APR 87
MAY 87
JUN 87
JUL 87
AUG 87
SEP 87
Heekly
JUL 1 87
JUL 8 87
JUL 15 87
JUL 22 87
JUL 29 87
AUG 5 87
AUG 12 87
AUG 19 87
AUG 26 87
OCT 7 87
OCT 14 87
OCT 21 87
OCT 28 87
Daily
OCT
OCT
OCT
federal
funds
__ -W
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures 
Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted NOV. 2, 1987
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt2
nontransactions total loans U.S
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government other total2
in M2 In M3 only Investments'
PEBCINT AIONAL GROIIT
ANIUALLI (UIZ TO QUl)
IERKLI LEULS ($SILLIONS)
1987-SPt. 7 746.4
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
NOV. 2, 1987
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds, NSA denomi- Term Term Short-
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation general Instlitu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Commer- Bankers
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollara NSA deposits time purpose, lions time NSA NSA bonds Treasury clal paper accep-
NSA deposits1  nd broker/ only deposits 3  securities lances
dealer
AlOUALLI (4T11 QTR):
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities1
Million of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
November 2, 1987
July 1
8
Oct. 7
"14
21
28
Treasury bills
net change'
Treasury coupons nol purchases'
within I 0 o. 0 I total
1 ear 1-5 _5-10
- -252
1,767 5,036
-- 5
- -75
- -125
_ _ I
Federal agencies net purchases'
within
1-year 1
maturing bils. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, follovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury
borrowing Ifrm the System.
Net change
outright holdings Net RPs'
