Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
September 18, 1987
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) September 18, 1987
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTENATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Following the August 18 FOC meeting, nonborrowed reserve paths
continued to be constructed assuming $500 million of adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing at the discount window; actual borrowing in the maintenance period
ending in late August exceeded this level owing to unanticipated demands for
excess reserves. With this degree of reserve pressure, federal funds generally
traded in a 6-1/2 to 6-3/4 percent range, though the rate moved a bit higher
around the end of August when markets began to expect a near-term System tight-
ening. In light of the potential for greater inflation, associated in part
with weakness in the dollar, the objective for borrowing was raised in early
September to $600 million and, on September 4, the discount rate was increased
from 5-1/2 to 6 percent. Borrowing averaged below the higher path level in the
most recent complete maintenance period, as required reserves fell well short
of estimates. (Through the first eight days of the current period, borrowing
has averaged $360 million.) Subsequent to the discount rate increase, federal
funds have traded mainly in the 7 to 7-1/4 percent area. Total and nonborrowed
reserves resumed expansion in August, primarily in association with higher
levels of excess reserves.
(2) In often volatile markets, other interest rates rose substan-
tially over the intermeeting period. Bond yields moved up sharply in the first
part of the intermeeting period, as further declines in the dollar against a
backdrop of strength in the economy spurred concerns about inflation and
anticipation of some tightening of monetary policy. Short-term market rates
also were rising, though by less, as at least a slight firming of policy was
perceived to be in train. After the announcement of the discount rate increase,
short-term rates increased considerably further, and commercial banks raised
the prime rate by 1/2 percentage point. On balance, private short-term rates
are up around 3/4 of a percentage point since the August meeting, while Treasury
bill rates have increased somewhat less, perhaps benefitting partly from the
approach of another debt ceiling deadline that could disrupt supply. Bond
rates have risen somewhat further after the discount rate action, but the bulk
of the net increase of more than 1/2 of a percentage point over the intermeet-
ing period was registered before that time. Rates on fixed-rate mortgages have
climbed about 5/8 of a percentage point since the meeting, but ARM rates have
risen relatively little, as lenders have sweetened terms to attract borrowers
to their variable-rate instruments. Most stock price indexes reached new highs
in late August, but have retreated since then to levels about 1 to 5 percent
below those at the last FOMC meeting.
(3) The dollar's exchange value against the G-10 currencies came
under substantial downward pressure in the second half of August and by early
September had declined by 2-1/2 percent from the last FOMC meeting to a level
ation appeared to be greater pessimism about the pace of adjustment of external
imbalances, sparked by the release of U.S. trade figures for June. In addition,
prospects for growth abroad relative to the U.S. implied little contribution
from this source to external adjustment. More recently the dollar has traded
somewhat above levels prevailing around the time of the discount rate increase,
leaving the net decline for the intermeeting period at 2 percent.
, while the Desk purchased about $400 million, primarily against yen
in the period before the change in the discount rate.
(4) Growth of M2 picked up further in August to about a 6 percent
annual rate and expansion of M3 increased to a 7-1/2 percent pace. Neverthe-
less, M2 remained well below the parallel band associated with its annual range,
while M3 was just at the lower edge of its parallel band. Data for early Sep-
tember suggest that expansion in both of the broader aggregates this month may
approach the August pace, which would imply growth for the three-month June-to-
September period consistent with the FOMC's specification of around 5 percent.
Ml advanced at a 5-1/4 percent pace in August, but seems to have slackened some-
what in September. Reflecting in part the effect of earlier interest rate
increases, the velocity of M2 appears to be growing at about a 3-1/2 percent
annual rate in the current quarter, based on the staff GNP forecast, and M3
velocity is projected to increase at a 2 percent rate. M1 velocity appears to
be rising at a 6-1/4 percent annual rate this quarter, the first substantial
increase in 3 years.
(5) The acceleration of M2 in August reflected stronger growth of
its retail deposit components, a cessation of runoffs in demand deposits, and
a pickup of growth in overnight RPs. The relatively steep yield curve for
retail deposits continued to encourage growth in small time deposits, which
accounted for much of the increase in the household component of M2, although
growth of total liquid retail instruments--OCDs, savings, MMDAs, and money mar-
ket mutual funds--more than reversed the previous month's net runoff. The
leveling off of demand deposits likely represented some tapering off of the
effects of previous interest rate increases on compensating balances and mort-
gage refinancing activity. Overnight and term RPs increased strongly at com-
mercial banks last month, helping to finance heavy purchases of government
KEY MONETARY AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV' 86
to
June July August August
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Excess reserves 1190 761 1032
pe - Preliminary estimate.
1. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
(6) M3 growth was bolstered in August by strong expansion in bank
credit, as both securities acquisitions and lending picked up considerably.
In addition to increasing term RPs, domestic banking offices borrowed heavily
from foreign branches, which evidently obtained funds by issuing Eurodollar
deposits-some of which are included in M3. Thrift institutions increased CD
issuance while running off RPs for the first time in more than a year. The
change in thrift funding patterns likely reflects reduced reliance on FHLB
advances as well as increased acquisitions of adjustable-rate mortgages, which
are less readily securitized and financed through RPs than are fixed-rate
(7) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors appears to have
expanded in August at around the reduced 8 percent pace of July, placing this
aggregate near the middle of its 8 to 11 percent annual range. The pattern
of credit demands has reflected the effects of rising long-term rates. Bond
issuance, by both businesses and state and local governments, was reduced in
August and September. Borrowing by businesses through bank loans and in the
commercial paper market also has remained weak, and the moderation in overall
credit usage may partly reflect some easing of the pace of financial restruc-
turing in the third quarter. Though the rise in mortgage rates has curtailed
fixed-rate mortgage financing, household borrowing appears to have been sup-
ported by a shift to adjustable-rate financing and by some strength in consumer
credit, which has been bolstered recently by auto sales incentives. Federal
borrowing picked up sharply in August, after the temporary extension of the
debt ceiling. The Treasury has continued a normal pattern of borrowing in
September, despite the prospect of a surplus in the federal budget this month.
The Treasury's cash balance surged after mid-month, reflecting unusually
large quarterly tax receipts from corporations, as well as payments by
Policy alternatives
(8) The table below presents three alternative specifications for
growth of the monetary aggregates from August to December based on the usual
differences in pressures on reserve positions. (August, rather than Septem-
ber, is used as the base, as monetary data for September are still incomplete.
More detailed data, including implied growth from September to December, are
shown on the table and charts on the following pages.)
Memo:
Long-run
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C ranges
Growth from August
to December
M2 5-1/2 4-1/2 3-1/2
M3 6-1/4 6 5-3/4
Ml 4-1/2 3 1-1/2
Implied growth from
Q4'86 to Q4'87
Associated federal
funds rate range 4 to 8 5 to 9 6 to 10
(9) Under alternative B, reserve paths would continue to be drawn
with adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at the $600 million level that has
been specified since early September. Money markets do not yet appear to
reflect this higher level of borrowing, and the federal funds rate would be
expected to firm a little, into a 7-1/4 to 7-3/8 percent range, as borrowing
came to average around $600 million and the market perceived the Federal
Reserve's intentions. The three-month Treasury bill rate would climb by
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 Ml
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
about 1/4 percentage point toward 6-3/4 percent, consistent with the slight
firming of the federal funds rate and an unwinding of distortions associated
with potential debt-ceiling disruptions. Private short-term rates also would
rise, but by even smaller amounts. In light of the higher federal funds rate
compared with its level expected at the last FOMC meeting, the federal funds
range associated with alternative B, given in the last line of the table, is
suggested at 5 to 9 percent; this would be 1 percentage point above the range
now in the directive, and more nearly centered on the federal funds rates
thought likely to prevail under this alternative.
(10) The slight further firming of short-term rates likely under
alternative B would tend to support trading of the dollar on foreign exchange
markets at around current levels for a while. Under these circumstances, the
Treasury bond rate would be expected to continue to fluctuate a little above
gages could drift higher into more normal alignment with Treasuries. Legis-
lative developments could have a significant effect on the dollar and domestic
financial markets over coming weeks, however. Agreement on a mechanism for
substantial and continuing budget deficit reductions would tend to bolster
bond prices and possibly the dollar. However, should little substantive
progress be made on the budget, or should relatively restrictive trade mea-
sures seem to be in train, bond yields could come under upward pressure.
In addition, if incoming information pointed to continued massive current
account deficits, significant downward pressure on the dollar could well
reemerge. In this event, long-term rates would be expected to rise in re-
flection of associated concerns about inflation and demand for dollar assets,
while short-term rates also would tend to move higher in anticipation of
further monetary restraint. Indeed, the staff GNP forecast envisions further
declines in the dollar over coming quarters and upward movements of short-
term interest rates; in that forecast a portion of these movements has been
assumed to occur in the fourth quarter. 1
(11) The monetary aggregate specifications of alternative B assume
that the reserve pressures of this alternative are maintained through year-
end. Under these conditions, M2 is expected to grow at a 4-1/2 percent rate,
near its pace of recent months. This would bring growth in M2 for the year
to 4 percent, well below the lower end of the Committee's 5-1/2 to 8-1/2
percent long-run range. Adjustments of portfolios to the recent increase in
open market rates would act to restrain M2 growth over the months ahead,
especially its more liquid components, resulting in a further rise in M2
velocity. Opportunity costs of holding OCDs, savings deposits and MMDAs have
risen appreciably over recent weeks and are likely to remain high owing to
sluggish adjustment of offering rates. Moreover, similar to the experience
thus far this year, demand deposits could well remain about flat, as the
effects of the expected growth in economic activity over the remainder of the
year are about offset by the impact of the recent upward movement in interest
rates. Growth in small time deposits, in contrast, should be well maintained
as banks and thrifts have been adjusting yields on these accounts more promptly
to those in the open market. Given its relatively large interest sensitivity,
M1 would be expected to grow at only a 3 percent rate over August to December,
implying quarterly average growth of 3-1/4 percent in the fourth quarter and
a 2-1/4 percent rate of velocity expansion.
(12) Growth in M3 from August to December is anticipated at a 6
percent rate under alternative B. This would be a little stronger than its
pace earlier in the year, and would move this aggregate close to, though not
quite within, its longer-run range. Bank credit growth, and associated
issuance of managed liabilities in M3, should be buoyed by additional reli-
ance by businesses on short-term sources of funds, given increasing financing
needs and the rise in bond rates. Despite some moderation in total mortgage
flows owing to higher interest rates and reduced housing market activity, the
renewed borrower interest in ARMs should support growth in thrift assets and
managed liabilities in M3. Consumer credit growth may slacken substantially
after the current round of automobile incentive programs ends and spending
on cars and other durables weakens. Total borrowing by domestic nonfinancial
sectors is expected to strengthen a bit in the fourth quarter, reflecting
entirely a pickup in federal borrowing to finance a larger deficit. For the
year, debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to rise by 9-1/2
percent on a quarterly average basis, in the middle of the annual range for
this aggregate.
(13) Under alternative C, the borrowing assumption would be raised
to $800 million. The federal funds rate would move up to 7-3/4 percent or a
little above, after the markets had adjusted to this further tightening of
pressures on reserve positions. Other short-term market rates might also
rise by around 1/2 percentage point, with the 3-month bill rising to about
relatively narrow spread of this rate over CDs now prevailing. The dollar
could firm a little, at least in the near term, and the perceived willingness
to tighten policy could postpone emergence of any subsequent downward pressure
on the dollar. Bond yields probably would move higher, although if the mar-
kets were to view this measure as forestalling future inflationary pressures,
any rise in long-term rates could be rather small.
(14) Under alternative C, M2 growth over the August-to-December
period would slow to about a 3-1/2 percent pace, as opportunity costs of
holding M2 balances widened substantially further. At the most liquid end of
the spectrum, M1 might expand only a little over this period, with demand
deposits declining. Banks and thrifts, faced with even smaller inflows to
core deposits, would step up their issuance of managed liabilities to fund
only marginally weaker credit demands, and M3 would expand at a 5-3/4 percent
rate over the August-to-December period, leaving growth for the year at 5-1/4
(15) Alternative A assumes that reserve paths would be constructed
with borrowing of $400 million. Since markets have not yet adjusted to the
current $600 million objective, this alternative implies only a modest drop
in money market rates from current levels. The federal funds rate would
drift lower to below 7 percent, somewhat above its trading range before the
recent run-up in rates. Other private short-term rates also would decline,
perhaps by a quarter of a percentage point. Bill rates might drop very little
on balance once potential supply constraints eased. Even so, absent a clear
indication of weakness in the economy or lessened inflation concerns, market
participants probably would be surprised by any easing action caning on the
heels of the discount rate hike. The dollar might well come under consider-
able downward pressure, and this would tend to limit possible declines in
bond yields.
(16) Under alternative A, all of the monetary aggregates likely
would accelerate from their pace of recent months, bringing M3 to the lower
bound of its long-run range. Both M2 and M3 would be expected to end the
year growing at rates that fall within, but in the lower portions of, their
tentative ranges for next year. As short-term rates retraced much of their
recent advances, opportunity costs would act as only a minor drag on M2 in
the caning months, especially on its M1 and other liquid components. Con-
sequently, M1 and M2 would expand at rates more in line with income over the
fourth quarter. M3 would be expected to strengthen to a 6-1/4 percent rate
over the August-to-December period as larger core deposit inflows to banks
and thrifts would not be offset completely by smaller issuance of managed
Directive language
(17) Draft language for the operational paragraph, with the usual
options for alternative specifications of reserve pressures, is presented be-
low for Committee consideration. The proposed addition of the phrase "sought
in recent weeks" at the end of the first sentence would take account of the
difference between actual reserve pressures recently and those specified in
the reserve paths since the intermeeting adjustment in early September. The
sentence on possible intermeeting adjustments provides for the usual options
with regard to the symmetry or asymmetry of such adjustments with appropriate
use of "would" or "might" and "somewhat" or "slightly." New language is
suggested to update the M1 sentence.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future,
the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. A)/maintain (Alt. B)/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT (Alt. C) the [DEL: existing] degree of pressure on reserve
positions SOUGHT IN RECENT WEEKS. Somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater
reserve restraint would (MIGHT), or (SOMEWHAT) slightly lesser reserve
restraint (WOULD) might, be acceptable depending on indications of
inflationary pressures, the strength of the business expansion,
developments in foreign exchange markets, as well as the behavior of
the aggregates. This approach is expected to be consistent with growth
in M2 and M3 over the period from [DEL: June through September] AUGUST
THROUGH DECEMBER at annual rates of around [DEL: 5] ____ and [DEL: 7-1/2] ____
percent, RESPECTIVELY. {DEL: Growth in M1 while picking up from-recent
levels, is expected to remain well below its pace during 1986.] M1
IS EXPECTED TO CONTINUE TO GROW RELATIVELY SLOWLY. The Chairman
may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager
for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the period
before the next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal
funds rate persistently outside a range of [DEL: 4 to 8] ____ TO ____
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
Monthly
1986--Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Weekly
June 3
July I
8
Sept. 2
9
Sept. II
17
18
Short-term
CDs money.deral Treasury bills comm. mark
ey  bank
feeral / /secondary marketfndsecondary market paper mutual prime
funds -3 [ ea 5 market .. mutual
S jmonth 8-mon h 1year 3-month fund
S -a
September 21. 1987
corporate conventional home mortgagesU.S. government constant A utility municipal--- - -- .....
A tility Bon secondary
maturity yields recently Bond primary market
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures 
Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted
SEPT. 21, 1987
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt
2
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government
PEBCMNT AUIUAL GROUTHi
ANIUALLI (UI1 TO QIV)
BEEKLT LEVELS (tBILLIONS)
1987-AUG. 3 751.6
SEPT. 7 P 746.0
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
SEPT. 21, 1987
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds, NSA denomi- Term Term Short-
Demand checkable RPs and MMDAs Savings nation general Institu- nation RPs Eurodollare Savings term Commer. Bankers
rlod Currency deposits deposits Eurodollarl NSA deposits time purpose, tions time NSA NSA bonds Treasury la paper accep
NSA deposits' and broker/ only depositsa securities tances
dealer 2
ANNUALLU (4TH QTR)
APE.
HAX
JUNE
JULI
AUG. P
S48.0
543.4
__ _ ±_ _ _ _ __L_ __ _ _ _I._ _ _ _ __L__ _ _ _ _I _ _ I_ __ __ _I__ _ _j _ _ I I
NSTATUTIONS ABB SUBTRACTED1/ INCLUDES RETAIL REPURCHASE AGBEIEENTS. ALL IBA AND KWUGH ACCOUNTS AT COMMEECIAL BANKS AND THBIFT I
FRO SRALL TIME DEPOSITS.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
Net Changes in System Holdings of Securities1 CLASS II-FOMC
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
September 21, 1987
STreasury coupons net purchases Federal agencies net purchases' Net change
Period Treasury bills outright holdings Net RPs'
net change' within 1-5 -10 over 10 total 1-5 5-10 over 10 total total'
1-year 1-5_ 5-10_ over 10 totalearweh
July 1
8
Sept. 2
9
LEVEL--Sept. 16
($ billions)
-- 252
1,767 5,036
- -252
920 8,948
- 11,981
2,247
3,632
4,236
maturing bills. Excludes redemptions, maturity shifts, rollovers of maturing coupon issues, and direct Treasury
borrowing from the System.
4. Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts only. Excludes redemptions and maturity shifts.
