Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
August 18, 1989
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) August 18, 1989
CLASS I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Immediately after the July FOMC meeting, the borrowing
objective was set at $600 million, reflecting a slight easing of policy
and also an upward technical adjustment to take account of unusually
strong seasonal borrowing. Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing averaged
$581 million in the two maintenance periods completed in July, and, in
line with the policy move, the federal funds rate edged down to around
neighborhood until late in the month, when policy was eased further with a
reduction in the borrowing objective to $550 million, in the context of
incoming data which continued to portray a softer economy and some less-
ening in inflationary pressures. Since then, federal funds have traded
around 9 percent, but actual borrowing in the most recent complete main-
tenance period averaged $621 million, boosted by a shortfall in reserves
owing to an unexpectedly large Treasury balance on the last day of the
period. Over the first eight days of the current period, borrowing has
run at $521 million on average. Seasonal credit continues strong, but is
down a bit from its late-July levels of more than $500 million, perhaps in
response to the lower funds rate.
(2) During the past six weeks, market interest rates swung over
a wide range in response to shifting perceptions about the state of the
economy and the outlook for monetary policy, but most rates ended the
period with only modest net changes. The easing of policy that occurred
in July had been expected at the time of the last meeting. Nonetheless,
rates continued to decline through July as weaker-than-anticipated eco-
nomic data were seen as portending additional policy steps. The 1/2 per-
centage point drop in the funds rate was accompanied by a somewhat larger
decline in most private money market rates, and major banks cut their
prime rate one-half percentage point to 10-1/2 percent. Long-term rates
also fell. In early August, however, market sentiment changed on release
of the July employment report. With various other economic indicators
also showing some strengthening, the market's expectations of further
near-term easing by the Federal Reserve were scaled back. The consequent
backup in rates left long-term yields about where they were at the time of
the last FOMC meeting and Treasury bill rates up about 1/4 percentage
point on balance. Short-term private rates, however, remained down on
balance, by roughly 30 basis points from their early-July levels. In
equity markets, most major price indexes reached record highs during the
intermeeting period, before dropping back some. Nevertheless, they
retained increases of as much as 9 percent over the period.
(3) Unusually large changes in some interest rate spreads have
occurred recently, related in part to supply effects stemming from the
process of resolving troubled thrifts. In money markets, spreads between
private and Treasury rates narrowed substantially. Bill supplies had been
expected to rise markedly in the third quarter, after a huge paydown of
bills in the second quarter, as the Treasury's needs for funding picked
up. Passage of the thrift legislation, which called for the Treasury to
funnel $18.8 billion to the Resolution Trust Corporation (RTC) before the
end of September, added to borrowing requirements in the bill market. In
long-term markets, however, the thrift situation has contributed to a
widening of spreads between some obligations and Treasury issues. For
example, the prospect of thrifts liquidating their $14 billion in holdings
of junk bonds to comply with the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery,
and Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA), along with a steady stream of new
issuance and concerns about rising defaults, helped raise spreads in that
market to their highest levels this decade. In secondary mortgage mar-
kets, there were some sizable sales of mortgage-backed securities by sav-
ings and loans, and the outlook for further sales by the industry was a
factor keeping spreads about 50 basis points wider than earlier this year.
This increase in spreads has fed through to an extent to the primary mar-
ket for fixed-rate mortgages, where rates have fallen less than yields on
comparable maturity Treasury issues this year. Over the same period,
initial rates on adjustable-rate mortgages have not declined on balance,
even as other short-term rates moved lower, as deep discounting of ARMs
has become less popular.
(4) As with interest rates, exchange rates moved over a fairly
wide range during the intermeeting period in response to release of eco-
nomic data and associated actual or expected Federal Reserve monetary
policy actions. On balance, the dollar's exchange value rose by 2-3/4
percent on a weighted-average basis in terms of other G-10 currencies.
The recent strengthening of the dollar perhaps reflected a firming of real
returns on dollar assets relative to previous expectations, based on
better inflation news and a stronger economy, as well as improvement in
the trade balance. The Desk sold a total of $950 million against yen and
(5) Growth in the broader monetary aggregates accelerated in
July and appears to have continued at a fairly strong pace into August.
The rapid rebuilding of balances drawn down to meet April tax liabilities
and the substantial narrowing of opportunity costs since the spring con-
tributed to the pickup in money. M2 grew at a 12 percent annual rate last
month, lifting it to the lower end of its target range. Growth in July
was considerably above the 7 percent rate specified at the last FOMC meet-
ing for the three months ending September. M3 growth was boosted by a
pickup in bank credit and, at 9-1/4 percent, also exceeded the 7 percent
rate the Committee expected for the June-to-September interval.
(6) Strength was especially evident in the liquid components of
the aggregates, which earlier in the year had borne the brunt of the out-
sized tax payments. Moreover, opportunity costs on these accounts dropped
sharply through late July relative both to market instruments and to less
liquid types of deposits. Transactions deposits rebounded in July, lift-
ing M1 to a 10-1/2 percent rate of growth. Demand deposits grew at a
higher compensating balance requirements, while OCDs registered their
first monthly increase this year. Similarly, within nontransactions M2,
the liquid components were responsible for the acceleration last month;
growth in small time deposits slowed substantially. The strength in over-
all M2 deposits last month held down depository institutions' needs for
managed liabilities. Large time deposit issuance by banks increased only
moderately, despite the more rapid rise in bank credit. At thrifts, siz-
able declines were posted in large time deposits and term RPs in M3, as
well as in FHLB advances, likely signalling a further contraction in their
assets last month.
(7) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors appears to have
grown in July at about the reduced 7 percent rate of June. Business bor-
rowing strengthened as C&I loans at banks increased at better than a
in other markets: net issuance of commercial paper by nonfinancial firms
came to a halt last month, and corporate bond issuance slowed from its
rapid May-June pace as the decline in long-term rates stalled. Available
information on household debt suggests no sharp deviations from the recent
growth paths of either mortgage or consumer credit. Real estate loan
growth at banks increased a bit in July from its first-half pace, but the
June mortgage commitment data from thrifts showed a downturn. Municipal
and federal borrowing in July appears to have been quite subdued. The
federal government continued to benefit from the large size of the April
tax payments and financed its deficit last month by drawing on its cash
balance. Over the remainder of the third quarter, however, the Treasury's
funding needs are set to grow rapidly, boosted by the $18.8 billion called
for by FIRREA. Already, a $15 billion 247-day cash management bill has
been issued, in part to finance RTC's initial operations. Through July,
overall domestic nonfinancial debt grew at about a 7-3/4 percent annual
rate from its fourth-quarter base, leaving it in the lower portion of its
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV '88
to
May June July July
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
1
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 523 573 588
Excess reserves 1031 905 972
Policy Alternatives
(8) Three alternatives are presented below for Committee con-
sideration. Alternative B involves federal funds continuing to trade
mostly in a 9 to 9-1/8 percent range and adjustment plus seasonal borrow-
ing at the discount window remaining at $550 million. Under alternative
A, a funds rate of 8-1/2 to 8-5/8 percent would be expected to be asso-
ciated with borrowing of $450 million, while under alternative C, a funds
rate of 9-1/2 to 9-5/8 percent would accompany borrowing of $650 million.
As is apparent, the alternatives incorporate a rule of thumb of 50 basis
points on the funds rate for each $100 million change in adjustment plus
seasonal borrowing, implying discount borrowing behavior that is only half
as responsive as that embodied in the traditional rule of thumb. This
reduced sensitivity stems in part from the very low and largely frictional
levels of adjustment borrowing that would be consistent with any of these
funds rates. Consequently, the bulk of borrowing is likely to remain
seasonal credit. Under alternative A, seasonal credit would have to drop
significantly from current levels. Such credit is sensitive to the spread
between the funds rate and the discount rate, though less so than adjust-
ment credit has been historically. Abstracting from interest-spread
effects, seasonal borrowing, which reached record levels in late July, is
likely to begin to move lower later in the intermeeting period. But with
seasonal credit showing surprising strength and adjustment credit inex-
plicably weak, the outlook for borrowing remains uncertain, suggesting
continued flexibility by the Desk in its approach to the borrowing objec-
(9) Markets still seem to expect a slight easing of policy over
the months ahead. The stability of the funds rate around the current
level under alternative B, especially if combined with incoming economic
data in line with the greenbook forecast of sustained economic growth,
would raise further doubts in securities markets about the likelihood of
such an easing. The alteration of market perceptions about future policy
moves may induce a small rise in private money market rates. Treasury
bill rates already have adjusted upward relative to private short-term
rates in reflection of actual and near-term heavy supply. Thus, they
could edge up by less than private rates--to the 8 percent level--as the
recent surge in bill issuance recedes after the initial RTC funding is
completed. Intermediate- and long-term yields could move up over coming
months, though by limited amounts should inflation remain moderate in line
with the staff forecast. Supported by slightly higher market rates,
strength in the dollar on foreign exchange markets could persist, at least
for a time.
(10) Alternative A's policy easing likely would engender general
declines in market yields. A 50 basis point reduction in the trading
range for federal funds would come more promptly, and be larger, than the
easing currently built into the structure of interest rates. Money market
interest rates could drop 1/4 percentage point or so--and somewhat more if
the action itself fostered the notion that the Federal Reserve would be
inclined to undertake additional steps to loosen reserve pressure in the
months ahead. A rally in bond markets also would seem probable, espe-
cially because inflation concerns do not now seem to be weighing on market
psychology; however, should spending prove reasonably strong, there is
some risk that such concerns would be reignited against the background of
the further easing of policy in alternative A. Some downward adjustment
to the exchange value of the dollar also could occur since foreign author-
ities would be unlikely to follow up with comparable easing actions in
light of inflationary pressures abroad.
(11) Under alternative C, market interest rates would back up
abruptly, given that the Federal Reserve policy tightening would come as a
surprise. Increases in short rates by more than the 1/2 percentage point
rise in the funds rate could well occur, as market participants reassessed
not only current but also future money market conditions in light of a
more restrictive policy stance than they anticipated. The advance in bond
yields probably would be more restrained in view of the implications of
higher short-term rates for future economic activity and inflation. Such
monetary policy tightening would result in some additional upward pressure
on the dollar.
(12) Growth of the monetary aggregates from June to September
expected to be associated with the three policy alternatives is given in
the table below. (More detailed data are shown on the table and charts on
subsequent pages.) With only six weeks left in the quarter, most of the
effects of the various money market conditions associated with the alter-
natives would be felt in the fourth quarter; money growth over the June-
to-September period differs relatively little across the three alter-
natives, with M2 rising well into the lower half of its annual range by
September, while M3 edges up a little further in the lower half of its
range. Growth of the aggregates will be supported by continued expansion
in nominal income around its recent pace and by the declines in oppor-
tunity costs of monetary assets since March. Nevertheless, M2 and M3 are
projected to slow over the remainder of the third quarter as the restock-
ing of balances depleted earlier by tax payments is completed and as the
resolution of the thrift crisis depresses retail deposits and managed
liabilities at S&Ls. In the staff greenbook forecast, the resolution is
not expected to have a material impact on mortgage activity, residential
construction, and GNP expansion more generally, but the particular
approach taken by the RTC will affect the money growth rates associated
with a given path for the economy. However, the impact of the resolution
on the aggregates seems rather difficult to predict with any precision, in
part because it depends on policies yet to be fully specified.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from June
to September
M2 9-1/2 9 8-1/2
M3 7 6-3/4 6-1/2
Ml 4-1/2 4 3-1/2
Associated federal
funds rate range 7 to 11 7 to 11 7 to 11
(13) Although passage of thrift legislation should bolster depos-
itor confidence and forestall some thrift deposit outflows, the substitu-
tion of RTC funds (not in the aggregates) for deposits and other liabili-
ties, along with discouragement of asset expansion at thrifts, are
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
------------------------------------ ------------------------ ------------------------
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
expected on balance to damp growth of the broader aggregates.2 The
restraining effect might be particularly evident in the period just ahead
owing to the inducement for the RTC to spend $20 billion by the end of
September. Most of those funds are likely to replace current S&L liabili-
ties, with particular focus on high-yielding liabilities. With respect to
M2, premia on offering rates on small time deposits at insolvent thrifts
should decline, with a more general softening of deposit rates possible at
both banks and thrifts as competitive pressures become less intense.3  In
response to the higher opportunity costs on deposits, some portion of the
funds withdrawn is likely to be transferred by the public into investments
outside M2. This would be particularly true of brokered deposits, which
often are of high denomination ($80,000 to $100,000) and may be held by
especially rate-sensitive investors. Partly as a consequence, M2 growth
under alternative B is projected to slow from around 8 percent in August
to 6 percent in September, with the resolution impact accounting for per-
haps as much as 1 percentage point of the moderation. Moreover, the
rebound in market rates since their lows in late July has widened oppor-
tunity costs, which will also tend to damp M2 growth.
(14) The influence of the legislation on M3 will be considerably
larger. Those government funds not substituting for M2 liabilities will
be available to substitute for managed liabilities, including those in M3.
Moreover, assets held by insolvent thrifts will decline as these institu-
tions are liquidated or pared in size by RTC conservators; some assets
will be sold into markets and others may be acquired by the RTC, which
would fund them from non-M3 sources. Tighter capital requirements and
more restrictive asset standards also should hold down asset expansion at
other thrifts, whose sales of mortgage-backed securities may begin to be
supplemented by sales of junk bonds. While thrift RPs and large time
deposits should continue to decline, some of the reduction in managed
liabilities at thrifts will take the form of repayments of FHLB advances
and other non-M3 borrowing, muting the decline in M3.5 Moreover,
responding to the higher spreads on mortgages, banks are likely to absorb
a portion of thrift assets, boosting their needs for funds. On balance,
the thrift situation is projected to damp M3 growth by about 2 percentage
points in September to 5 percent under alternative B.
(15) In the fourth quarter, if short-term interest rates remain
around current levels, as in the staff economic forecast, M2 growth is
seen at a 6-1/2 percent rate, a little above the projected pace of nominal
GNP. For the quarter, the impact on velocity of the lower offering rates
associated with the thrift resolution process is assumed about to offset
the effects of earlier declines in market rates. Growth of M2 for the
year would come to about 4-1/4 percent, damped only slightly by the
accelerated thrift resolution. However, the effect on annual growth of M3
may be as large as 1/2 percentage point. Growth in this aggregate in the
fourth quarter is projected to remain close to its 5 percent September
pace, bringing its advance for the year to 4-1/2 percent.
(16) Growth of the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is pro-
jected to strengthen to a 9 percent pace over August and September, before
moderating to 8 percent over the fourth quarter. For August and Septem-
ber, the federal component will be boosted by the initial financing of
thrift resolution spending; after September this spending will be financed
off-budget by REFCORP, which is not included in the debt measure. Outside
the federal sector, debt growth is expected to slow somewhat in September
after being augmented in July and August by corporate restructuring
activity. Over the fourth quarter debt of nonfederal borrowers is pro-
jected to increase at around the 8 percent pace of the first half of the
year. Growth for the year of the total debt measure is projected at 8-1/4
percent, with about 1/4 percentage point of this total accounted for by
the additional federal borrowing associated with the on-budget thrift
(17) Alternative C, by widening opportunity costs on liquid
balances, would tend to retard M2 growth to a 4-1/2 percent rate in Sep-
tember. If rates remained at the higher level associated with this
alternative, little pickup in M2 growth would be anticipated in the fourth
quarter, despite the waning impact of the effects of the thrift resolu-
tion. For the year, M2 likely would grow at a 3-3/4 percent rate. The
lower interest rates of alternative A could boost M2 growth to a 7-1/2
percent rate in September, and, with comparable growth in the fourth
quarter, to 4-3/4 percent for the year. By contrast, with both M3 and
debt much less responsive to variations in short-term rates, their annual
growth rates are unlikely to differ appreciably from those consistent with
the flat interest rates in the staff forecast.
Directive Language:
(18) Shown below is a draft of the operational paragraph with the
standard options, including the existing ordering and wording of the fac-
tors that could prompt an intermeeting adjustment in reserve pressures.
(19) As the members will recall, the Committee was polled shortly
after the July meeting regarding preferences for the ordering and wording
of the factors bearing on intermeeting adjustments. A majority indicated
at that time that they wanted to continue to give first priority to price
developments, but a significant minority proposed moving the reference to
business conditions up to the top of the list. Several commented on the
placement of the monetary aggregates in the listing; three indicated that
they would move the aggregates up to first or second place, but four
expressed strong reservations about giving them greater prominence, in-
cluding two who wanted to move them to the bottom of the list. With
regard to particular wording, a number suggested substituting a reference
to "progress toward price stability" for the current "indications of in-
flationary pressures"
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to decrease slightly (SOMEWHAT)/
MAINTAIN/INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. Taking account of indications of infla-
tionary pressures, the strength of the business expansion,
the behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments in
foreign exchange and domestic financial markets, somewhat
(SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint (WOULD)(MIGHT) or some-
what (SLIGHTLY) lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT) be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with growth
of M2 and M3 over the period from June through September at
annual rates of about [DEL: 7] ____ AND ____ percent RESPECTIVELY. The
Chairman may call for Committee consultation if it appears to
the Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions
during the period before the next meeting are likely to be
associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a
range of [DEL: 7 to 11] ____ TO ____ percent.
August 21, 1989
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
J *1I _LIr_ L_ _ .t -- Ir..
-- Treasury bills--- -U.S. Gov't. constant-- --- conventional home--
-- secondary market-- maturity yields-- -rtgages-----
money sec mkt primary market
cds comm. market bank corp. A muni.
Monthly
AUG 88
SEP 88
OCT 88
NOV 88
DEC 88
JAN 89
FEB 89
MAR 89
APR 89
MAY 89
JUI 89
JUL 89
NMekly
MAY 3 89
MAY 10 89
MAY 17 89
MAY 24 89
MAY 31 89
JUN 7 89
JUN 14 89
JUN 21 89
JUN 28 89
JUL 5 89
JUL 12 89
JUL 19 89
JUL 26 89
AUG 2 89
AUG 9 89
AUG 16 89
Daily
AUG 11 89
AUG 17 89
AUG 18 89
V... 7.96
8.95 /...
8.92p 7.86
L l AI_ I^ _I
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted AUG. 21, 1989
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt1
nontransactions total loans U.S
Period Mi M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
in M2 In M3 only investments
ANN. GROWTH RATES (%) :
ANNUALLY (Q4 TO Q4 1
LEVELS ($BILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
--... 4l, avaraae basis, derived by averaging end-of-month levels of adjacent months, and have been adjusted to remove
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Class II FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted AUG. 21, 1989
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi mutual funds, NSA denomi- Term Term Short. Bankers
Demand checkable RPs and MMOAs Savings nation general Inslitu- nation RPs Eurodollars Savings term Cornmer- accep
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars NSA deposils time purpose lions time NSA' NSA' bonds Treasury cial paper' lances
NSA' deposits' and broker only deposits securities
dealer'
LEVELS ($BILLIONS) :
ANNUALLY (4TH QTR.)
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES
1
August 21, 1989 Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
August 2
9
August 16
Treasurv b.lls
Net
purchases2
Redemp-
tions (-)
Net
chance
Change from end-of-period to end-of-period.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts.
Outright transactions in market and with foreign accounts,
short-tezz notes acquired in exchange for maturing bills.
maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing coupon issues.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
I I
Swithin
1-year
y 
c
o s
Net pu3chases
3
over 10 tionns (-
Net
Federal
agencies
redemptions
i-\tin (- I cag -er 15 1hn
-- 228
--- 3
- -225
and
Excludes
purchase sale transactions (+).
6. The levels of agency issues were ih
as follows: within
1-year 1-5 5-10 over 10 total
i~ .. . . -- - ". .
Net change
outright
holdings
total Net RPs
- -856
-5,131 14,448
-1,285 -23,527
-1,771 10,002
-7,984 -5,152
- -12,088
-858 -7,774
-737 -327
I __
