Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
May 12, 1989
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC May 12, 1989
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Over the intermeeting period, reserve paths continued to
allow for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $500 million, and federal
funds were expected to trade at or a little above 9-3/4 percent. Reserve
management was complicated in April and early May by federal tax revenues
that proved stronger than anticipated, swelling Treasury balances at
Federal Reserve Banks and draining more reserves from the banking system
than projected. The rapid rise in Treasury balances contributed to
slightly firmer conditions in reserve markets; adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing averaged $565 million in the three maintenance periods completed
since the March meeting and the federal funds rate averaged 9.85 percent.
Over the first eight days of the current period, borrowing has come in at
$525 million on average and the effective funds rate at 9.84 percent.
Borrowing has been boosted by a particularly rapid upswing in seasonal
credit usage this year to an average of $325 million in the current main-
tenance period. Seasonal borrowing is running noticeably above the rela-
tively high levels at this time last year, reflecting the wider gap that
now exists between the funds rate and the discount rate. Some of the
strength over the last two years may stem from the seasonal program
liberalizations instituted in 1985, which have shown through to actual
borrowing with the revival of agricultural loan demand.
(2) Most market interest rates declined over the intermeeting
period, with substantial decreases in the short and intermediate portion
of the maturity spectrum. Data suggesting a more moderate pace of
activity and prices appeared to eliminate the likelihood of a tightening
of monetary policy and even to kindle some anticipation of an easing.
Rates on short- and intermediate-term Treasury issues dropped about a
percentage point and on private money market instruments a bit less.
Treasury bond yields fell around 35 basis points. Gains in this market
during the intermeeting period may have been tempered by prospects for
upcoming supply. In addition to the regular mid-quarter auctions of 10-
and 30-year issues, the Treasury announced that it would make nonmarket-
able zero-coupon securities available directly to Refcorp rather than
forcing the agency to purchase them in the market. This announcement
together with progress on the legislative package tended to focus atten-
tion on the large volume of long-term bonds this new agency would be
issuing. The spread of rates in primary and secondary mortgage markets
over Treasuries continued to widen, reflecting a number of influences,
including an apparent increase in expected interest rate volatility and
apprehensions that beleaguered thrift institutions might have to liquidate
their holdings of mortgage-related securities. Nevertheless, these
spreads remain well within the range of recent years. Spreads on junk
bonds over investment-grade securities rose more sharply, by 30 to 40
basis points, perhaps also affected to a degree by the prospect of
liquidations by thrifts. Also contributing was the impending issue by
RJR-Nabisco, reports of sales related to the Drexel situation, and con-
cerns about how issuers might fare in a softer economic environment.
Boosted by lower interest rates and expectations of more moderate, sus-
tainable, economic expansion, major stock price indexes rose about 7 per-
cent, reaching post-crash highs.
(3) The dollar appreciated about 1-1/4 percent on balance on a
weighted average basis over the intermeeting period despite the easing of
U.S. interest rates and a modest firming of interest rates abroad. Con-
cerns about the political prospects in Germany and Japan may have been a
significant factor in the dollar's recent strength, though the degree of
strength is somewhat puzzling.
(4) The monetary aggregates weakened in April, with substantial
declines after mid-month extending into early May. The sharp drop in
deposits was associated with outsized personal tax payments and a short-
fall in refunds. More generally, the aggregates continued to be restrain-
ed by the earlier rise in market interest rates, which substantially
increased the opportunity costs of most monetary assets. M2 grew at a 1/2
percent annual rate last month, considerably below the 3 percent rate
specified at the last FOMC meeting for the three months through June. M3
growth in April, at 2-3/4 percent, also fell well short of the 5 percent
rate the Committee foresaw for the March-to-June interval. Relative to
their annual target cones in April, M2 was somewhat below, and M3 a little
above, the lower bounds.
(5) The tax and opportunity cost factors had their impact on the
liquid components of the aggregates: transactions deposits, MMDAs, and
savings deposits ran off at more rapid rates in April, while inflows to
money market mutual funds eased. With currency growth also slowing, M1
dropped at a 5-1/4 percent rate. (The weakness in transactions accounts
led to a 7-1/2 percent rate of decline in total reserves last month. In
conjunction with the weakness in currency last month, this resulted in
essentially no growth in the monetary base.) Small time deposits rose at
nearly a 25 percent annual rate in April, roughly double their first-
quarter pace; rates on these deposits had tracked more closely previous
increases in market rates, and the drop in market rates left yields on
shorter-time deposits above those available on Treasury securities. Al-
though rates on retail deposits at thrift institutions rose last month
relative to those at banks, thrifts continued to lose such deposits,
albeit at a somewhat slower pace than earlier in the year. Overall M2
likely was little affected in April by continuing concerns about the
thrift industry; the dropoff to more normal levels in noncompetitive
tenders at Treasury auctions suggests that banks and money funds were in
general the beneficiaries of the relative weakness of thrift deposits.
The non-M2 portion of M3 continued to expand rapidly in April; large time
deposit issuance again was robust--even though bank credit advanced only a
small amount--as banks replaced borrowings from their foreign offices with
large CDs. Thrift large time deposits were swelled in April by the
proceeds of medium-term notes issued by several thrift holding companies
and downstreamed to their S&L subsidiaries.
(6) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors appears to have
grown at a somewhat slower pace in April, damped by strong tax revenues,
which reduced the Treasury's financing needs, and by earlier increases in
interest rates, which brought to a virtual halt refundings by state and
local borrowers. Business borrowing probably ran at about the same rate
as in March and was down in both months from earlier in the year, when
borrowing was inflated by large, merger-related financings. Available
information on household debt suggests that consumer and home equity
borrowing increased, perhaps related to the April tax date and higher
automobile sales. Mortgage growth through March appears to have been
well maintained; despite their problems, mortgage lending by thrifts
strengthened over the quarter. Since the fourth quarter of 1988, overall
domestic nonfinancial debt has grown around the midpoint of its 6-1/2 to
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'88
to
February March Aprilp  Aprilp
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 437 478 582
Excess reserves 1154 957 786
p - preliminary.
1. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
NOTE: Monthly reserve measures, including excess reserves and borrowing, are
calculated by prorating averages for two-week reserve maintenance periods that
overlap months. Reserve data have been revised to reflect annual revisions to
seasonal factors and new procedures to adjust for discontinuties associated
with the annual indexations of the reserve requirement exemption and low
reserve tranche.
Policy Alternatives
(7) Three policy alternatives are presented below for Committee
consideration. Under alternative B, funds would continue to trade in the
reserve market conditions are likely to involve borrowing of around $600
million. This technical adjustment to the borrowing objective from the
current $500 million level seems to be called for by the surge in seasonal
borrowing, which is expected to continue in the intermeeting period. In
the circumstances of still-low adjustment borrowing, the rise in seasonal
borrowing has reduced the overall borrowing shortfall that emerged last
fall. Uncertainty about the extent and effect of the increase in seasonal
borrowing as well as about the behavior of adjustment borrowing argues for
some continued flexibility by the Desk in the approach to the borrowing
objective. Under alternative A, the funds rate would decline to the 9-1/4
to 9-3/8 percent area with borrowing around $400 million, and under alter-
native C federal funds would rise to 10-1/4 to 10-3/8 percent and borrow-
ing to $800 million.
(8) Growth in the monetary aggregates expected under the three
alternatives is presented in the table below, along with implied growth
through June from a fourth-quarter base. (Detailed data are presented on
the table and charts on the following pages.) Under all three alterna-
tives, growth of M2 and M3 would rebound from early May, when deposits
were depressed by unusually large final tax payments and small refunds.
The rate of growth will depend in part on the extent to which the public
had anticipated its full tax liability and had adjusted liquid balances in
advance. If entirely anticipated, M1 and M2 ought to resume their under-
lying growth paths as determined by the course of income and interest
rates. However, much of the drawdown of liquid balances appears to have
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from March
to June
M2 2-1/4 1-1/2 3/4
M3 4-1/4 4 3-3/4
M1 -3-3/4 -4-1/2 -5-1/4
Growth from Q4'88
to June
M2 2-1/4 2 1-1/2
M3 4-1/4 4-1/4 4
M1 -1-3/4 -2 -2-1/2
Associated federal
funds rate range 7 to 11 8 to 12 8 to 12
been unanticipated, judging from the absence of an unusual buildup before
the tax season, as well as the normal behavior of recent quarterly decla-
rations. As a consequence, the rebound in money growth is expected to
include some "catch-up", as M1 and M2 balances are brought back closer to
desired levels. Such a catch-up is likely to be fairly gradual, accom-
plished largely by redirecting, and perhaps augmenting, savings flows,
rather than by liquidating other financial assets. On this basis, we have
assumed that the rebuilding of balances will add a percentage point to the
underlying growth of M2 over coming months. The greater growth of core
deposits feeds through to a degree to M3, which also is bolstered as
government deposits no longer serve as a source of new funds. Because the
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Actual Level
------ Estimated Level
* Projected Level
.E e
V
V
S
V ss
Vs
o
V...-/ /
I I i a I a I I I I I I
O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D
catch-up is presumed to be gradual, growth of M2 and M3 under all three
alternatives would be below the Committee's expectations for the March-to-
June period at the last meeting.
(9) M2 under all the alternatives embodies some impetus from the
decline in market rates over the intermeeting period, as well as a common
catch-up factor. In addition, any effect that thrift deposit outflows
might have had on M2 growth earlier in the year is likely to be even
smaller, as such outflows continue to abate. Nevertheless, owing to the
impact of tax payments in late April and early May, M2 is projected to
decline in May, before growing in June. As a consequence, this aggregate
through June should remain below the 3 percent lower bound of its target
cone, even under the reduced interest rates of alternative A. However, if
money market conditions of either alternative A or B were maintained
through the summer, the waning effects of earlier increases in market
interest rates, reinforced by the delayed upward adjustment of liquid
deposit rates, likely would bring M2 within its annual range by the end of
the third quarter, assuming spending and income growth close to the green-
book projections. M1 also is expected to strengthen, though given its
adverse opportunity costs, this aggregate would only level out in June
under B, and under all three alternatives would remain substantially below
its March level. The velocity of M2 would be expected to increase between
a 5 and 6 percent rate in the second quarter under the three alternatives;
this is substantially faster than would be predicted from our models of
money demand, given the interest rates of the three alternatives and
greenbook GNP, reflecting in part the depressing effect of the tax-related
drawdown on quarterly average M2.
(10) Growth of M3 in May and June is projected to be supported
by a strengthening of bank credit from its sluggish April pace and
associated funding needs. However, in May this pickup is funded impor-
tantly by increases in government deposits, and M3 is projected to rise at
only a 2 percent rate. Greater reliance on M3 sources of funds would be
expected in June as government deposits retreat and core deposits rebound,
resulting in M3 growth between 6-1/2 and 7-1/2 percent. Still, the net
rise in government deposits from March to June restrains the 3-month
growth path of this aggregate to only 3-3/4 to 4-1/4 percent under the
various alternatives, leaving M3 around 4-1/4 percent at an annual rate
above the fourth-quarter base of its annual range. Aggregate credit
demands of private domestic nonfinancial sectors over the remainder of the
quarter are expected to be maintained around the reduced rates of March
and April. But with the federal government's seasonally adjusted borrow-
ing declining further in light of the Treasury's ample cash balance,
expansion of total debt likely will slip to around a 7 percent average
annual rate in May and June, edging this aggregate below the 8-1/2 percent
midpoint of-its annual monitoring range.
(11) Since market yields now appear to have built in some near-
term easing of monetary policy, maintaining current conditions under
alternative B probably would be associated with some back-up in short-term
rates. Especially if incoming information on activity and prices does not
seem to confirm the extent of the weakness apparent in the most recent
data, that rise could be noticeable, on the order of 1/4 percentage point
or more. Under these circumstances, bond yields also might retrace some
of their most recent decline, with the 30-year Treasury bond returning to
the 9 percent level. With U.S. interest rates possibly firming under this
alternative, the exchange value of the dollar in the weeks ahead could be
subject to further upward pressure, unless monetary authorities were to
intervene in a much more aggressive manner.
(12) The easing of the federal funds rate under alternative A
would result in further declines in short-term rates of an additional 1/4
percentage point. With a policy move of this dimension this soon still
unexpected by market participants, it could reinforce the perception that
market rates have peaked, fueling a further rally in fixed-income and
stock markets. On the other hand, if the Federal Reserve were seen in
light of subsequent developments to have moved prematurely, the easing
could rekindle inflation concerns. In any case, some downward pressure on
the exchange value of the dollar would be likely as interest differentials
favoring dollar assets narrowed further.
(13) The tightening of policy under alternative C would be a
considerable surprise to financial markets, and would likely induce a
substantial-backup in rates. Increases in short-term interest rates could
exceed the nearly 1/2 percentage point rise in the federal funds rate, as
the market reassessed the Federal Reserve's monetary policy strategy. If
such a tightening were not followed by stronger economic data, risk premi-
ums on private paper might widen further, as worries spread about a pos-
sible recession and its effect on credit quality. Long-term Treasury
rates likely would rise, at least initially, but by less than yields on
corporate bonds and mortgage-backed securities; over time, any rate
increase might be reversed if such a policy came to be seen as raising the
odds on disinflation. Additional upward pressure on the dollar would
emerge from the higher U.S. real interest rates, absent similar tightening
actions abroad.
(14) Draft language for the operational paragraph, including the
usual options, is shown below. Should the Committee decide to "maintain"
current reserve conditions, the previous discussion of policy alternatives
suggests interpreting such a decision as consistent with a technical
increase in the borrowing assumption from $500 million to $600 million.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future,
the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/INCREASE SOMEWHAT
the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. Taking
account of indications of inflationary pressures, the strength of
the business expansion, the behavior of the monetary aggregates,
and developments in foreign exchange and domestic financial
markets, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint would
(MIGHT), or (SOMEWHAT) slightly lesser reserve restraint (WOULD)
might, be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2
and M3 over the period from March through June at annual rates of
about ____ [DEL:3] and ____ [DEL: 5] percent, respectively. The Chairman may call
for Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the period
before the next meeting are likely to be associated with a federal
funds rate persistently outside a range of ____ [DEL: 8] to ____ [DEL: 12] percent.
Shor
--- Treasury bills--
-- secondary market-
federal 3
funds month
cds
sec mkt
3-month
comm.
paper
1-month
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent
-U.S. Gov't. constant--
--- maturity yields--
money
market
mutual
fund
bank
prime
loan
May 15, 1989
ong-I erm,.
-- conventional home--
--- or tgages
corp. A
utility
rec off
muni.
Bond
Buyer
sec mkt
fixed-
rate
fixed-
rate
Honthly
MAY 88
JUN 88
JUL 88
AUG 88
SEP 88
OCT 88
NOV 88
DEC 88
JAN 89
FEB 89
MAR 89
APR 89
FEB 1 89
FEB 8 89
FEB 15 89
FEB 22 89
MAR 1 89
MAR 8 89
MAR 15 89
MAR 22 89
MAR 29 89
APR 5 89
APR 12 89
APR 19 89
APR 26 89
Daily
MAY 5 89
MAY 11 89
MAY 12 89
Strictly Conlidential (FR)
Bank Reserves, Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Cles.. ,
FOMC
Seasonalty adjusted MAY. 15, 1989
pank reserves' 9n___y stock mpeasres and liquid alsyts Benk credit Domestic noninafciI debt
Period nonborrowd ol monetary Ml M2 M3 L total loans US. olher' total'
base and goernmint
MONTHLY
1988-APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR. p
discontinuities.
p-preliminary
Strictly Conidenlial (FR)-
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures cl... l FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted MAY. 15, 1989
S- - i r 1 *l - .. T -- T . I T 1 1- r
Other
checkable
deposits
Overnight
RPs and
Eurodollrs
NSA'
MMDAs
NSA
Savings
deposits
Small
denomi-
nation
time
Money market
mutual funds, NSA
general Institu-
purpose lions
and broker only
Large
denomi-
nation
Term
Eurodollars
NSA'
Savings
bonds
Short-
term
Treasury
securiltes
Commer-
cial paper'
i i f
Bankers
accep
lances
nstitutions are subtracted from small time deposits.
Currency
Demand
daposiltPeriod
LEVELS (SBILLIONSI :
ANNUALLY (4TH QTR.)
MONTHLY
1988-APR.
HAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR. p
--- '
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS AND SECURITIES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjustedMay 15, 1989 STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasury coupons Feceral Net change
Net purchases agencies outright
Period Net 2 Rdemp- Net within Redemp- Net redemptions holdings
purchases tion (-) change 1-year 1-5 5-10 over tions (- change (-) total Net RP
Feb. 1
8
Mar. 1
8
May 3
10
Memo: LEVEL (bil.$)6
May 10
-- 20
-- 236
-- 218
- 2,734
-- 179
short-term notes acquired in exchange for maturing bills.
maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing coupon issues.
-- -800
1,092 3,661
- -3
-- 225
--- 3
- -225
and
Excludes
purchase sale transactions (+).
6. The levels of agency issues were
as follows: within
securities.
(-), and matched
