Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC May 11, 1990
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Open market operations since the last Committee meeting have
continued to be directed toward maintaining unchanged pressures on reserve
positions, and the federal funds rate has remained in the area of 8-1/4
percent. Federal funds have tended to the soft side of this level since
late April, however, reflecting a more abundant supply of nonborrowed
reserves than expected, as shortfalls in tax receipts have shown through
to the Treasury's account at the Federal Reserve. Adjustment borrowing
has been around $100 million throughout the intermeeting period. Total
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing, which has trended up over the period
with the normal rise in seasonal borrowing, reached $257 million in the
most recently completed maintenance period. In the current period, ad-
justment plus seasonal borrowing is averaging $291 million. In recogni-
tion of rising seasonal credit needs, the borrowing allowance was raised
from $150 million immediately after the March meeting to $200 million in
late April and then to the current level of $300 million.
(2) Responding to shifting sentiment on the strength of the
economy, inflation prospects, and the likelihood of a near-term tightening
of monetary policy, other market interest rates first rose in the inter-
meeting period and then fell sharply. On balance, bond yields have risen
The largest decreases were registered by Treasury bills; despite this
widening, quality spreads remain low by historical standards. The struc-
ture of short-term rates had suggested strong expectations of a near-term
firming of monetary policy part way through the period, but these expecta-
tions dissipated after release of the April data on employment, retail
sales, and producer prices, and market yields now embody expectations of
an essentially unchanged policy in coming months.
(3) The dollar's weighted average exchange value has declined
about 3-1/2 percent since the last FOMC meeting, with much of the drop
occurring as interest rates in the United States began retracing earlier
increases following the release of April employment data. The dollar was
weak against the mark, which strengthened against most currencies follow-
ing publication of the plan for German monetary unification and prompt
conclusion of an important labor negotiation, both of which appeared to
relieve some concerns about the outlook for inflation. Very late in the
period the dollar dropped sharply against the yen as well. Foreign inter-
est rates showed mixed movements over the intermeeting period. Both
short- and long-term rates in EMS countries other than Germany moved
lower, prompted in some cases by cuts in central bank lending rates as
those countries reacted to the earlier weakness of the mark in the EMS.
The Japanese stock market rebounded substantially from its low in early
The Desk sold $100 million against yen prior to and
immediately following the April G-7 meeting, with half for the System
(4) M2 growth slowed to a 2 percent rate in April, well below
the 6 percent path set for the March-to-June period at the last FOMC meet-
ing. Part of this weakness owed to declines in the wholesale components
of M2: overnight RPs ran off, likely associated with a contraction in
government securities held in commercial banks' trading accounts last
month, and demand deposits declined at a 6-1/2 percent rate. Growth of
the retail components of M2 also slowed, dropping to a 3-1/2 percent rate
from around 6 percent over the first quarter. M2 has been restrained by
the rise in intermediate- and long-term rates since late last year, and by
the unusually slow adjustment of rates on retail deposits.2 The conser-
vative pricing stance at thrifts, which has accompanied a shrinkage of the
industry and supervisory constraints on brokered deposit rates, has tended
to deflect deposit flows toward banks. Banks also have held down deposit
rates, as retail deposit inflows at those lower rates have been more than
sufficient to fund credit growth. With their attractiveness diminished,
small time deposits continued to increase sluggishly in April while non-
competitive tenders at bill and note auctions surged. Slow credit expan-
sion at banks in April, along with an apparently steeper contraction of
the thrift industry, held down overall needs for funds at depository in-
stitutions, and M3 grew at only a 1-1/4 percent rate in April as large CDs
continued to decline.
had risen about 3/4 percentage point; by contrast, over the same period, the
rate on 1-year small time deposits had risen only about 12 basis points at
banks and at thrifts had fallen slightly.
(5) The growth of private domestic nonfinancial debt has moder-
ated somewhat in recent months; the slowing appears to reflect a dropoff
in credit demands, though tightening supply conditions likely have
affected some specific credit categories. Most of the deceleration in
overall credit usage reflected reduced borrowing by the household sector.
Consumer credit expanded sluggishly in the first quarter and consumer
lending at commercial banks weakened in April. The growth of real estate
loans at banks also slowed in April; the higher cost of residential mort-
gage credit and softening real estate markets may be restraining demands,
but survey data suggest that banks are tightening the terms of lending on
many types of nonresidential loans. Reluctance of banks and other lenders
to provide merger-related financing has continued to discourage net equity
retirements. Abstracting from estimated merger financing, business lend-
ing at banks was weak in the first quarter, although it strengthened in
April. Results from a May survey suggest that the weak C&I loan growth
since the turn of the year primarily reflects reduced demand, particularly
from large and middle market firms, but middle market firms and small
businesses also faced tighter credit standards and more stringent loan
terms. However, commercial paper issuance has been strong and businesses
continue to find receptive markets for investment-grade bond issues,
sustaining overall expansion of business credit. Federal debt issuance
has been boosted by RTC-related borrowing. From the fourth quarter to
March, total domestic nonfinancial debt increased at nearly a 7 percent
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'89
to
Feb. Mar. Apr. Apr.
Money and credit aggregates
M3 4.6 .8 1.2 2.4
Domestic nonfinancial debt 7.6 7.5 n.a. 6.81
Reserves measures
Total reserves 6.4 1.6 -.6 2.0
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 913 173 224
Excess reserves 989 861 882
n.a. - not available.
1. Through March.
2. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
NOTE: Monthly reserve measures, including excess reserves and borrowing, are
calculated by prorating averages for two-week reserve maintenance periods
that overlap months.
Policy Alternatives
(6) Three alternatives--containing the standard differences in
associated federal funds rates--are presented below for consideration by
the Committee. Under alternative B, federal funds would be expected to
continue to trade around 8-1/4 percent, with an initial level of adjust-
ment plus seasonal borrowing of $350 million. The specifications of
alternative A call for federal funds trading around 7-3/4 percent and a
borrowing level of $300 million, while those of alternative C call for
federal funds in the 8-3/4 percent area, which is likely to involve $400
million of borrowing. Judging from the experience of recent years, it is
anticipated that seasonal borrowing will rise about $100 million over the
intermeeting period; the borrowing levels suggested above incorporate a
$50 million technical increase to take account of the expected rise in the
next few weeks, but an additional increase in the borrowing path may be
necessary under all three alternatives.
(7) Interest rates generally would be expected to show little
net change under alternative B. Market expectations now embody federal
funds continuing to trade around 8-1/4 percent, as under this alternative.
Similarly, incoming information on the economy consistent with the green-
book forecast would be roughly in line with the continued economic growth
and moderation in measured inflation--though with little improvement in
longer-term price trends--that market participants now seem to be antici-
pating. Rates on Treasury bills and notes, however, could be subject to
transitory supply pressures if RTC activity accelerates appreciably and
with it Treasury financing needs. A breakthrough in negotiations on the
budget between the Administration and the Congress in coming weeks would
be likely to spark a rally in capital markets, which after a time might
induce a downward adjustment in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
Absent such a breakthrough, the dollar likely would remain around recent
levels on foreign exchange markets; with the dollar stable and German
reunification impending, a tightening of monetary policy in Germany and
Japan before the next FOMC meeting appears unlikely.
(8) Projected growth rates for the monetary aggregates from
March to June are given in the table below for all three alternatives.
(The table and charts on the following pages show more detailed data.)
Under alternative B, growth in both M2 and M3 would pick up over May and
June from the sluggish pace of April. This pickup results in part from a
cessation of the runoff of demand deposits and RPs. In addition, the
response of depositors to previous increases in opportunity costs would
begin to wane. Moreover, opportunity costs have already narrowed from
April and, with market interest rates stable, this narrowing could con-
tinue, buoying retail deposit inflows, as banks raise small time deposit
rates, albeit slowly, in adjustment to increases in market rates on bal-
ance this year. To an extent, the strengthening of M2 and M3 under this
alternative rests on a rebound in bank credit growth and associated fund-
ing needs in May and June--given the evidence that reductions in willing-
ness to lend are limited. Again, the behavior of the RTC constitutes a
major uncertainty in the outlook for money growth. To date in the second
quarter, RTC spending still has been fairly modest. We have assumed pro-
gressively more resolution activity over May and June, but well below
RTC's announced goal of 141 resolutions involving $50 billion of assets
for this quarter. A surge in RTC activity could damp M3 growth as thrift
assets end up on the government's balance sheet. And it could affect M2
as well, if large volumes of retail deposits are transferred to commercial
banks without accompanying loans and investments, reducing bank needs to
raise deposit offering rates. On balance, M2 growth is projected to
strengthen to a 5 percent pace on average in May and June, in line with
average growth over the first four months of the year. M3 growth would
remain quite sluggish as thrifts continued to shrink--through RTC resolu-
tions and through action to meet capital requirements--but would pick up a
little to about a 3-1/2 percent pace from growth of around 1 percent in
March and April.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from March
to June
M2 4-1/2 4 3-1/2
M3 3-1/4 3 2-3/4
M1 4-3/4 4 3-1/4
Growth from Q4'89
to June
M2 5-1/2 5-1/4 5
M3 3 2-3/4 2-3/4
M1 5 4-3/4 4-1/2
Associated federal
funds rate ranges 6 to 10 6 to 10 7 to 11
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
------------------------------------- ------------------------ ---------------------
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
(9) Even with the projected strengthening in money, growth of
both M2 and M3 over the March-to-June period would be noticeably below
expectations at the time of the last meeting. Moreover, growth of M2
would be appreciably below the 6 to 7 percent rate of expansion of the
previous several quarters, leaving this aggregate only a little above the
midpoint of its annual range at mid-year. As noted, the moderation in
both M2 and M3 has resulted in part from the weakness in credit growth
at banks as well as thrifts. To a considerable extent, this weakness
seems to represent a rechannelling of credit flows involving assets, such
as mortgages and consumer receivables, that are easily securitized and
absorbed by other lenders, without materially raising costs to borrowers.
The lack of serious disruptions from this process can be inferred from
continued narrow yield spreads between mortgages and Treasury securities.
In addition, weaker bank credit growth reflects some tightening of terms
and reduction in availability of loans--including those to small business
and for construction--that are not easily transferred to other lenders.
In the staff forecast, however, the "credit crunch" does not deepen and,
while important in certain locales and for selected uses, does not have a
major effect on aggregate borrowing and spending. In these circumstances,
the slower money growth now forecast for the second quarter would not
signal the approach of underlying weakness in the economy, since it would
be offset by an upward shift in velocity. M2 velocity in the staff fore-
cast is projected to increase at a 2-1/4 percent rate in the second quar-
ter, following a 1-1/2 percent rise in the first quarter.
(10) Consistent with the notion that credit remains generally
available, growth in the debt of private domestic nonfinancial sectors is
expected to continue close to the 6 percent average pace of recent months,
about in line with spending. While the less hospitable attitude of lend-
ers toward LBOs will continue to restrain corporate restructuring activity
and associated credit usage, credit availability difficulties elsewhere in
the business sector are expected to have only relatively modest effects,
and borrowing by nonfinancial businesses should continue around its recent
rate. Credit availability effects likely will continue to be more notice-
able in the construction and development area, and the rise in mortgage
rates that has occurred this year will continue to restrain household
mortgage borrowing as well. Consumer credit growth is expected to remain
subdued as spending on durables is-projected to be sluggish. Considerable
uncertainty surrounds the outlook for Treasury borrowing--both the amount
and timing--owing to RTC financing needs. While Treasury borrowing for
RTC working capital purposes would end up boosting the debt aggregate,
such borrowing would not be expected to put underlying pressure on the
general level of interest rates: federal government liabilities simply
would be replacing those of private intermediaries, which are not included
in the debt aggregate, leaving unaffected the volume of saving available
for investment. Assuming a substantial pickup in RTC-related borrowing in
the second quarter, federal government debt would increase at about an 8
percent pace over the March-to-June period. Total domestic nonfinancial
debt is projected to expand at a 7 percent rate over the three months and
by June would be 7 percent at an annual rate above its fourth-quarter 1989
base, at the midpoint of its 1990 monitoring range.
(11) The easing of reserve conditions under alternative A would
tend to strengthen money growth over May and June to something more in
line with rates incorporated in the Committee's expectations at the last
meeting. Opportunity costs would narrow even more, boosting M2 growth to
nearly a 6 percent rate over May and June, leaving this aggregate notice-
ably above the midpoint of its annual range. M3 growth would firm to a 4
percent annual rate, keeping this aggregate a little above the lower bound
of its range. The easing of policy under alternative A would come as
something of a surprise to most market participants, and money market
rates would decline by the full 50 basis point drop in the federal funds
rate. The dollar would come under downward pressure, and, absent incoming
information pointing to a weaker economy or a distinct improvement in
underlying cost or price trends, the decline in bond rates would be
limited, resulting in a steeper yield curve. If, however, evidence sug-
gested a softening in economic activity, perhaps reflecting more powerful
credit restraint than now seems apparent, the drop in short-term rates
would feed through to bond yields. The decline in market rates would tend
to buoy borrowing and spending by those with market access, helping to
offset the effects of tighter credit availability on spenders dependent on
depository intermediaries.
(12) The tighter reserve conditions under alternative C would be
expected to keep money growth damped. M2 would be at the middle of its
range by June and M3 just above the lower end of its range. Short-term
rates would increase by about the 1/2 percentage point rise in the federal
funds rate, and the dollar would tend to firm. Banks would raise the
prime rate, and could further tighten other credit terms. Bond yields
also would rise, at least initially, in response to the reversal of the
previous trend in Federal Reserve actions. However, in the context of
only moderate growth in the economy, the higher short-term interest rates
and slower money growth would be seen as a policy response to inflation
pressures, implying additional emphasis by the Federal Reserve on its
price stability objective. In this context, the credibility of that
objective could be enhanced, to the benefit of bond prices.
Directive Language
(14) Draft language for the operational paragraph, including the
usual options, is shown below.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. Taking account of progress toward price stabil-
ity, the strength of the business expansion, the behavior of
the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign ex-
change and domestic financial markets, slightly (SOMEWHAT)
greater reserve restraint (WOULD/MIGHT) or slightly (SOME-
WHAT) lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable
in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve condi-
tions are expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3
over the period from March through June at annual rates of
about ____ AND ____ [DEL: 6 and 4] percent respectively. The Chairman
may call for Committee consultation if it appears to the
Manager for Domestic Operations that reserve conditions
during the period before the next meeting are likely to be
associated with a federal funds rate persistently outside a
range of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 6 to 10] percent.
May 14, 1990
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Monthly
May 89
Jun 89
Jul 89
Aug 89
Sep 8 9
Oct 89
Nov 89
Dec 89
Jan 90
Feb 90
Mar 90
Apr 90
Weekly
Feb 7 90
Feb 14 90
Feb 21 90
Feb 28 90
Mar 7 90
Mar 14 90
Mar 21 90
Mar 28 90
Apr 4 90
Apr 11 90
Apr 18 90
Apr 25 90
May 2 90
May 9 90
Daily
May 4 90
May 10 90
May 11 90
p -- pramnwy daa
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted MAY 15, 1990
Money stock measures and liquid assets a_ nk credit Domestic nontinancilI debt-
nontransactions total loans U.s
Period MI M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
ANN. GROWTH RATES (%) :
ANNUALLY 14 TO Q4)
LEVELS (SBILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Class II FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted MAY 15, 1990
-T"- Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds denoml- Short- Bankers
Demand checkable RPi and Sawings nation general Institu. nation Term Term Savings term Commer. accep-
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars MfMDA deposits time purpose tions time RP Eurodollars bonds Treasury cll paper' tances
NSA' deposits' and brokeri only deposits* NSA' NSA' securities
____ _i 1_ __ __ _ _ « ldealer' ____ __ _____
LEVELS $(BILLIONS) :
ANNUALLY (4TH QTR.)
1987
1988
1989
MONTHLY
1989-APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR. p
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITIES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjustedMay 14, 1990
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasury coupons Federal Net change
e Net pu chases
Period Net Rdep- Net within Redemp- Net redemptions holdins
purchae tions (-) change 1-year 1-5 5-10 over 10 tions (-) change (-) total Net RPs
Apr. 4
11
May 2
9
Memo: LEVEL (bil.$)6
May 9
- 107.2
short-term notes acquired in exchange for maturing bills.
maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing coupon issues.
-- 500
and
Excludes
purchase sale transactions (+).
6. The levels of agency issues were
as follows:
(-) of Treasury and agency securities.
sale-purchase transactions (-), and matched
within | 0 |
1-year 1-5 5-10 over 10 total
- --- - - - ; - -- -
