Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
November 9, 1990
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC November 9, 1990
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Open market operations in the first four weeks after the
last FOMC meeting were directed toward maintaining unchanged reserve mar-
ket conditions, with federal funds expected to trade around 8 percent. On
October 29 the Desk implemented the FOMC's decision that, against the
background of a weakening economy, called for a more accommodative policy
stance following the conclusion of a meaningful budget agreement: The
borrowing assumption was reduced by $50 million (of which about half was
in recognition of falling seasonal borrowing) and the federal funds rate
was expected to decline by 25 basis points to 7-3/4 percent.1 Over the
intermeeting period, federal funds often traded on the high side of expec-
tations, as commercial banks managed reserve positions cautiously to avoid
being caught short and needing either to be seen tapping funding markets
in size or being forced to the window. With the Desk boosting the sup-
ply of excess reserves early in the current maintenance period, federal
has been boosted by increasing spreads on federal funds sold to Japanese
banks relative to the rates paid by domestic banks and displayed on
broker screens. The Japanese banks are reported to be borrowing more
heavily in the overnight funds market, and their credit standing has
declined somewhat as a result of falling asset values in Japan, which
have eroded their capital directly and raised questions about their loan
portfolios.
funds have generally traded a bit below 7-3/4 percent in recent days.3
(2) Most other market interest rates also declined over the
intermeeting period. In general, decreases were greater for Treasury than
for private issues, owing to increased concerns about credit quality and
more restrictive supply conditions discussed below in paragraph (4).
Three-month Treasury bill rates fell 15 basis points, while 30-year Trea-
sury bond yields declined 20 basis points. Yields on Treasury bonds rose
appreciably shortly after the October FOMC meeting when the budget accord
failed to pass; yields more than retraced these increases in recent weeks,
however, reflecting renewed prospects for fiscal restraint, clearer signs
of a softening economy, and heightened preference for safe investments.
(3) Indications of greater weakness in the U.S. economy and the
associated expectations of easing by the Federal Reserve contributed to a
decline was intensified by signs that monetary policy was tightening in
Germany and remaining restrictive in Japan. The Bundesbank increased its
Lombard rate by 1/2 percentage point, paving the way for a moderate
increase in market rates, and the Bank of Japan took pains to signal an
unchanged monetary policy in the face of a bond market rally.4
(4) Concerns about creditworthiness were manifest in various
sectors of the credit markets during the intermeeting period. Announce-
ments that loan problems worsened during the third quarter and the deteri-
orating economic outlook and slumping real estate markets all implied
greater difficulties for a broad range of borrowers and their creditors.
A number of finance and insurance companies encountered increased investor
resistance, and yields on their debt have risen relative to Treasury
securities. Funding difficulties of certain money center banks persisted;
some lenders reportedly trimmed or eliminated a number of lines, money
funds continued to shun the obligations of a number of banks, and rates on
capital issues of several money center banks rose further. The prime rate
remained at 10 percent, resulting in an unusually wide spread over the
federal funds and CD rates, as banks sought to build margins and discour-
age borrowing. In addition, survey results indicate that banks have
further tightened credit standards and both price and nonprice terms of
credit for their business borrowers in the last three months. For non-
financial firms with direct access to credit markets, the spread of rates
paid by the highest quality borrowers relative to those on Treasury issues
was little changed. However, lower-rated issuers faced some widening of
spreads: The gap between Baa- and Aaa-rated corporate bonds rose 20 basis
points, and that between rates on medium- and high-grade commercial paper
rose about 1/8 percentage point from its September average.
(5) Diminished credit availability and retrenchment of spending
plans appear to be continuing to restrain business borrowing. C&I loans
at banks are estimated to have contracted at a 2-1/2 percent annual rate
over September and October. Bond issuance by nonfinancial firms also has
been subdued for several months. During September, firms obtained a sub-
stantial amount of financing in the commercial paper market, but outstand-
ings have been about unchanged since the end of that month. Data for
September indicate some moderation in business credit growth at finance
companies. In the tax-exempt markets, problems seem to have been confined
to the obligations of several large cities with troubled finances. Over-
all issuance was fairly strong in September before dropping off in Octo-
ber. The few pieces of available data on recent household borrowing
suggest a modest pace of expansion. About one-quarter of surveyed banks
indicated that they had begun to tighten lending standards for residential
mortgages, and a quarter said that their enthusiasm for making consumer
loans had waned. Heavy Treasury borrowing to finance its outsized fourth-
quarter deficit is augmenting growth of total nonfinancial sector debt;
this measure is estimated to have expanded at a 6-3/4 percent rate for the
year through September, leaving it near the middle of its monitoring
(6) The broad monetary aggregates were about flat in October,
with M2 expanding at only a 1 percent annual rate and M3 contracting
slightly. Some slowing had been anticipated in view of weak nominal
income growth and the likely absence of the special factors that had
boosted growth during the preceding two months, but money growth has
fallen well short of projections. The shortfall in M2 can be only par-
tially accounted for by the downward revision in estimated income growth.
In general, money growth since the spring has been substantially slower
than can be explained on the basis of historical relationships with income
and opportunity costs. The underpredictions of the money demand models
may be indicative of the reduced role of deposit intermediaries in the
credit process, but they also may suggest the possibility that the path of
income was weaker than is now estimated.
(7) The sluggishness of M2 in October was broad-based. Its
liquid retail component contracted, while small time deposits remained
subdued despite a narrowing of opportunity costs in recent months. Demand
deposits also dropped. Growth of M2 from the fourth quarter through
October was 4 percent at an annual rate. The managed liability components
of the non-M2 part of M3 also declined in October as banks restrained
asset growth and thrifts shrank owing partly to the bulge in RTC
resolutions around quarter-end. Institution-only money funds, however,
surged, as their yields lagged the decline in market rates. Through
October, M3 was only 1/2 percentage point above the lower bound of its
annual range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'89
to
Aug. Sept. Oct. Oct.
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt 7.5 7.2 n.a. 6.8
Reserves measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 799 618 392
Excess reserves 868 909 849
n.a. - Not available.
1. Through September.
2. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
Monetary Policy Alternatives
(8) Three policy alternatives are presented below for Committee
consideration. Under alternative B, federal funds would continue trading
around 7-3/4 percent. Under alternative A, the funds rate would move down
to the 7-1/4 percent area, while under alternative C it would firm slight-
ly, returning to around the 8 percent level prevailing at the last meet-
ing. The associated level of adjustment plus seasonal borrowing under
alternative B would be set at $250 million in the first maintenance period
after the meeting and might need to be lowered another $50 million over
the intermeeting period to accommodate the ongoing decline in the demand
for seasonal credit. Under alternative A, the initial level of borrowing
would be lowered to $200 million (or the discount rate could be cut by 1/2
percentage point), while under alternative C it would be raised to $275
million. The relationship of reserve availability and the federal funds
rate is likely to remain highly uncertain and volatile as banks manage
reserves to avoid being seen at the discount window or being forced to tap
potentially unreceptive funding sources.
(9) Interest rates currently embody anticipation of a 1/4 point
drop in the funds rate in the near-term. Nevertheless, market rates are
not likely to back up significantly under the unchanged reserve conditions
of alternative B, since expectations of an easing would be maintained if,
as expected, incoming information confirms a weakening economy. An un-
changed policy would provide some underpinning for the foreign exchange
value of the dollar, especially if market participants see that stance as
in part motivated by concerns about potential further weakening in the
dollar. Quality spreads may widen further, reflecting year-end position-
ing and mounting concerns about defaults. A number of large banks, espe-
cially those with weak capital positions and eroding access to capital
markets, expect to be holding down balance sheet totals to bolster capital
positions and investor confidence. At the same time, many investors,
particularly mutual funds and others publishing year-end statements, are
likely to intensify efforts to shed assets of less than top quality,
including holdings of some bank obligations. Under these conditions, it
will be difficult to distinguish transitory disturbances in relative
interest rates and credit flows from signals of more fundamental and last-
ing problems of borrowers.
(10) In view of the expectations of some easing already built
into rates, short-term interest rates would decrease somewhat less than
the 50 basis point decline in the federal funds rate, under alternative A.
Banks may be encouraged to advance credit less reluctantly by the wider
margins they would enjoy, and by greater confidence of repayment as lower
interest rates countered weakness in the economy and bolstered asset
prices. Banks eventually would pass the drop in funding costs on to their
customers through a lower prime rate, though the adjustment could be slug-
gish, especially given the desire to limit footings at year-end, and mar-
gins will remain unusually high. In the context of the softer economy and
lessened pressures on resources, long-term rates, too, should decline,
with fixed-rate mortgages dropping below 10 percent. The extent of the
decline in long-term rates might be limited should the likely drop in the
foreign exchange value of the dollar be especially steep, which would be
seen as accentuating price pressures, possibly limiting the scope for
further policy easing. The odds on a sharper drop in the dollar would be
greater if the easing seemed to reflect especially heightened Federal
Reserve concern about the strength of the financial system and the real
economy, with reduced priority given to restraining price pressures. From
this perspective, the risk that market participants would interpret a
signals might be increased if the cut were accomplished by a reduction in
the discount rate.
(11) Under alternative C, the dollar would retrace at least some
of its recent decline in response to a rise in the federal funds rate. A
tightening of policy would come as a surprise to market participants,
especially in light of the recent decline in the funds rate on the heels
of the budget accord. Short-term rates would generally rise by 1/4
percentage point or more, as expectations of further easing were extin-
guished. Bond rates also would increase initially. Quality spreads might
widen appreciably, with strains on lower-rated borrowers seen as being
heightened as the Federal Reserve appeared willing to tolerate a weaker
path for economic activity.
(12) Projected growth of the monetary aggregates under all three
alternatives is presented in the table. (Detailed data are shown on the
table and charts on the following pages.) Under all the alternatives, M2
and M3 will be substantially below the paths specified in the current
directive, despite the recent easing of money market rates. To some
extent, this reflects the money growth data already in hand for October.
Looking forward, because the supply of credit through depositories has
tightened more than anticipated, asset expansion at depositories and
associated demand for funding will continue to be damped. Nominal GNP for
the fourth quarter is now projected to be somewhat slower than at the last
FOMC meeting, which also implies reduced demands for money and credit. M2
will remain below the midpoint of its 1990 range and M3 just above its
lower bound under all three alternatives; differences in monetary growth
that emerge late in the year under the various alternatives have impercep-
tible effects on annual growth for 1990 but more impact on the position of
the aggregates relative to their tentative ranges for 1991.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Associated federal funds
rate ranges 5-1/2 to 9-1/2 6 to 10 6 to 10
(13) Under alternative B, M2 probably would strengthen, but only
a bit--to a 1-3/4 percent rate over November and December. Its M1 com-
ponent is projected to resume expanding over the final two months of the
year, boosted by some bounceback of transactions deposits owing to a
lagged response to the previous reduction in opportunity costs and the
effect of declining market rates on compensating balance requirements. On
a quarterly average basis, M2 would grow at a 2-3/4 percent rate, appre-
ciably faster than nominal GNP in the staff forecast but well below pro-
jections of standard money demand models. The strengthening of M2 would
be expected to extend into the first quarter, with this aggregate above
the lower end of its provisional 1991 range. Under alternative A, the
drop in opportunity costs would boost M2 to a 2-3/4 percent rate over the
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
------------------------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ ------
final two months of the year and put it in the middle portion of its new
range in the first quarter. The firming in M2 growth under alternative C
would be quite modest and this aggregate would be entering the new year
around the lower end of its tentative 1991 range.
(14) M3 would be little changed over November and December under
any of the alternatives. Some pickup in RTC resolution activity from the
pace of recent weeks also will tend to restrain growth of the aggregates,
especially M3. The slight differences in the growth of M3 under alterna-
tive A and C in December would owe largely to inflows to money market
mutual funds, as their rate advantage temporarily rose or declined,
respectively. In all cases, growth in M3 through the first quarter of
next year would be around the lower end of its tentative range.
(15) Stringent conditions in credit markets and weak credit
demands will damp private credit growth over the remainder of the year.
In the business sector, credit flows for construction and development
activities and commercial properties will decline in the fourth quarter,
partly in response to the pull back by lenders. Less than top-rated
firms--including medium and smaller businesses--are likely to face higher
costs and further reduction in the availability of credit from banks and
other lenders. In the context of desires to bolster capital ratios at
year-end, the reluctance of banks to extend credit to some borrowers may
be accentuated by demands from some borrowers with existing lines of
credit. In particular, medium-rated commercial paper issuers can be
expected to tap their backup lines with banks to pay down paper in
response to wider spreads in that market. Household debt growth also
should slow, reflecting the weakness in consumption expenditures--espe-
cially for durables--and anemic housing activity. The growth of the debt
of nonfederal sectors is expected to average only around 5 percent over
the fourth quarter. The federal government, by contrast, will be a heavy
borrower over the final two months of the year. As a result, the growth
of total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to be boosted
to a rate of about 6 percent over this period, placing growth for the year
at 6-3/4 percent, near the midpoint of its 5 to 9 percent range.
Directive Language
(16) Draft language for the operational paragraph, including the
usual options, is shown below. The language for the last sentence on the
federal funds rate range does not reflect any of the alternatives pre-
sented in the memorandum by Messrs. Lindsey, Kohn, and Sternlight.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/
maintain/INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of
pressure on reserve positions. Taking account of
progress toward price stability, the strength of the
business expansion, the behavior of the monetary
aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and
domestic financial markets, slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater
reserve restraint (WOULD) might or (SLIGHTLY) somewhat
lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable in
the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with growth of
M2 and M3 over the period from September through
December at annual rates of about ____ AND ____ [DEL: 4 and 2]
percent respectively. The Chairman may call for
Committee consultation if it appears to the Manager for
Domestic Operations that reserve conditions during the
period before the next meeting are likely to be
associated with a federal funds rate persistently
outside a range of ____ TO ____ [DEL: 6 to 10] percent.
Monthly
Nov 89
Dec 89
Jan 90
Feb 90
Mar 90
Apr 90
May 90
Jun 90
Jul 90
Aug 90
Sep 90
Oct 90
Weekly
Aug 1 90
Aug 8 90
Aug 15 90
Aug 22 90
Aug 29 90
Sep 5 90
Sep 12 90
Sep 19 90
Sep 26 90
Oct 3 90
Oct 10 90
Oct 17 90
Oct 24 90
Oct 31 90
Nov 7 90
Daily
Nov 2 90
Nov 8 90
Nov 9 90
November 13, 1990
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Short-Term Long-Tann
CDs Imoney corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm market bank US government constant A utility municipal secondary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market primary market
p -- preliminary data
ANN. GROWTH RATES (%) :
ANNUALLY (Q4 TO Q4)
QUARTERLY AVERAGE
1989-4th QTR.
1990-1st QTR.
1990-2nd QTR.
1990-3rd QTR.
MONTHLY
1989-OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
LEVELS I(BILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
Seasonally adjustwd
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class II FOMC
NOV. 13, 1990
Money stock melures and liquid assets I Bnk credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period Ml M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
NEEKLY
1990-SEP.
OCT. 1
8
_ I I I I I I I I
derived by averaging end-of-month levels of adjacent months, and have been adjusted to remove
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class II FOMCComponents of Money Stock and Related Measures
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted NOV. 13, 1990
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi. mutual funds denomi- Short Bankers
Demand checkable RPi and Savings nation genrsl Institu- nation Term Term Savings term Commer- accep-
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars MMDAs deposits time purpose lions time APs Eurodollars bonds Treasury cial papr' tances
NSA' deposits' and broker/ only deposits' NSA' NSA' scurities
LEVELS (SBILLIONSI :
ANNUALLY 14TH QTR.1
MONTHLY
1989-SEP.
OCT.
NOV,
DEC.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
nstitutions are subtracted from small time deposits.
November 9, 1990
Weakly
Augpu 1
August 8
August 15
Augut 22
August 29
September 5
September 12
September 19
Septntber 26
October 3
October 10
Octobr 17
Octobr 24
October 31
Memo: LEVEL (bL $)7
November 7
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF 8ECURITE81
MIlonr of dollar, not aemoniEy adjusted
I Trewurycoupons
-. 842
2,496
-. 650
4,333
- -248
- 2,104
- -172
- 200
- 150
- 156
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
- 2,822
21 -3.257
- 2.490
November 7
