Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC August 16, 1991
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) In the weeks immediately after the July FOMC meeting,
the Desk sought to maintain existing reserve pressures, basing reserve
targets initially on an allowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrow-
ing of $325 million and expecting federal funds to continue to trade
around 5-3/4 percent. Through early August, the federal funds rate
averaged close to this expected level. Reserve conditions were
eased slightly on August 6 in response to data that raised questions
about the strength of the recovery, to indications of abating price
pressures, and to substantial declines in M2 and M3 that brought these
aggregates close to the lower bounds of their annual ranges. In that
action, the borrowing allowance was reduced $25 million, with the
expectation that the federal funds rate would trade around 5-1/2
percent. Federal funds have averaged a bit above this level in recent
(2) In response to downward revisions in market expectations
about aggregate demand and price pressures, as well as to the policy
easing, market interest rates have declined appreciably since the July
FOMC meeting. On balance, most market interest rates fell 30 to 70
basis points over the intermeeting period; the largest declines were
in the intermediate-term area, suggesting that the market focused on
the prospects that a somewhat smaller rise in interest rates over the
next few years would be consistent with moderate economic expansion.
The prime rate, however, remains at 8-1/2 percent, widening bank lend-
ing margins. Despite the weaker economic picture, private rates fell
as much or even more than Treasury yields and broad stock indexes rose
look. Spreads on below-investment grade debt were relatively stable
even though insurance companies, traditional lenders in this sector,
reportedly have become very selective as they attempt to strengthen
their balance sheets and boost liquidity in view of the industry's
asset quality problems and worries about runs. Lower interest rates
and announcements of bank mergers bolstered the securities prices of
large banks: The spread between Eurodollar and Treasury bill rates
fell about 15 basis points, reaching unusually low levels, and indexes
of bank stock prices surged almost 20 percent.
(3) The exchange value of the dollar depreciated 3 percent
on a weighted average basis since the last Committee meeting, declin-
ing more against the mark, 3-1/2 percent, than against the yen,
More fundamentally,
changes in exchange rates reflected shifting expectations about rela-
tive monetary policies here and in Germany, which tended to be con-
firmed by subsequent actions. On August 15, the Bundesbank raised its
discount rate by 1 percentage point and its Lombard rate by 1/4 per-
centage point; the latter was less than had been anticipated by the
market, and in reaction the dollar retraced a portion of its previous
decline. Over the intermeeting period, German short-term interest
rates rose 20 basis points; long-term rates were little changed.
Japanese short- and long-term interest rates declined about 30 basis
points. (The Bank of Japan had reduced its discount rate 1/2
percentage point just prior to the July FOMC meeting.)
(4) The broad monetary aggregates were quite weak in July,
with M2 and M3 contracting at 3-3/4 and 4-1/2 percent rates, respec-
tively. Data through early August show M2 about flat and M3 declining
further, leaving them around the lower bounds of their annual ranges.
Growth of transactions deposits fell off in July, pulling the expan-
sion of M1 down to a 1-3/4 percent rate, but appears to be rebounding
in early August, and M1 seems on track to register a strong increase
this quarter. The nontransactions component of M2, which has been
decelerating steadily since March, contracted in June and ran off at a
faster rate last month. At the M3 level, declines in M2 were aug-
mented by continued runoffs of large time deposits, as bank credit
growth weakened and thrift assets dropped.
(5) Substantial downward revisions to projected nominal
income this quarter explain some--but not all--of the weakness in M2
relative to expectations at the last meeting. Even if income comes in
somewhat lower than the current estimate, other factors also must be
at work to explain the large shortfall in M2. To a degree, the recent
weakness of M2 appears to reflect low yields on M2 instruments, both
relative to those to which depositors had become accustomed and--given
the steep yield curve--relative to returns on capital market instru-
ments. Supporting this view are increases in noncompetitive tenders
at Treasury auctions and anecdotal reports that households continued to
invest heavily in bond and equity mutual funds last month. Bank re-
tail CD rates have continued to drop relative to market rates. Among
senior financial officers at banks surveyed, a significant portion of
those reporting weak deposit growth had bid less aggressively for
deposits in the last few months. The recent declines in consumer
credit also suggest the wide spreads between returns on deposits and
rates on consumer loans may be leading households to pay down debts
with liquid assets and to finance expenditures out of savings rather
than taking on additional debt. However, household credit flows are
in line with model predictions based on historical relationships to
spending, and observable flows into capital market instruments fall
well short of accounting for the shortfall in M2. A complete explana-
tion for the recent performance of M2 is elusive.
(6) Private credit growth likely was quite weak again in
July: Bank loans declined at a 5 percent annual rate, public bond
offerings by nonfinancial business dropped well below their second-
quarter pace, and municipal security issuance ebbed. The overall
sluggishness likely owed predominantly to continued slack demand for
credit. Credit supply effects may have been a factor restraining debt
growth, too, but whether these effects have intensified recently is an
open question. The already-wide spreads between the prime rate and
banks' cost of funds have increased further, and insurance companies
have become more cautious in their lending. Responses to the latest
survey of senior loan officers show that the extent of credit tighten-
ing is waning appreciably, and most quality spreads in open markets
are remarkably narrow. Thus far in August, bond markets have absorbed
a surge in supply from both corporate and municipal issuers in
response to the further drop in yields. In July, total debt growth
appears to have been sustained at roughly a 5 percent rate, supported
by heavy borrowing by the federal government, leaving domestic non-
financial sector debt near the lower end of its monitoring range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'90
to
June July July
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt 5.6 5pe 4 -1/2pe
Bank credit 3.5 0.2 2.2
Reserve measures
Total reserves 8.7 1.8 6.4
Monetary base 3.8 5.5 8.1
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 332 561
Excess reserves 1008 897
pe--preliminary estimate.
1. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
Policy Alternatives
(7) Two alternatives are presented below for Committee con-
sideration. Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to
trade around 5-1/2 percent, at the discount rate, in association with
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $375 million.4  Under alter-
native A, the federal funds rate would decline to 5 percent. The
money market conditions of this alternative could be achieved through
a reduction in borrowing to $325 million or through a 1/2 percentage
point cut in the discount rate, holding borrowing at $375 million.
There are no technical impediments to an easing of policy through open
market operations alone--dropping the federal funds rate 50 basis
points below the discount rate--although a little more volatility in
the funds rate likely would be a by-product, as the discount window
became a less effective buffer of reserve market disturbances.
(8) Money growth projections under the two alternatives are
presented below. (More detailed data appear in the table and charts
on the following pages.) M2 under both alternatives is expected to
decline less rapidly in August and to resume growing in September,
although unexplained recent weakness adds to uncertainty about the
extent of the rebound. The recent easing of policy and a pickup in
nominal income growth are expected to boost M2 demands in the period
just ahead. In addition, as portfolios become more fully adjusted to
the steep yield curve, outflows from M2 should diminish; the recent
drop in intermediate-term relative to short-term rates also would tend
to damp outflows to shorter maturity bond funds. Nonetheless, growth
in M2 over the June-to-September period will be well below that spe-
cified at the July FOMC meeting, and in September this aggregate would
be near the lower end of its annual range. In this projection, M2
does not recoup any of its recent shortfall; instead, growth of M2 is
assumed to move toward a more normal alignment with growth of income
and changes in interest rates, albeit with some continuing weakness
relative to model projections. Further declines in depository credit
will continue to restrain M2 and especially M3. Even with the modest
growth projected for M3 in September, this aggregate would decline
over the June-to-September period, instead of expanding at a 3 percent
rate as specified in the July directive, and would end up only about
M1, in contrast, is expected to expand briskly in August and Septem-
ber. A failure of M2 and M3 to pick up over the intermeeting period
would raise additional concerns about the strength of the recovery--in
particular, whether spending was increasing as expected, and whether
financial conditions, including credit availability, were compatible
with a sustained expansion of the economy.
Alt. A Alt. B
Growth from June
to September
M2 0 -1/2
M3 -1-1/4 -1-1/2
M1 6-1/4 5-1/2
Implied growth from
1990:Q4 to September
M2 2-3/4 2-1/2
M3 1-1/4 1-1/4
M1 7 7
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. A Alt. B
Levels in billions
1991 April
May
June
July
August
September
Monthly Growth Rates
1991 April
May
June
July
August
September
Quarterly Ave. Growth Rates
1990 Q3
Q4
1991 Q1
Mar
June
July
Q2 91
Q3 91
July 91
Aug 91
Sept 91
(9) In light of persistent weakness in the broader monetary
aggregates and other indicators pointing to a sluggish recovery, mar-
kets currently see a distinct possibility of some further easing of
policy in the weeks ahead. With reserve market pressures unchanged,
as under alternative B, rates might firm a touch. Such a firming
would further diminish prospects for a cut in the prime rate. The
extent of any backup in rates, though, would depend on incoming infor-
mation: Indeed, rates might remain near current levels should M2 run
along the lower band of its annual range, as the staff expects, and if
new information casts further doubts on the strength of the recovery.
Should pressures on insurance companies mount, quality spreads on
lower-rated corporate debt could widen as insurers curtail lending to
this segment of the market. The dollar likely would trade around
current levels under alternative B, but could firm a notch if U.S.
interest rates were to back up.
(10) The 1/2 percentage point drop in the funds rate con-
templated under alternative A is larger than the easing of policy
currently anticipated in the markets; thus, short-term rates are
likely to move down under this alternative--but not by as much as the
cut in the funds rate--with the three-month bill rate drifting to near
operations alone, bringing the funds rate well below the discount
rate, market participants might speculate about the need for a dis-
count rate cut, and whether such a cut would be accompanied by an
additional easing. The prime rate likely would decline by the 50
basis point drop in the funds rate, leaving the spread over funding
costs at a historically high level. Bond rates initially would de-
crease a bit, but such declines might erode should incoming informa-
tion suggest that the economic recovery is more solidly under way,
along the lines of the staff forecast. The dollar would decline on
foreign exchange markets.
(11) Under alternative B, M2 would be expected to increase
over the balance of the quarter. On a monthly average basis, the
sizable decline in M2 in July would be followed by a small drop in
August and a 4 percent rate of expansion in September. Absent a
subsequent change in policy, M2 would be expected to continue to
increase at about a 4 percent pace over the fourth quarter, as the
anticipated strengthening of income offsets the waning effects of
earlier declines in rates; growth for the year would be 2-3/4 percent.
The recent easing would be expected to have its greatest effect on
liquid deposits, whose offering rates adjust especially sluggishly.
M1 is projected to increase at a 7-1/2 percent rate in August and
September, while outflows from the nontransactions component of M2
would ebb. On a quarterly average basis, M2 would be about flat in
the third quarter--well below the growth predicted by models of money
demand incorporating the staff's economic forecast--and its velocity
would rise at a 5 percent rate. M1, in contrast, would grow at nearly
a 7 percent annual rate in the current quarter and its velocity would
fall at a 2 percent rate.
(12) M3 would resume growing in September under alter-
native B, albeit at just a 2-1/4 percent pace. Still, on a quarterly
average basis, M3 would fall at a 2 percent rate, its first quarterly
decline in more than two decades. Contributing to the expected Sep-
tember turnaround in M3 is the pickup in M2 and a resumption of flows
to institution-only money funds, prompted by recent declines in market
rates. On the other hand, acting to hold down M3 growth in the months
ahead will be further large decreases in thrift assets owing in part
to fairly brisk RTC resolution activity. Moreover, banks remain quite
reluctant to lend, as suggested by recent senior loan officer survey
results and the unusually high prime rate in relation to funding
costs, and banks involved in mergers could, given various uncertain-
ties during the consolidation phase, be making more cautious credit
decisions. In addition, credit demands are expected to stay light.
Weak capital spending and fairly strong equity issuance will be acting
to hold down business credit demands in the months ahead. With bond
yields down and rate spreads quite narrow, investment-grade borrowers
are expected to continue to rely heavily on the bond market for funds.
Lower-rated firms, more dependent on banks and private placements with
insurance companies, however, are likely to encounter continued dif-
ficulties in getting credit. Borrowing by state and local governments
should remain light as these units struggle with budgetary shortfalls
and debt downgradings. Household borrowing is expected to strengthen
a bit as single-family housing activity and consumption outlays con-
tinue to firm. Growth of debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors other
than the federal government, while picking up a bit, is expected to
remain at depressed levels. In contrast, federal borrowing will be
robust as deposit insurance outlays remain substantial. Total debt of
domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to grow at around a 7 per-
cent rate over August and September, leaving this aggregate in the
lower portion of its monitoring range in September.
(13) The easing of monetary policy under alternative A would
boost M2 to a 4-1/2 percent annual rate of expansion in September and
the pace would firm further in the fourth quarter, lifting growth of
this aggregate for the year to around 3 percent. Pacing M2 next month
would be an 8-1/2 percent rate of growth in its M1 component and more
rapid expansion in its other liquid deposits, whose opportunity costs
would diminish still further. The opening of even larger intermedia-
tion spreads on some credits would enhance bank efforts to raise capi-
tal and encourage bankers to pursue more lending opportunities. With
a little more bank credit to fund and larger inflows to institution-
only money funds, M3 would pick up to a 2-1/2 percent pace in Septem-
ber and remain around that rate early in the fourth quarter.
Directive Language
(14) Draft language for the operational paragraph, including
the usual options, is shown below. Two versions are presented. The
first retains the structure of the current directive, but it includes
possible changes in the sentence on monetary growth. The proposed
language would highlight the unusual decline in money thus far this
quarter and the expectation that the broad aggregates will resume grow-
ing in the weeks ahead. In light of the current weakness of these
aggregates in relation to their ranges, the Committee may wish to give
special emphasis to the aggregates in the directive, at least in the
period ahead. In that case, a second version is provided that enhances
the role of the aggregates in guiding intermeeting changes. However,
this version might be viewed as less relevant if the Committee decides
to ease at this meeting.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
Version I
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. Depending upon progress toward price
stability, trends in economic activity, the behavior of the
monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange
and domestic financial markets, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater
reserve restraint (MIGHT/WOULD) or somewhat (SLIGHTLY)
lesser reserve restraint might (WOULD) be acceptable in the
intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions
are expected to be consistent with A RESUMPTION OF growth
of M2 and M3 IN THE WEEKS AHEAD, BUT IN VIEW OF THE DECLINE
ALREADY POSTED SINCE JUNE, THE COMMITTEE ANTICIPATES THAT
M2 WOULD BE LITTLE CHANGED AND M3 WOULD BE DOWN ____ PERCENT
over the period from June through September [DEL: at annual rates
of about 5-1/2 and 3 percent respectively.]
Version II
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. The contemplated reserve conditions are
expected to be consistent with A RESUMPTION OF growth of M2
and M3 IN THE WEEKS AHEAD, BUT IN VIEW OF THE DECLINE
ALREADY POSTED SINCE JUNE, THE COMMITTEE ANTICIPATES THAT
M2 WOULD BE LITTLE CHANGED AND M3 WOULD BE DOWN ____ PERCENT
over the period from June through September [DEL: at annual rates
of about 5-1/2 and 3 percent respectively]. TAKING ACCOUNT
OF THE BEHAVIOR OF THE MONETARY AGGREGATES AND depending
upon progress toward price stability, trends in economic
activity, [DEL: the behavior of the monetary aggregates,] and
developments in foreign exchange and domestic financial
markets, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint
(MIGHT/WOULD) or somewhat (SLIGHTLY) lesser reserve
restraint might (WOULD) be acceptable in the intermeeting
August 19, 1991
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs I I money corporale conventional home motgages
federal Treasury DIIIS secondary comm. market bank U.S government constant A utlity municipal secondary
funds scondarymarket makel paper mulual prime maludly yields recently I Bond market I prima., market
-__oni6..mol .I at lud loan .-. Y= 10--Iyeaf |fr L-n Buylr filxe I lai -M
1 ? I 1 - 4 - 5 a 7 a- -n.I-10 -I 1 - I 12 -- -- - 14 I -15 I-.v.isLL!
Monthly
Aug 90
Sep 90
Oct 90
Nov 90
Dec 90
Jan 91
Feb 91
Mar 91
Apr 91
May 91
Jun 91
Jul 91
Weekly
May 1 91
May 8 91
May 15 91
May 22 91
May 29 91
Jun 5 91
Jun 12 91
Jun 19 91
Jun 26 91
Jul 3 91
Jul 10 91
Jul 17 91
Jul 24 91
Jul 31 91
Aug 7 91
Aug 14 91
Daily
Aug 9 91
Aug 15 91
Aug 16 91
p -- preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted AUG. 19, 1991
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt1
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
in M2 in M3 only investment*
ANN. GROWTH RATES (%) :
ANNUALLY (Q4 TO Q41
LEVELS ($BILLIONS)
MONTHLY
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Class II FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted AUG. 19, 1991
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds denomi- Short- Bankers
Demand checkable RPs and Savings nation general Institu- nation Term Term Savings term Commer. accep-
Period Currency deposits depositl Eurodollars MMDAs deposits time purpose lions time RPs Eurodollars bonds Treasury cial paper' lances
NSA' deposits' and broker/ only deposits' NSA' NSA' securities
LEVELS (SBILLIONS :
ANNUALLY 14TH QTR.
MONTHLY
1990-JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY p
subtracted from small time deposits.
1. Net of money market mutual fund holdings of these items.
2. Includes retail repurchase agreements. All IRA and Keogh accounts at commercial banks and thrift institutions are
3. Excludes IRA and Keogh accounts.
4. Net of large denomination time deposits held by money market mutual funds and thrift institutions.
Weekly
June 5
June 12
June 19
June 26
July 3
July 10
July 17
July 24
July 31
August 7
August 14
Memo: LEVEL (bil. ) 6
August 14
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Million of dollar, not .eaonally aduted
- 4,150
- 6,689
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
- 1,801
