Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS I - FOMC February 1, 1991
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Immediately after the December FOMC meeting, the discount
rate was cut 1/2 percentage point and Desk operations were adjusted so
that about half of this decline would show through to the federal funds
rate. Another easing step of 25 basis points was taken in early Janu-
ary, with the funds rate expected to decline to 6-3/4 percent in response
to indications that the monetary aggregates were very weak at a time when
the economy was continuing to exhibit considerable softness. 2 Most
recently, after the employment data for January and other indicators
portrayed the economy as slackening further and inflation pressures as
abating, the discount rate was lowered another 1/2 percentage point, to 6
percent, with the expectation that all of this decline would be trans-
mitted to the federal funds rate.
(2) The actual funds rate fluctuated widely around its intended
levels, however, with rates as high as 100 percent and as low as zero
registered during the period. An important factor in the additional
volatility was the phase-out of the nontransaction reserve requirement,
which reduced required reserve balances to levels that proved at times to
be insufficient for clearing purposes--that is, to avoid overnight over-
drafts. At those times, for many banks the marginal dollar of reserve
in this action.
balances was held to meet clearing needs, leaving banks less willing to
arbitrage the funds rate across time and demanding additional excess re-
serves. This phenomenon has seemed especially important in the current
maintenance period as required reserve balances reach their seasonal low.
Other forces contributing to volatility in earlier maintenance periods
were balance sheet maneuvering around year-end and occasional shortfalls
of reserves near the ends of maintenance periods. On a maintenance-period
average basis, the federal funds rate ranged only from a high of 7-1/4
percent in the period ended December 26 to a low of about 6-3/4 percent in
the subsequent period. So far in the current maintenance period, clearing
demands for balances have pulled the funds rate up to an average of about
(3) The monetary policy easings and the passing of year-end
were the dominant influences on other short-term credit markets over the
intermeeting period. Treasury bill rates have fallen about 75 basis
points since mid-December, somewhat less than the size of the System's
easing actions. Private money market rates are down by more, reflecting a
reduction in the pronounced risk premiums that had been built into them
ahead of year-end. Long-term markets, by contrast, were more affected by
developments surrounding the outbreak of war in the Middle East. Prices
in bond and stock markets declined appreciably in the weeks leading up to
the U.N. deadline on January 15. Those losses were reversed in a single
day when initial reports engendered optimism that the war would be brief
and have minimal impact on global oil supplies. Broad indexes of stock
prices have risen about 4 percent on balance over the intermeeting period.
Treasury bond yields, however, are down only 8 basis points since the
December meeting, despite both a $6 net drop in oil prices and the
System's easing actions. Some of the stickiness in yields may reflect
concerns about upcoming supplies of Treasury securities, given upward
revisions to expected federal deficits, as well as a sense that, partly
because of Federal Reserve actions, the length and depth of the recession
will be limited.
(4) Dollar exchange rates fluctuated widely over the intermeet-
ing period. The dollar's weighted average exchange value rose about
basis of safe-haven demands associated with developments in the Middle
East and turmoil in the Soviet Union. In the flush of optimism generated
by reports out of the Persian Gulf on the first day of the war, the dollar
declined by 2 percent as the safe-haven effect diminished. After drifting
lower in subsequent days, the dollar dropped sharply following the Bundes-
bank's 1/2 percentage point increase in its official lending rates and the
next day's cut in the Federal Reserve's discount rate. Only the Nether-
lands and Austria followed the German rate action, and short-term market
rates abroad remain down about 35 basis points on average over the period,
helping to limit the dollar's decline to just 1-1/4 percent on balance.
Foreign long-term rates fell about 30 basis points, on average.
(5) M2 growth remained weak, at a 1-1/4 percent annual rate in
January, off a bit from the 1-3/4 percent rate registered in December;
this aggregate thus is running below the 4 percent rate that the Committee
had expected for the November-to-March period. The aggregate was held
down by declines in RPs and demand deposits, both of which were affected
by an unusually pronounced seasonal pattern around year-end. On the other
hand, currency increased sharply, likely owing to stepped-up shipments
overseas. M2 growth excluding these items (and Eurodollars holdings as
well) picked up to roughly a 3 percent rate in December and 3-3/4 percent
in January, buoyed by narrowing opportunity costs. Even so, growth likely
was held down by heightened concerns both about the Bank Insurance Fund,
and about depository institutions generally, in the wake of the closing of
privately insured banks and credit unions in Rhode Island and the failure
of the Bank of New England. Noncompetitive tenders at Treasury auctions
have been unusually strong in recent weeks, and, within M2 (as adjusted
above), all the increase was accounted for by money funds, which grew at a
downward movement in market interest rates.
(6) Although bank credit edged lower in January, M3 growth
picked up to a 4 percent rate. Over the last two months, M3 has grown at
about a 2 percent average rate, compared with the Committee's expectation
of 1 percent for the November-to-March period. The strength in M3 rela-
tive to M2 resulted from a pickup in large CD issuance, reflecting a
shifting of bank funding patterns, and from very rapid inflows to money
(7) Preliminary data indicate that bank loans contracted in
January, with the drop most evident in the C&I category. To an extent,
this decline may be the paydown of business loans taken out late last
year, when some corporations that faced a cool reception from the commer-
cial paper market ahead of year-end turned to their backup lines of credit
at banks. Also likely contributing to the reduction in C&I loans were
weak loan demand related to the slump in economic activity and tighter
loan supply conditions, as reflected in responses to the Federal Reserve's
latest survey of senior loan officers. On average in December and Janu-
ary, bank business loans fell at a 1-3/4 percent rate. The prime rate was
lowered by 1/2 percentage point after the turn of the year, and many banks
reduced it again when the discount rate was cut to 6 percent; neverthe-
less, the prime rate remains exceptionally high relative to other short-
term interest rates. Outstanding commercial paper of nonfinancial firms
moved lower on balance over the last two months; bond offerings became
scarcer in January, but surged as the market rallied on February 1. Long-
term issuance by state and local governments in recent weeks has been
quite limited. Consumer debt growth slowed in the fourth quarter and bank
data for January suggest continued weakness. The survey of lending
officers conducted last month showed still small, but growing, reluctance
to lend to consumers and a tightening of standards in home mortgages.
Federal borrowing, by contrast, has remained quite robust and is estimated
to be supporting total debt growth through January at around the midpoint
of its 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent provisional monitoring range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV '90
to
Nov. Dec. Jan.p  January p
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt 6.9 6.9 --
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 206 303 492
Excess reserves 945 1667 1841
p - preliminary.
1. Data on the monetary aggregates incorporate the 1991 benchmark and
seasonal review.
2. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
Long-Run Strategies
(8) Three long-run strategies are presented in the table below
as background for Committee consideration of ranges for money and credit
growth for 1991. The first, or baseline, strategy takes the staff's
greenbook forecast of output and inflation over 1991 and 1992. The eco-
nomic indicators received since the greenbook would seem to suggest
slightly greater weakness currently, but the half-point reduction in the
funds rate should be sufficient to offset that weakness and to restore
output to its greenbook level by the latter part of this year. Indeed, to
hold GNP to the greenbook path in late 1991 and 1992, interest rates need
to begin to edge higher later this year, reaching the levels assumed in
the greenbook. For 1993-1995 the baseline strategy extends the logic of
the greenbook forecast--the maintenance of a small margin of slack in the
economy to achieve a gradual deceleration of prices--out for three more
years. Strategy II embodies a tighter monetary policy, as indexed by
an easier policy, indexed by 1 percentage point faster M2 growth. The
baseline forecast for years beyond 1992 is based on simulations using the
Board's large-scale econometric model; the other strategies are derived
from the baseline using that econometric model.
(9) In all of these strategies, growth of M2 remains restrained
in 1991 and 1992 relative to income after allowing for the influence of
market interest rates, owing to continued contraction in depository credit
and investor concerns about the health of the banking system. Subse-
quently, with the economic recovery progressing and unusual restrictions
on credit availability and credit terms gradually lifting, bank lending
strengthens and banks begin to compete more actively for retail deposits.
As a result, M2 quickens after 1992 in each of the strategies as growth of
this aggregate returns to a more normal relationship with the expansion of
income. The effects of the easing of credit stringency in the last three
years are offset by tighter fiscal policy--as war-related outlays diminish
and the budget procedures adopted last fall take hold--leaving, on bal-
ance, a small damping influence on the economy in these years.
Alternative Strategy Simulations
(QIV to QIV percent change)
M2
I (baseline)
II (tighter)
III (easier)
Prices: GNP fixed-
weight price index
I
II
III
Real GNP
I
II
III
Unemployment rate
(QIV level)
I
II
III
.3 2
1-1/4
2-1/2
(10) In the baseline strategy, the economy begins to recover
by midyear, and by 1993 settles into a 2-1/4 percent growth rate, the
staff's estimated rate of growth of potential GNP. The modest amount of
slack that accompanies this strategy, as indicated by the 6 percent
unemployment rate--about a half percentage point above the estimated
natural rate--is sufficient to yield a deceleration of costs and prices of
about 1/4 percentage point per year; the inflation rate drops to 3 percent
in 1995. After 1992, nominal interest rates drift lower in line with the
decline in inflation and increased fiscal restraint. This decline in
interest rates buoys M2 growth relative to that of nominal GNP, and the
abatement of the velocity shift keeps M2 growth steady even as nominal
income slows with inflation.
(11) Under the tighter strategy II, the drop in inflation is
more pronounced, to below 2 percent in 1995. Slower M2 growth is achieved
by higher nominal and real interest rates than in the baseline in the
first couple years. These higher rates and the accompanying firmer dollar
damp the economic recovery sufficiently to raise the unemployment rate
through 1994, putting additional downward pressure on inflation. Nominal
interest rates, while higher than in the baseline in the first two years,
thereafter move below those in the baseline as inflation comes down more.
This scenario, along with the others, assumes that the public's outlook
for inflation is based on current and recent inflation experience and does
not allow for credibility effects. To the extent that the public believes
the Federal Reserve's commitment to a disinflation policy, lower inflation
would come with less slack in resource markets.
(12) Under the easier strategy III, output growth would be fast-
er until late in the period but inflation would edge higher. The upward
tilt to inflation owes to the stronger economy which pushes the unemploy-
ment rate below the natural rate. The pickup in nominal income boosts
demands for M2; to hold M2 growth at only 1 percentage point above the
baseline, interest rates need to rise later in the period, to well above
current levels. This easier strategy thus leads to appreciably higher
nominal interest rates than those embodied in strategies I and II,
although real interest rates remain lower.
(13) The next table presents inflation rates derived from two
different sets of simulations using the P* model, which has been augmented
with a relative price of oil variable. The upper panel uses the P* model
with historical long-run equilibrium velocity, V*, to derive the inflation
implications of the M2 growth rates used in the large-scale model simula-
tions above. These money growth rates, fed through the P* model, yield
greater restraint on prices because this P* simulation, unlike the above
simulations, assumes the recent and prospective unusual strength of
velocity associated with the disruption of the depository intermediation
process is transitory, and velocity returns to an unchanged V* over time.
In contrast, the P* simulations presented in the lower panel assume that
the velocity shifts built into the greenbook and into the large-scale
model exercise are permanent, i.e., imply rising V*. The results are very
close to those of the large-scale model simulations for strategies I and
II. For the easier strategy III, however, the adjusted P* model suggests
noticeably less inflation pressure, perhaps reflecting the more disinfla-
tionary starting point for the P* simulation; P* is appreciably below P at
the end of 1990 even with the upward adjustment to V*.
P* Model Simulations of Inflation
(QIV to QIV percent change)
Prices: GNP fixed-
weight price index
A. With no adjustment
for velocity shifts
B. With adjustment for
velocity shifts
I 4 3-1/2 3-1/4 3 2-3/4
II 4 3-1/4 2-1/2 2 1-1/2
III 4-1/4 4 3-3/4 4 4
Long-Run Ranges
(14) The table below presents three alternative sets of ranges
for growth of money and debt over 1991. (Appendix B gives the ranges and
outcomes for money and debt growth since 1979.) Alternative I represents
the provisional ranges selected by the Committee last July; the staff
projections for M2 and debt growth consistent with the greenbook forecast
fall at the midpoint of these ranges. The staff projection of M3, how-
ever, is lower in the provisional range. Alternative II allows for a
somewhat tighter policy stance by reducing the ranges uniformly by 1/2
percentage point. This alternative could be interpreted as more consis-
tent with the 1 percentage point slower M2 growth of longer-run strategy
II in the preceding section. Alternative III permits a somewhat easier
policy through comparably higher limits for money and debt growth. This
Alt. I
(Tentative Memo: Staff
Ranges) Alt. II Alt. III Forecast
Growth from
QIV '90 to QIV '91
M2 2-1/2 to 2 to 6 3 to 7* 4-1/2
6-1/2
M3 1 to 5* 1/2 to 1-1/2 to 2
4-1/2 5-1/2
Debt 4-1/2 to 4 to 8 5 to 9* 6-1/2
8-1/2
Memo: M1 5
Nominal GNP 6
*Range used for QIV '89 to QIV '90.
alternative could be viewed as more consistent with longer-run strategy
III discussed above, which embodies M2 growth 1 percentage point faster
than in the staff forecast.
(15) The staff forecast of 4-1/2 percent M2 growth over the four
quarters of 1991 implies a pickup in growth of the aggregate after the
weak expansion evidently in train for the first quarter. Expansion for
the year as a whole is a little higher than last year, given the stimulus
from more rapid nominal GNP growth that is projected and from the recent
policy easings. Even so, M2 growth will be limited by similar influences
as last year. The sum of bank and thrift assets should decline even more
than last year; RTC activity is projected to pick up further and bank
caution in the latter part of 1990 is carried over into 1991, with perhaps
added restraint on the pricing of retail deposits. Higher premiums or
special assessments on deposits to replenish the FDIC fund would reinforce
this tendency. In addition, depositors probably will remain chary about
the health of depository institutions, at least for a time.6 Thus,
despite the drop in interest rates, M2 growth is expected to fall short of
nominal GNP growth by about 1-1/2 percentage points in 1991, as shown by
the increase in M2 velocity on the chart.7
(16) The speed-up in M2 does not show through to M3 because of
the steeper decline in depository credit. Hence, M3 growth is expected at
around 2 percent again in 1991. Many of the retail deposits coming from
thrifts will be picked up by banks, who will use them mainly to pay down
the staff M2 demand model--a bit less than the 1990 model miss.
high cost managed liabilities rather than expand their own lending as they
continue their efforts to bolster capital ratios and limit risk exposure.
The ongoing contraction of depository credit in the face of accelerating
income growth is mirrored in an even more rapid gain in M3 velocity (see
(17) Growth of domestic nonfinancial debt is projected at 6-1/2
percent over 1991. Federal government debt is anticipated to expand
around 12 percent, up a bit from last year, with about 3 percentage points
of this total accounted for by RTC-related outlays. Growth of the debt of
nonfederal domestic sectors this year is likely to decline to a 4-3/4
percent rate, unusually slow relative to GNP. This configuration follows
in part from the prominence of net exports and thus spending by foreign
sectors in projected GNP; nominal gross domestic purchases rise only 1
percent this year, with credit restriction damping borrowing and credit-
intensive spending by domestic sectors. The moderation in debt growth is
particularly marked for households, accompanying weak housing activity and
slow spending for durables. In the nonfinancial business sector, borrow-
ing at banks and in the commercial paper market also will continue to be
damped in part by cautious lender attitudes. Issuance of long-term debt
is anticipated to edge up slightly, and be tilted toward higher quality
issuers in a less favorable environment for restructuring activity. The
worsening credit market situation of many states and localities is
expected to restrain their offerings of debt instruments.
(18) As noted above, the provisional ranges of alternative I
would seem to be broadly consistent the money and debt paths embodied in
the staff economic forecast. This alternative already represents a
reduction from the ranges of 1990 for M2 and debt. Should the Committee
wish to signal an even stronger commitment to an anti-inflation policy,
alternative II would reduce the ranges a further 1/2 percentage point.
The lower ceilings under this long-run alternative would call for a
prompter tightening of policy should the rebound in economic activity and
associated inflation outcome prove stronger than now anticipated by the
staff and carry through to more rapid money growth. The upper bounds of
this alternative also would inhibit a very vigorous easing in response to
an unexpectedly weak economy. At the same time, the reduced floors for
money growth would indicate a willingness of the Committee to tolerate
rather slow monetary expansion.
(19) Alternative III reverts to the M2 and debt ranges used for
to in July, and contains an M3 range 1/2 percentage point higher than the
range used last year and tentatively set for this year. This alternative
would seem most appropriate if the Committee were primarily concerned
about the risk of a deep and sustained recession, especially if that risk
were seen to arise from disruptions to the credit intermediation process
and the associated shortfall in M2 last year. Raising the lower bounds
would suggest a greater willingness to ease policy in the event that slow
M2 and M3 growth were to continue. The upper bounds would ensure more
scope for a pickup in money growth in response to any additional policy
easing that may be warranted by economic developments. And, as the
economy recovers this year, the higher ranges would allow more scope
before policy tightening were called for in case money growth should
return to a more normal relationship with movements in income and oppor-
tunity costs, reversing the largely inexplicable weakness of recent
quarters. The increases in all the ranges from their tentative specifica-
tion last July could raise questions about Federal Reserve resolve to
contain inflation, though such questioning would be muted in the context
of a recession.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(20) Two near-term policy alternatives are presented below for
Committee consideration. Under alternative B, federal funds trading would
be expected to average around 6-1/4 percent, with the assumption for ad-
justment plus seasonal borrowing remaining at $100 million. Under alter-
native A, the funds rate would decline to the area of 5-3/4 percent.
Alternative A could be implemented by a reduction of the borrowing assump-
tion of $25 million to $75 million.8  Such an approach, while technically
feasible, would place the funds rate below the discount rate and the low
levels of borrowing could add marginally to funds rate volatility. An
alternative approach to achieving the money market conditions of alterna-
tive A would be through another half-point cut in the discount rate com-
bined with maintenance of the borrowing assumption at $100 million. Bor-
rowing has been running somewhat higher, partly as difficulties in adapt-
ing to lower reserve requirements more often necessitated use of the
discount window on non-settlement days to avoid overdrafts. Some of these
difficulties will be alleviated as required reserve balances rise sea-
sonally and banks opt for higher required clearing balances. Still, the
Desk will have to take account of the possibility that demands for excess
reserves could continue to be high and variable. At least for a time,
such demands are likely to continue to be rather unpredictable day to day,
implying more frequent spikes in borrowing and volatility in the federal
funds rate.
(21) Following the recent series of policy moves by the Federal
Reserve, market participants probably are not anticipating much if any
further easing in the near term. Consequently, maintenance of current
reserve market conditions under alternative B likely would have relatively
little impact on interest rates. The dollar would remain around the lower
levels reached recently, though subject to an unusual extent to political
and military developments. Over a more extended period, however, long-
term interest rates could back up a bit if information suggesting some
revitalization of the economy, as in the staff forecast, led market par-
ticipants to conclude that the easing of monetary policy had run its
course for the current business cycle.
(22) With little market anticipation of an immediate further
easing, money market rates under alternative A are likely to fall roughly
in line with the decline of the federal funds rate. The decrease of pri-
vate rates could be a bit larger than that for Treasury bill rates, as
market participants viewed the policy easing process as providing
increased assurance of a near-term resumption of economic growth and
improved creditworthiness of borrowers in the foreseeable future. The
prime rate would be lowered another 1/2 percentage point, helping to
stimulate growth of bank credit. Judging from recent experience, bond
rates might not decline very much. The dollar would come under signif-
icant further downward pressures.
(23) Projected growth of the monetary aggregates under the two
short-term alternatives is shown in the table below. (Detailed data
appear on the tables and charts on the following pages.)
Alt. A Alt. B
Growth from December
to March
M2 4 3-1/2
M3 4 3-3/4
Ml 6 5
Growth from Q4 1990
to March
(24) While money growth will continue to be damped by the
restructuring of depository institutions, the staff expects the lower
market interest rates and opportunity costs of recent months to begin
providing some lift to monetary growth in the near term. Some hints of a
pickup of M2 were already in evidence in January, and an acceleration to
an average pace of about 4-1/2 percent over February and March would be
expected under alternative B. Under the lower money market rates of al-
ternative A, the acceleration would be even greater, to 5-1/2 percent over
the two months. To a large degree, the greater flows into M2 would be
direct toward money market funds, as investors likely will continue to
look askance at depository institutions and the institutions themselves
continue to post relatively unattractive rates. Alternative B would leave
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B Alt. A Alt. B
M2 in March only a little above the lower bound of its 2-1/2 to 6-1/2
percent provisional target range. However, given the lags between changes
in interest rates and money demand, the effects of the recent policy eas-
ings still would be boosting money growth through the second quarter,
bringing M2 closer to the middle of its provisional range by June. Under
alternative A, M2 still would be in the lower portion of its range by
March, but would be on a trajectory to move around the midpoint by June.
(25) M3 would be expected to expand at a 3-3/4 percent pace over
the December-to-March period under alternative B and a little more under
alternative A. In both cases this would represent a considerable pickup
from its pace over the previous three months and would leave this aggre-
gate 3 percent at an annual rate above its fourth-quarter base, in the
middle of its 1 to 5 percent provisional range for 1991. The acceleration
mainly reflects greater flows to both M2- and M3-type money funds, given
the temporary boost in their returns relative to market rates. Bank
credit is projected to remain sluggish, increasing at only about a 2 per-
cent rate in the first three months of the year. Thrifts, in turn, are
expected to continue to shrink, though at a slower pace given constraints
on RTC resources. These constraints will hold down Federal debt growth
relative to late last year, and expansion of nonfederal debt is projected
to remain depressed. Overall, the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors
should increase in the middle portion of its provisional 4-1/2 to 8-1/2
percent range.
Directive Language
(26) Presented below for Committee consideration is draft
language relating to the Humphrey-Hawkins ranges for 1991 and to the
operating paragraph for the intermeeting period.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability,
promote A RESUMPTION OF SUSTAINABLE growth in output on a
sustainable basis, and contribute to an improved pattern
of international transactions. In furtherance of these
objectives, the Committee at THIS [DEL: its] meeting [DEL: in July
reaffirmed the range it had] established RANGES [DEL: in February]
for GROWTH OF M2 AND M3 OF ____ TO ____ PERCENT AND ____ TO ____
[DEL: growth of 3 to 7] percent, RESPECTIVELY, measured from the
fourth quarter of 1990 [DEL: 1989] to the fourth quarter of 1991
[DEL:1990]. The [DEL: Committee in July also retained the] monitoring
range [DEL: of 5 to 9 percent for the year that it had set] for
growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt WAS SET AT
____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR THE YEAR. With regard to M3, the
Committee ANTICIPATED [DEL: recognized] that the ongoing restruc-
turing of thrift depository institutions WOULD CONTINUE TO
DEPRESS [DEL: had depressed] its growth relative to spending and
total credit [DEL: more than anticipated. Taking account of the
unexpectedly strong M3 velocity, the Committee decided in
July to reduce the 1990 range to 1 to 5 percent. For
monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter of 1990
to the fourth quarter of 1991, of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent
for M2 and 1 to 5 percent for M3. The Committee
tentatively set the associated monitoring range for growth
of t o tal domestic no nfinancial debt at 4-1/2 t o 8- 1 /2
percent for 1991.] The behavior of the monetary aggregates
will continue to be evaluated in the light of progress
toward price level stability, movements in their
velocities, and developments in the economy and financial
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to decrease slightly
(SOMEWHAT)/MAINTAIN/INCREASE SLIGHTLY (SOMEWHAT) the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions, [DEL: taking
account of a possible change in the discount rate.]
Depending upon progress toward price stability, trends in
economic activity, the behavior of the monetary aggre-
gates, and developments in foreign exchange and domestic
financial markets, slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve
restraint (WOULD) might or (SLIGHTLY) somewhat lesser
reserve restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable in the
intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions
are expected to be consistent with growth of [DEL:both] M2 and
M3 over the period from DECEMBER November through March at
annual rates of about ____ AND ____ [DEL: 4 and 1] percent, respec-
