Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC June 26, 1992
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Reserve pressures have been left unchanged since the FOMC
meeting on May 19. The federal funds rate has averaged very close to
its expected level of 3-3/4 percent. To account for rising demands for
seasonal credit, the allowance for adjustment and seasonal borrowing was
raised from $100 to $225 million in three steps during the intermeeting
period. Actual borrowing has come in somewhat above its allowance, in
part owing to a stronger-than-expected rise in seasonal borrowing.
(2) In the days following the May FOMC meeting, the failure of
the System to signal an easing action and news reports that a symmetric
directive had been adopted at that meeting prompted a backup in interest
rates. Later in the period, however, monetary and economic data
strengthened the notion that the recovery and credit demands would
remain modest, and interest rates moved lower, especially at intermedi-
ate maturities. On balance, money market yields were unchanged to up 10
basis points over the intermeeting period; long-term corporate and Trea-
sury rates were about unchanged on the period, while fixed-rate conven-
tional mortgages were marked down about 20 basis points. Most long- and
intermediate-term yields, although still somewhat above lows set early
in the year, ended the period 1/4 to 1 percentage point below highs
reached in early March. In the stock market, price indexes declined 3
to 5 percent over the intermeeting period owing to downward revisions to
the markets' ebullient earnings forecast.
(3) The dollar's weighted average exchange value has declined
decline, the dollar has retraced all of the increase from its January
low. The growing realization that the pace of the U.S. recovery was not
likely to be strong contributed to the softness in the dollar over the
intermeeting period and since its peak in March. Moreover, German money
growth has remained high in recent months, which has been seen as likely
to postpone any significant easing of German and associated European
interest rates. The German mark was particularly strong against the
dollar in the wake of the confusion over prospects for European mone-
tary union produced by the Danish referendum on June 2. Monetary
authorities in some European countries, Italy in particular, had to push
interest rates up fairly sharply to reassure exchange market partici-
pants after the referendum's defeat in Denmark. Weakness in Japanese
stock prices re-emerged, along with gloomier prospects for economic
activity and profits; major indices declined 12 to 16 percent over the
period, and the Nikkei index reached a six-year low. Short-and long-
term interest rates in Japan fell somewhat.
The Desk did not
(4) The monetary aggregates remained weak in May and June.
Over the two months, M2 and M3 are estimated to have fallen at 1-1/4 and
the last FOMC meeting that the two aggregates would increase at about
also has turned negative in June.1  The recent contraction in M2
brought its quarterly average growth to zero, far short of the predic-
tion of the standard money demand model using the staff GDP estimate and
short-term market and deposit interest rates. Correspondingly, the
velocity of M2 is estimated to have risen at a 5 percent rate during the
current quarter in the face of substantial declines in the second half
of last year in this conventional measure of the opportunity cost of M2.
The weakness over the second quarter has depressed the growth of both
aggregates through June by about a percentage point below their annual
ranges. At the time of the February FOMC meeting, the staff was
projecting M2 and M3 growth over the first half of the year at 3-1/4 and
relative to expectations has occurred despite slightly lower short-term
interest rates than envisioned in the staff forecast at the time of the
February FOMC meeting and expansion of nominal GDP over the first half
of the year that, at an estimated 5-1/4 percent, was somewhat above the
projection for the February meeting. A rise in velocities in the first
half of the year was anticipated, but by significantly less than the
estimated increases of around 3-1/4 and 5 percent at annual rates for M2
and M3, respectively.
(5) Sluggish monetary growth and sharply rising velocities
during the first half of 1992 appear to reflect an intensification of
some of the influences that depressed the demand for money and buoyed
velocity over 1990 and 1991. In contrast to expectations at the
February meeting, the yield curve steepened further and banks priced
deposits especially unattractively, reflecting weaker loan demand than
forecast and incentives to limit balance sheet expansion. Retail time
deposit rates at intermediate-term maturities have been particularly low
relative to market rates and relative to the original yields on maturing
deposits; rates on liquid deposits have adjusted down more quickly than
has been typical, with sizable reductions in the last few weeks; gener-
ally, depositories have made the largest cuts in the highest-rate liquid
deposits, which may have been held by the most interest-sensitive depos-
itors. The combination of still-elevated yields on bonds and low
returns on deposits evidently prompted heavy flows out of deposits and
into capital markets, either directly or through mutual funds. In
addition, high consumer borrowing costs relative to deposit interest
rates likely have encouraged households to emphasize debt repayment at
the expense of M2 asset accumulation. And RTC activity, at least until
mid-April when resolutions ceased because of the expiration of spending
authority, evidently disrupted banking relationships and prompted
depositors to seek alternative investment outlets. These factors are
associated, in varying degrees, with impediments to the flow of credit
through depository institutions, and thus are likely to be reflected in
both weak monetary growth and, to a lesser extent, some restraint on
spending and output.
(6) Despite heavy federal borrowing, nonfinancial sector debt
is estimated to have expanded at only a 4-1/2 percent rate through May,
leaving this aggregate at the lower end of its monitoring range. Non-
federal debt growth, at 2-1/2 percent, has been especially weak relative
to GDP, partly reflecting efforts to restructure balance sheets. Spend-
ing apparently has been financed out of internal funds, borrowers have
opted to pay down debt rather than hold low-yielding monetary assets,
and equity issuance has been used to reduce indebtedness. On the supply
side, evidence suggests that lending restraint by intermediaries, though
not abating, probably has stabilized, while open markets have become
more receptive to private borrowers, partly reflecting the diversion of
savings from depositories.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
April QIV'91
to to
April May Junepe Junepe Junepe
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial
debt 5.1 5.2 -- -- 4.51
Bank credit 5.2 -.8 2.7 .9 2.9
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Excess reserves 1137 1001 902
pe - preliminary estimate based on partial data through June 22.
1. 1991:Q4 to May.
2. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
Long-Run Ranges
(7) The table below presents staff projections of growth of
the monetary and debt aggregates for 1992 and 1993 thought to be consis-
tent with the greenbook outlook for the economy and interest rates.2
The table also contains the ranges for these aggregates chosen in
February and actual growth through June.
Money and Debt Growth
(Percent change, annual rate)
Staff projections
Current 1992 range 04:1991 to June 1992 1993
M2 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 1-1/2 2 2-1/2
M3 1 to 5 0 1/4 1/2
Debt 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 4-1/21 5 5-3/4
M1 12-1/4 10 6-3/4
Memo:
Nominal GDP 5-1/4 5-1/4 5-3/4
Projections for 1992 and 1993
(8) As discussed above, the broader monetary aggregates have
proven to be weaker in the first half of 1992 than envisioned early this
year. Moreover, relative to our expectations early in the year, we now
expect the factors damping money growth and raising velocity in the
period ahead to be more persistent and the restoration of more normal
relationships between growth in the monetary aggregates and income to be
more gradual. As a consequence, we now anticipate considerably slower
expansion of the broad money aggregates this year, associated with about
the same GDP that was projected in February, and we expect this sluggish
pattern to persist in 1993. Obviously, substantial uncertainty sur-
rounds our estimates of the relationship of money to spending, and in
making the forecast, we have balanced several factors. On the one hand,
bank and thrift asset growth is likely to remain damped, and credit will
continue to be channeled away from these intermediaries. In particular,
implementation of the FDIC Improvement Act (FDICIA) will constrain the
activity of many depositories, raise costs, and accentuate incentives to
bolster capital ratios. Capital itself is likely to remain under some
pressure at a number of banks and thrifts--stemming importantly from
continuing difficulties in the commercial real estate sector. The RTC,
though likely to be dormant over the balance of the year, should resume
closing thrifts in 1993, again damping depository credit and the mone-
tary aggregates. And, demand for depository credit at the wider spreads
that have developed is not expected to pick up much. Under these cir-
cumstances, deposit rates are likely to continue to be adjusted downward
under the greenbook assumption of flat federal funds rates and declining
long-term yields. On the other hand, the effects of these restraining
forces should diminish gradually as: capital positions improve; some
better capitalized banks, including those with ready access to equity
markets, more actively seek profitable lending opportunities; and steady
improvements in business profits and household earnings alleviate some
of the reluctance to lend. Moreover, households' efforts to pare lia-
bilities and to shift assets toward capital market instruments should
abate as their balance sheets are bought into closer alignment with
desired levels.
(9) M2 is expected to pick up some in the months ahead, but
only enough to produce growth for the year of 2 percent, below the cur-
rent annual range. Expansion of nominal income is projected at about
the same average pace in the second half as in the first. Acting to
restrain M2 growth relative to income over the balance of this year are
further downward movements in deposit rates--especially as liquid depos-
it rates move into closer alignment with market rates and as FDICIA
limits begin to constrain some banks' offering rates. In addition,
FDICIA limitations on brokered deposits as well as other provisions that
tend to raise intermediation costs should reinforce tendencies to hold
down deposit growth and spur further portfolio realignments. Partly
offsetting these influences should be recent and prospective declines in
consumer loan rates and capital market yields. The shortfall of M2
growth from standard model predictions is expected to be unprecedented,
on the order of 4 percent this year, and V2 is expected to rise by more
than 3 percent. Slightly faster growth of M2 is projected for 1993. By
then, the portfolio adjustment process will be further along, and GDP
growth in the staff economic forecast is projected to pick up a bit.
However, a decline in short-term interest rates, as occurred in late
the outlook. Furthermore, a number of additional provisions of FDICIA
that will come into effect in late 1992, including asset growth restric-
tions and early closure of weaker depositories, as well as limitations
on pass-through insurance and on payments to uninsured depositors, will
likely contribute to restraints on growth of the depository sector. On
balance V2 would rise about 3 percent next year as well.
(10) M3 also is projected to remain below the lower bound of
its current range over the balance of 1992. Weakness in bank credit
should abate a little as businesses shift from inventory liquidation to
modest restocking and as other businesses and household outlays expand.
Funding this credit imparts a slight upward tilt to M3 in the second
half of 1992 and in 1993. Over the balance of this year and next, ex-
pansion in core deposits will continue to be more than ample to cover
that growth, implying that managed liabilities in M3 will continue to
run off at a brisk clip. Also tending to buoy M3 over the rest of 1992
is the likelihood that RTC resolution activity will be dormant, owing to
funding constraints that are unlikely to be removed by congressional
action before next winter. In 1993, when depository resolutions by the
RTC and the FDIC pick up, M3 is expected to grow 1/2 percent, only
marginally faster than this year, extending the exceptionally weak
performance of this aggregate in recent years.
(11) Growth of debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is an-
ticipated to pick up a bit over the remainder of 1992 and to firm a
little more in 1993. Business credit demands will be boosted by the
swing in inventories and a rise in fixed capital spending that outstrips
the improvement in internal funds. Moreover, firms' borrowing will be
augmented by some slowing in net equity issuance from the extraordinary
pace of recent quarters, as opportunities to reduce overall capital
costs by unwinding over-leveraged balance sheets have been more fully
exploited. Further gains in earnings also should ease debt servicing
strains and improve access to credit. Still, restraints on credit
supplies at banks and insurance companies, while abating, are likely to
remain pronounced as these institutions continue to grapple with asset-
quality problems and regulatory constraints. Consequently, loan take-
downs at both types of institutions are expected to rise only slowly,
and those borrowers with access to open markets are likely to continue
to concentrate their credit demands on the bond market. Household bor-
rowing is expected to strengthen a little, in line with modest expansion
in outlays on consumer goods and housing activity and a moderation in
the deleveraging process. With banks seeking to limit asset growth and
thrifts continuing to run off assets, securitization is expected to
remain the major source of mortgage credit and to be an important source
of funding for consumer credit as well. Borrowing by state and local
governments will be held in check by fiscal pressures that restrain
their capital outlays and by large scheduled retirements of pre-refunded
bonds. In contrast, debt of the federal government will continue to
rise rapidly over the next year and a half, although funding constraints
on the RTC limit federal borrowing over the rest of this year before an
expected return to more normal activity early next year. Total debt of
nonfinancial sectors is projected to grow 5 percent this year, rising
above the lower bound of its range, and 5-3/4 percent next year; such
expansion is in line with growth in nominal GDP in both years.
Alternative longer-run strategies
(12) The staff's economic projection embodies gradual disin-
flation to about 2-3/4 percent on the GDP fixed-weight price deflator in
the second half of 1993. Some further progress on inflation would be
in train in 1994 since the level of the unemployment rate, at 6-3/4 per-
cent at the end of 1993, would still be above the natural rate. Growth
would have to remain moderate and unemployment rates elevated to extend
mild disinflation through 1994 and beyond. With regard to the financial
conditions necessary to achieve these results, the greenbook forecast
assumes a flat federal funds rate through 1993. Given its current low
level, the real federal funds rate will need to rise at some point to
keep downward pressure on inflation, perhaps requiring upward adjust-
ments in the nominal funds rate as well. While this tightening of
reserve conditions might await 1994, should the economy turn out more
ebullient than expected, an earlier firming in the stance of policy
would be consistent with the gradual disinflation path. Developments in
financial markets that might necessitate an earlier firming would in-
clude a more rapid easing of credit supply constraints than incorporated
in the forecast or a major downward adjustment of real long-term rates
that brought them into better alignment with short-term rates. Nor-
mally, greater underlying strength in the economy would require slower
money growth to hold to the disinflation path. However, declining long-
term rates or ebbing credit restraints would work to lower velocity as
well, complicating assessment of the appropriate money growth path.
(13) Alternatively, the Committee could strive for more rapid
progress toward price stability, which would entail slower economic
expansion and maintenance of greater slack in the economy for a longer
period. Such a strategy would involve a prompter firming of short-term
rates, probably by sometime early next year, to unwind a portion of the
easing undertaken late last year and earlier this year. However, the
greater progress in reducing inflation would imply that nominal short-
term rates need not go much higher than they eventually would in the
gradual disinflation case and likely would begin to retreat sooner.
Money growth would have to be slower than in the former case, appreci-
ably so in 1993. On the other hand, the Committee could put greater
emphasis on reducing unemployment over the next few years, keeping core
inflation around its current levels. Such a strategy would require a
significant easing of policy over the next year, perhaps involving a cut
in the federal funds rate of a percentage point or so. However, given
the already low level of the funds rate and the moderate degree of slack
in the economy, an aggressive tightening of policy at some point in the
next couple years would be needed to avoid an acceleration of wages and
prices. With regard to money growth, if the staff's assessment of
underlying money demand developments is about right, the initial stages
of this strategy might be produced by hitting the lower end of the cur-
rent M2 range. Thereafter, money growth would have to decelerate to
avoid building in accelerating prices.
Ranges for 1992
(14) Shown below are two alternatives for money and debt
growth in 1992.3 Alternative I retains the current ranges for all
three aggregates while alternative II lowers them by a full percentage
Money and Debt Growth Options for 1992
(Percent)
Memo:
Alternative I Alternative Staff
(current ranges) II projection
M2 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 2
M3 1 to 5 0 to 4 1/4
Debt 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 5
(15) Alternative II would reduce the ranges, encompassing the
staff projections for M2 and M3. Choice of this alternative would imply
the Committee's readiness to tolerate shortfalls of M2 relative to
earlier expectations, presumably because in the presence of the unusual
behavior of money demand such slow growth was considered to be consis-
tent with the Committee's desired outcome for spending in 1992 and early
tion of M2 in the event of a quick return to a more normal relationship
between M2 holdings and income and interest rates; indeed, M2 could
expand at a 10 percent annual pace between June and December without
breaching the upper end of this range. Still, reducing the ranges,
especially if coupled with the choice of ranges for 1993 that were lower
than the current 1992 ranges, might also be seen as pointing in the
direction of the Committee's intention to make further progress toward
price stability. Although the staff projection for M3 is just within
the alternative II range, the chances that this aggregate could fall
below the lower end are greater than for M2, especially in light of the
size of the unexpected contraction in this aggregate in recent months.
By contrast, the alternative II range for debt would be nearly centered
on the staff's expectation for growth of this aggregate this year.
(16) Alternative I might be selected if the prospects for a
return to more normal money demand and therefore M2 growth were seen as
greater than envisioned by the staff. This range also might be pre-
ferred if recent weakness in M2 were thought to be signalling slower
output growth than in the staff forecast--including a risk to the
recovery itself. In addition, as noted, attempts to hit the lower end
of this range would be more consistent with a strategy that endeavored
to make greater progress in reducing unemployment rates than in the
staff forecast. Depending on how it was presented, choice of this
alternative could signal that the Committee would not be complacent
about undershooting its current range; in these circumstances, pressure
to reexamine the System's stance in reserve markets would be present
with growth below the ranges. Instead, the Committee could choose to
retain the current range because it was so uncertain about money-income
relationships that any change was seen as implying more knowledge of
those relationships and commitment to achieving the new range than it
felt appropriate. In that event, the Committee would need to explain
that shortfalls from the unchanged range might not warrant policy
action. Actions to return M2 to its alternative I range would tend to
move M3 closer to its range; however, since any easing action to boost
M2 growth would have less impact on M3 expansion, there is a greater
Ranges for 1993
(17) The alternatives shown for 1993 are the same as those
suggested for 1992.5
Money and Debt Growth Options for 1993
Staff
Alt. I Alt. II Projections
M2 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 2-1/2
M3 1 to 5 0 to 4 1/2
Debt 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 3-1/2 to 7-1/2 5-3/4
(18) Alternative II would tend to be favored if it were
thought that the same forces acting to depress broad money in 1992 were
going to persist through next year. In the staff projections, M2 would
be squarely in the lower half of this reduced range over 1993 and M3
would be a little above the lower end of its range. Thus, this lower
range would accommodate the staff forecast of an economy that was ex-
panding at a pace slightly above its potential growth rate and infla-
tionary pressures that were continuing to abate. While encompassing
more scope for downward shifts in money demand, this alternative also
would embody less room for an acceleration in M2 growth that might
threaten progress toward price stability and greater scope for a rise in
interest rates were that needed to preserve the downtrend in inflation
or to seek an even faster deceleration than in the staff forecast.
(19) Alternative I, the current 1992 ranges, might be chosen
if the Committee wished to temporize about its 1993 choice, given
velocity uncertainties. This alternative would seem a more plausible
choice should the Committee choose to maintain, rather than lower, the
again in 1993 could be appropriate if the Committee saw chances of less
robust velocity growth next year. This alternative also could be
communicated as connoting a willingness to take action to counter any
potential stalling out of the economic expansion; the 2-1/2 percent
lower end of this range is equal to the staff's projection, implying
that only a modest shortfall from this expectation would tend to prompt
an easing of policy. Particularly if the money demand shifts do not
persist, this alternative might be more consistent with efforts to
promote somewhat stronger growth in the economy than contained in the
staff forecast. In the staff forecast, M3 expansion would stay below
the lower end of the alternative I range as RTC and FDIC resolutions
pick up. The staff's projection for debt of domestic nonfinancial
sectors is below the midpoint of the alternative I range, but about
centered on the midpoint of the alternative II range.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(20) Three short-run policy alternatives are presented below
for Committee consideration. Under alternative B, the federal funds
rate would continue to center on 3-3/4 percent. Maintaining that un-
changed stance likely would entail retaining the assumption for adjust-
ment plus seasonal borrowing at its $225 million level. Under the
easier alternative A, the funds rate would be reduced to 3-1/4 percent,
placing it 1/4 percentage point below the discount rate, in association
with a borrowing assumption of $200 million. Or this same funds rate
could be achieved by keeping a $225 million borrowing assumption and
reducing the discount rate 1/2 percentage point to 3 percent. Under
alternative C, the funds rate would be raised to around 4-1/4 percent by
selecting a borrowing specification of $250 million. Further upward
technical adjustments to the borrowing assumption likely will be needed
over the intermeeting period with any of the alternatives to account for
a continued upswing in seasonal borrowing.
(21) Market participants appear to have built into interest
and exchange rates some probability of a near-term easing in the stance
of monetary policy next week after the FOMC meeting and release of June
employment data. Thus, in the near-term, rates would rise somewhat
under alternative B. Over the course of the third quarter, with infla-
tion pressures subdued and the pace of economic expansion moderate, as
in the staff forecast, short-term and long-term rates might come back
down. Long-term rates could well end up below current levels, espe-
cially if the lack of Federal Reserve action ultimately contributes to
downward adjustments to inflation expectations. The exchange value of
the dollar would probably average around current levels.
(22) Under alternative A, most of the drop of 50 basis points
in the funds rate would be transmitted to other money market interest
rates. The prime rate would be cut a half percentage point. The
reaction of bond yields is difficult to anticipate. To the extent mar-
ket participants saw the easing as warranted by prospective economic
weakness, long-term rates would decline further on the policy easing.
On the other hand, to the degree that the action was interpreted as more
aggressive than was justified by economic fundamentals and by the pro-
spects for continued disinflation, heightened inflation concerns and an
enhanced possibility that a policy tightening may be needed in the not-
too-distant future would temper such a decline and could even bring
about some increase in nominal bond rates. Still, the easing would
provide some stimulus to economic activity as real long-term yields
moved lower and the recent weakening in the exchange value of the dollar
was extended.
(23) The increase of 50 basis points in the funds rate under
alternative C would come as a considerable surprise to market partici-
pants. Short-term rates would back up by at least as much, and the
dollar exchange rate would strengthen appreciably. The surprise element
itself could well trigger a flurry of selling pressures on longer-term
securities. Later, market reflection about the System's anti-inflation-
ary resolve, combined with favorable incoming price data, might well
engender a bond-market rally, leaving nominal long-term rates not much
above their current levels.
(24) The table below presents anticipated growth of the mone-
tary aggregates from June to September under the three short-run policy
alternatives. (The charts and table on the following pages show more
detailed data.) Under all the alternatives, M2 and M3 in September
would remain below the lower bounds of their current ranges. Even
under alternative A, M2 would be on a trajectory that would bring it
closer to, though still a bit below, its lower bound in the fourth
quarter, and M3 also would be expected to remain somewhat below its
current range through year-end. The response of M2 under alternatives A
and C incorporates the reduced interest elasticity now thought to be
embodied in demand for this aggregate, partly as a consequence of
heightened depositor sensitivity to the slope of the yield curve.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from June to
September
M2 2-3/4 2 1-1/4
M3 1 1/2 0
M1 8 6-1/2 5
Growth from QIV'91
to September
(25) While M2 under all three alternatives appears likely to
resume growth over the June-to-September period, under alternative B
this aggregate still is projected to grow at only a 2 percent annual
rate. The same forces that have been evident in recent years will
continue to depress the demand for broad money. Growth in M2 likely
will be damped additionally by runoffs of demand deposits associated
with the slowing in the pace of mortgage refinancing. Partly as a
result, M1 growth probably will be held down to a 6-1/2 percent annual
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
rate from June to September, about in line with its reduced March-to-
June pace. By contrast, the runoff of the non-M1 component of M2
is expected to come to an end, leaving its level about unchanged over
the June-to-September period. The declines in intermediate-term mar-
ket yields relative to rates on retail time deposits of comparable
maturity during the spring, as well as a prospective flattening of the
yield curve, should damp the shifting out of small time deposits.
(26) The turnaround in M2 growth under alternative B should
show through to M3. After its decline over the second quarter, this
aggregate is projected to expand at a 1/2 percent annual rate over the
next three months. Bank credit growth should strengthen some from its
torpid second-quarter pace, though loan demand would still be rela-
tively weak. Domestic nonfinancial debt is projected to move gradu-
ally above its lower bound in coming months, placing its growth from
the fourth quarter of last year through September at 4-3/4 percent.
This strengthening owes almost entirely to heavy federal borrowing, as
non-federal debt growth is expected to remain sluggish.
(27) Choice of alternatives A or C would entail somewhat
stronger or weaker M2 over the third quarter. Most of the adjustment
would come in liquid money balances, whose offering rates are unlikely
to respond much to changes in short-term market interest rates. M2
growth from June to September could be expected to respond by about
percentage point. The effect of such a changed policy stance on M3
growth over the same interval would be smaller, however, perhaps on
the order of 1/2 percentage point, reflecting the reaction of loans
demanded to a movement in borrowing costs of this magnitude.
Directive Language
(28) Presented below for Committee consideration is a draft
of the paragraph relating to the ranges for 1992 and 1993. The lan-
guage in the first set of brackets is offered as a suggestion should
the Committee reaffirm the current ranges and at the same time wish to
indicate an expectation that acceptable growth could be around (implic-
itly including a little below) the lower ends of those ranges. The
language in the second bracket would cover a decision to reduce the
tence, like the one suggested in this bracket, might be considered to
explain the reason for the reduction.
(29) A draft operational paragraph follows that for the long-
run ranges. The language in brackets at the end of that paragraph
might be considered should the Committee wish to reduce the weight it
places on the near-term growth of the monetary aggregates relative to
Committee expectations as a guide to adjustments in reserve conditions
over the coming intermeeting period.
PARAGRAPH FOR 1992 AND 1993 RANGES
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and
promote sustainable growth in output. In furtherance of
these objectives, the Committee REAFFIRMED at THIS [DEL: its]
meeting THE RANGES IT HAD ESTABLISHED in February
[DEL: established ranges] for growth of M2 and M3 of 2-1/2 to
from the fourth quarter of 1991 to the fourth quarter of
TRIBUTING TO UNUSUAL VELOCITY INCREASES COULD PERSIST IN
THE SECOND HALF OF THE YEAR, AND UNDER THOSE CIRCUMSTANCES
M2 AND M3 GROWTH AROUND THE LOWER ENDS OF THEIR RANGES
WOULD BE CONSISTENT WITH ITS BROAD POLICY OBJECTIVES.]
[IN FURTHERANCE OF THESE OBJECTIVES, THE COMMITTEE AT THIS
MEETING LOWERED THE RANGES IT HAD ESTABLISHED IN FEBRUARY
FOR GROWTH OF M2 AND M3 TO RANGES OF ____ TO ____ AND ____ TO
PERCENT RESPECTIVELY, MEASURED FROM THE FOURTH QUARTER OF
PATED THAT DEVELOPMENTS CONTRIBUTING TO UNUSUAL VELOCITY
INCREASES WOULD PERSIST OVER THE BALANCE OF THE YEAR, AND
THAT MONEY GROWTH WITHIN THESE LOWER RANGES WOULD BE
CONSISTENT WITH ITS BROAD POLICY OBJECTIVES.] The moni-
toring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial
debt ALSO was MAINTAINED [DEL: set] at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent
[(ALSO) WAS LOWERED TO ____ TO ____ PERCENT] for the year.
[DEL: With regard to M3, the Committee anticipated that the
ongoing restructuring of depository institutions would
continue to depress the growth of this aggregate relative
to spending and total credit.] FOR 1993, THE COMMITTEE
AGREED ON TENTATIVE RANGES FOR MONETARY GROWTH, MEASURED
FROM THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1992 TO THE FOURTH QUARTER OF
M3. THE COMMITTEE PROVISIONALLY SET THE ASSOCIATED
MONITORING RANGE FOR GROWTH OF DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEBT
AT ___ TO ____ PERCENT FOR 1993. The behavior of the mone-
tary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light
of progress toward price level stability, movements in
their velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. In the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly
(SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint (MIGHT/WOULD) or
slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint might (WOULD)
be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contem-
plated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from [DEL: April
through] June THROUGH SEPTEMBER at annual rates of about
____ AND ____ [DEL: 2-1/2 and 1-1/2] percent, respectively.
[HOWEVER, THE RECENT UNUSUAL BEHAVIOR OF THESE AGGREGATES
SUGGESTS THAT THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THEIR GROWTH AND
THE COMMITTEE'S LONG-RUN OBJECTIVES IS ESPECIALLY UNCER-
TAIN AT THIS TIME.]
