Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC May 15, 1992
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The degree of reserve pressures was left unchanged
immediately after the March 31 FOMC meeting, with the expected federal
funds rate remaining at 4 percent. However, reserve conditions were
eased on April 9, reducing the expected federal funds rate to 3-3/4
percent: The broad monetary aggregates had declined for several weeks,
bringing them to the lower ends of their target ranges and extending
their sluggish growth trends of 1991; moreover, the weakness in money
occurred in the context of indications that the economic expansion was
moderating from the pace early in the year and of fundamentals that
continued to point to long-run disinflation. Desk reserve management
during the intermeeting period was complicated by several factors.
These included uncertainties about whether the demand for excess
reserves might increase as a result of the cut in the reserve require-
ment on transactions deposits from 12 percent to 10 percent (implemented
on April 2). In the event, depository institutions appeared to adjust
smoothly to the lower level of required reserve balances; with combined
required reserve and clearing balances seasonally high and noticeably
above minimal clearing needs, little evidence of heightened demands for
excess reserves or of increased federal funds rate volatility emerged.
As a further complication, variable tax flows produced unusual fluctua-
tions in the Treasury balance, and, on average, somewhat larger reserve
supplies than projected. Over the five weeks since the April 9 easing,
the federal funds rate averaged about 1/8 percentage point below the
expected level. Borrowing averaged $108 million over the three complete
maintenance periods since the March meeting.
(2) The easing of policy, in conjunction with data suggesting
a subdued economic expansion and persistent weakness in broad money,
prompted sizeable declines in market interest rates. Most short-term
rates fell by more than the federal funds rate--registering declines of
around 45 basis points over the intermeeting period--as sentiment shift-
ed from expectations that the next policy action was more likely to be
toward tightening to the current sense that some further ease may be
more likely.2 Intermediate-term yields fell 20 to 45 basis points and
bond yields 5 to 15 basis points, while rates on fixed-rate mortgages
dropped 35 basis points. But these declines still leave intermediate-
and long-term rates about 1/4 to 3/4 percentage point above their lows
reached around the turn of the year. Buoyed by generally strong earn-
ings reports for the first quarter, price indexes for larger capitaliza-
tion firms are up 2 to 4 percent since the March meeting. Bank earnings
reports suggesting wide lending margins and generally less severe asset
problems than had been anticipated led to even larger increases in bank
stock prices; these price gains were trimmed somewhat late in the period
by the bankruptcy filing of Olympia and York.
(3) The shift in outlook for U.S. interest rates, along with
perceptions that any easing by the Bundesbank would be postponed, con-
tributed to a downward move in the foreign exchange value of the dollar
late in the intermeeting period. This recent decline largely accounted
for the net depreciation of the dollar of 2-1/4 percent on a weighted
average basis over the entire period. In Germany, short-term interest
rates edged up on continued rapid money growth and adverse labor market
developments, while long-term rates were about unchanged. However, a
number of other countries took steps to ease monetary policy. Monetary
authorities in Japan and the United Kingdom lowered official interest
rates, and short-term rates in Canada also declined. Despite the Bank
of Japan's easing move, long-term rates rose about 20 basis points on
balance, possibly reflecting uncertainties associated with the effects
of the Japanese stock market decline and the policy response to it.
Major Japanese stock indexes rallied sharply in the first part of May,
but fell back late in the intermeeting period after the Olympia and York
filing. The net loss over the intermeeting period was 5 to 6-1/2 per-
The Desk did not
intervene in foreign exchange markets.
(4) The broad monetary aggregates contracted in April, falling
well below the track consistent with expectations at the time of the
last FOMC meeting that M2 and M3 would increase at 3-1/2 and 1-1/2 per-
cent rates, respectively, over March to June. M2 fell 2 percent at an
annual rate last month, while M3 contracted at a 3-1/2 percent rate,
after smaller declines for both aggregates in March. These decreases
left M2 and M3 in April slightly above and slightly below the lower ends
of their respective target ranges. Available data for early May suggest
a resumption in money growth, although on a month-average basis M2 and
M3 are likely to stay around the lower bounds of their ranges and below
the paths implied by the Committee's specifications.
(5) Some of the recent declines in the aggregates appears
attributable to temporary factors. Nonwithheld personal tax payments
were unusually weak, and the associated buildup of liquid balances in
March and April undoubtedly was less than incorporated in seasonal
factors. Partly as a result, expansion of transactions and other liquid
deposits slowed substantially in April. M1 increased at a much-reduced
funds expanded at an 8 percent rate, near the pace of March but down
considerably from that of the first two months of the year. In
addition, a surge in RTC activity around the end of the quarter likely
played a part in a further sharp drop in retail deposits. Along with
these factors restraining M2, M3 has been depressed by an appreciable
runoff of Yankee CDs by branches of Japanese banks over the last six
weeks; these banks have found some decreased acceptance of their
liabilities from investors concerned about the consequences of the
decline in real estate and stock prices in Japan.
(6) Even after taking account of these special factors, mone-
tary growth appears to have been unusually sluggish. Subdued demand for
M2 relative to income was reflected in an increase in velocity in the
first quarter, despite little change in average opportunity costs. The
unprecedented steepness of the yield curve and low rates on longer-term
retail time deposits relative to market rates have encouraged investors
to shift funds from deposits into the capital markets, as suggested by
very large flows into bond and stock mutual funds. Indeed, the backup
in intermediate- and long-term market interest rates that occurred
earlier in the year strengthened those incentives. Similarly, compara-
tively high rates on consumer debt may be prompting households to use
deposit balances to pay down or to limit increases in such indebtedness.
In addition, the deceleration of money growth after the surge early this
year may signal some tapering-off of actual and expected spending.
(7) Aggregate credit flows appear to have remained weak
through April, particularly outside the federal government. Private
debt growth edged up during the first quarter, but remained appreciably
slower than nominal GDP. The anemic expansion of debt likely reflected
continued weak demand, as lenders, if anything, seemed to be moving
toward an increased willingness to supply credit. In the business sec-
tor, little evidence of a further pickup in credit usage has emerged
recently. Business loans at commercial banks declined 6 percent at an
annual rate in April, despite indications that banks had been no more
restrictive in approving loans, and commercial paper of nonfinancial
firms ran off. Firms continued to issue sizable amounts of bonds in
public markets in April, where narrowing spreads suggested ample
appetite by investors. But a substantial proportion of the proceeds
were used to pay down high cost debt, and further equity issuance also
has limited demands on credit markets. Adjusted for securitizations,
consumer loans at banks declined slightly over the past two months,
despite evidence that some banks have become more willing to make such
loans, and borrowing from banks under home equity lines remained modest.
Judging from data on applications, mortgage borrowing likely is retreat-
ing somewhat from its strong pace of earlier in the year. State and
local governments continued to tap longer-term markets at a brisk clip
last month, but a sizable proportion of the proceeds went to refund
existing debt. Federal borrowing remained heavy, boosting overall debt
growth. Through March, total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors grew
at a 4 percent rate from its fourth-quarter base, leaving this aggregate
a little below its 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent monitoring range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'91
to
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. Apr.
Money and credit aggregates
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Policy Alternatives
(8) Three policy alternatives are presented below for Commit-
tee consideration. Under alternative B, federal funds would continue
trading in the 3-3/4 percent area; extending the current assumption of
$100 million for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing would be expected to
preserve the current 1/4 percentage point spread of the funds rate above
the discount rate, at least over the first part of the intermeeting
period.4 Under alternative A, the federal funds rate would drop to
count rate by lowering the initial specification for borrowing to $75
million, placing the federal funds rate below the discount rate. The
same federal funds rate could be achieved by cutting the discount rate
alternative B level of $100 million. Under the policy tightening of
alternative C, the federal funds rate would rise to 4-1/4 percent, in
association with higher initial borrowing of $125 million.
(9) Although market participants apparently view the prospects
for the next policy action as more heavily favoring an easing than a
tightening, no immediate policy change seems to remain the predominant
view. Consequently, prices in domestic credit and foreign exchange
markets probably would not show much reaction should the Committee main-
tain current reserve market conditions by choosing alternative B at this
meeting. Economic expansion along the lines projected in the greenbook
and money growth remaining near the lower end of the Committee's range
(discussed below) are likely to continue to foster some downward bias in
market expectations for reserve market pressures for a time. Maintain-
ing unchanged conditions over the entire intermeeting period eventually
could cause some short-term rates to edge higher and dollar exchange
rates to strengthen a little as markets reassessed the Federal Reserve's
intentions. However, long-term yields are likely to remain fairly
steady or possibly even edge down as expectations for growth and infla-
tion are trimmed back; the passage of an effective balanced budget
amendment would add to downward pressures on long-term rates.
(10) The extent of the easing of reserve market conditions
under alternative A would catch market participants unawares, and the
able decline in other money market interest rates. Commercial banks
are likely to pass through the funds-rate reduction fully to the prime
rate, while retaining a relatively wide spread over costs of funds.
Recent declines in long-term rates, occurring as markets were beginning
to build in a possible easing, suggest that a decrease in bond yields
might accompany such an action. However, following an easing move,
especially of the dimensions of alternative A, investors would become
more assured of sustained economic expansion, but also less confident of
any longer-term decrease in inflation, which together would limit any
reductions in long-term rates. With interest rates on dollar-denomi-
nated securities becoming less attractive relative to returns abroad,
the exchange value of the dollar would adjust downward.
(11) The more restrictive policy of alternative C would come
as a considerable surprise to market participants. Short-term interest
rates would rise at least commensurately with the federal funds rate.
Long-term rates might increase relatively little, as investors shifted
their concerns toward the potential for renewed economic weakness for a
time rather than inflationary pressures, in light of the signal of
Federal Reserve resolve to achieve disinflation gains. Stock prices
probably would slide as dividend streams expected by investors are
reduced and discounted at somewhat higher rates. Quality spreads on
private paper over Treasuries also could widen some from their current
narrow levels. The dollar would strengthen appreciably on foreign
exchange markets.
(12) Projected monetary growth under the three policy alter-
natives is given in the table below. (More detailed data are presented
in the table and charts on the following pages.) Under all three alter-
natives, M2 and M3 are expected to resume growing in May and June, as
the temporarily depressing effects on money demand in March and April of
low tax payments and accelerated RTC resolutions fade out, and as some
stimulus from the System's most recent easing takes hold. However,
decreases in the volume of mortgage prepayments in prospect will have a
depressing effect on demand deposits and MMDAs. The broader aggregates
would end up in June only around the lower bounds of their annual growth
cones--well below levels projected in the last bluebook. Although
projected growth in nominal GDP for the second quarter has been revised
down somewhat since the last greenbook, the staff is interpreting the
shortfall in money to an important extent as signifying weaker underly-
ing demands for money and credit relative to spending and interest rates
than anticipated at the last meeting--that is, a shift in money demand.
The forces that have held back depository intermediation in recent
years--households and businesses deleveraging, borrowers substituting
other financing for depository credit, and investors shifting from low-
interest retail time deposits out a steep yield curve into bond mutual
funds--seem to be persisting.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from March
to June
M2 1-1/4 1 3/4
M3 1/4 0 -1/4
M1 9-3/4 9-1/4 8-3/4
Growth from April
to June
M2 3 2-1/2 2
M3 2 1-3/4 1-1/2
M1 12 11-1/4 10-1/2
(13) Growth of M2 is projected to average 2-1/2 percent at an
annual rate over May and June with the essentially stable money market
interest rates of alternative B. Most of the pickup should stem from
the liquid components, as outflows to cover tax payments prove to be
smaller than implicitly anticipated by seasonal factors. In particular,
Ml is likely to return to a double-digit pace over May and June, led by
a sharp reacceleration of demand and other checkable deposits. Even
so, M2 growth from March to June would be only 1 percent, as would its
growth on a quarterly-average basis, far below the staff's projected
pace of 5 percent for nominal GDP. The staff believes that M2 velocity
will continue to increase in coming quarters but at a much slower rate
as the unusual factors inducing the current quarter's increase in M2
velocity wane. For the year as a whole, V2 is projected to be up about
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in billions
1992 January
February
March
April
May
June
Monthly Growth Rates
1992 January
February
March
April
May
June
Quarterly Ave. Growth Rates
1991 Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q4 91
Q2 92
Mar 92
Apr 92
June 92
Dec
Mar
Apr
Q4
Q4 <
Q4 i
Q4 5
Q4 i
(14) Under alternative B, the projected turnaround in M2 over
May and June should show through to M3, which is expected to register an
annual growth rate of 1-3/4 percent; from March to June, M3 would be
about unchanged. The slower expansion of M3 than of M2 would reflect
continued runoffs of large time deposits, as net credit extension at
depositories lags behind inflows to retail deposits. The decline of
business loans at banks might moderate as inventory liquidation slows
and banks become more willing to lend, especially to smaller businesses.
However, business credit demands are expected to be restrained overall,
as projected cash flow about matches capital spending, and to remain
focused on longer-term markets. The modest projected rise in spending
for new homes and durable goods, together with continuing cautious
attitudes toward debt, should limit household borrowing as well. Conse-
quently, growth of the debt of nonfederal sectors is projected to con-
tinue at only a 2-3/4 percent annual rate from March to June. Federal
debt, by contrast, is expected to post a more rapid 13 percent rate of
growth over these three months. Total domestic nonfinancial debt is
anticipated to expand at a little above a 5 percent rate over the second
quarter, lifting it in June to just above the lower bound of its 4-1/2
to 8-1/2 percent monitoring range.
(15) The growth of M2, M3, and debt through June would be
little affected by either the easing or tightening of reserve conditions
under alternatives A or C. More of the impact of these actions could be
expected to be felt in the second half of the year. If the lower funds
rate of alternative A is maintained through year-end, growth of M2 for
the year could be expected to come in around 4 percent. Some impetus to
money demand would derive from the reduced opportunity cost of holding
liquid balances and, later in the year, from added strength in spending.
If alternative C is adopted and the higher rates maintained, a 3 percent
annual pace for M2 would be more likely. Overall, based on recent ex-
perience, the impetus from changed short-term interest rates is project-
ed to have a considerably smaller effect on M2 growth than embodied in
historical relationships. While growth of M3 for the year of 2 percent
is expected under the constant funds rate of alternative B, this projec-
tion would have to be shaded up or down by perhaps 1/4 point if alterna-
tive A or C were chosen at this FOMC meeting and sustained for the rest
of the year.
Directive Language
(16) Draft language for the operational paragraph is present-
ed below. An alternative for the last sentence is shown in brackets.
This alternative would stress the Committee's expectation of a resump-
tion of growth in broad money over May and June, in contrast to the
traditional three-month specification, which would show little if any
monetary growth (for example, 1 percent for M2 and zero for M3 under
alternative B).
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. In the context of the Committee's long-run
objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, slightly (SOMEWHAT)
greater reserve restraint might (WOULD) or slightly
(SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint (MIGHT) would be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with growth
of M2 and M3 over the period from March through June at
annual rates of about ____ AND ____ [DEL: 3-1/2 and 1-1/2] percent,
respectively. [The contemplated reserve conditions are
expected to be consistent with a resumption of growth in M2
and M3 over the period from April to June to annual rates of
about ____ and ____ percent, respectively.]
May 18, 1992
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds - secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
May 91
Jun 91
Jul 91
Aug 91
Sep 91
Oct 91
Nov 91
Dec 91
Jan 92
Feb 92
Mar 92
Apr 92
Weekly
Jan 29 92
Feb 5 92
Feb 12 92
Feb 19 92
Feb 26 92
Mar 4 92
Mar 11 92
Mar 18 92
Mar 25 92
Apr 1 92
Apr 8 92
Apr 15 92
Apr 22 92
Apr 29 92
May 6 92
May 13 92
Daily
May 8 92
May 14 92
May 15 92
- p - - - -
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Clas IFOMC
Seasonally adjusted MAY. 18, 1992
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period MI M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
in M2 in M3 only investments
ANN. GROWTH RATES (%) :
ANNUALLY (04 TO Q4)
LEVELS SBILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
WEEKLY
1992-APR. 6 941.2 3468.3 2527.1 702.5 4170.8
MAY 4 p 951.7 3471.0 2519.4 707.7 4178.8
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
MAY. 18, 1992
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds denomi- Short- Bankers
Demand checkable RPs and Savings nation general Institu- nation Term Term Savings term Commer- accep-
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars deposits' time purpose tions time RPs Eurodollars bonds Treasury cial paper' tances
NSA' deposits' and broker/ only deposits' NSA' NSA' securities
dealer'
LEVELS (SBILLIONS) :
ANNUALLY (4TH QTR.)
APR. p 273.6 311.2 350.2 71.2 1111.4 984.4 354.2 189.2 406.1 72.2 56.2
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Weekly
January 22
May6
13
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
May 13
- 3,411
- 37
- 1,359
- 5,776
- 529
- 2,198
- 2,823
- 837
- 2,452
i00 1,315
- 375
- 11,282
- 4.150
- 1,450
- 1,815
- 3,867
May 15, 1992
May 13
