Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC August 14, 1992
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) On July 2, the day after the FOMC meeting, the discount
rate and the intended federal funds rate were reduced 50 basis points to
to data suggesting that the economic expansion was more subdued than
anticipated, and against a background of marked weakness in the broad
monetary aggregates, sluggish credit growth, and continuing disinfla-
tion. Over the balance of the period, the intended federal funds rate
remained at 3-1/4 percent. The allowance for adjustment and seasonal
borrowing was maintained at $225 million until July 30, when it was
raised by $25 million to account for increasing demands for seasonal
credit. Borrowing averaged close to its allowance in the two complete
maintenance periods since the meeting, and the federal funds rate has
averaged 3.25 percent.
(2) The weak economic data and policy easing prompted a con-
siderable decline in market rates across the maturity spectrum on
July 2. Note and bond markets have rallied further in recent weeks, as
incoming information suggested limited momentum in the economic recovery
and more favorable price and wage trends. On balance over the period,
rates on both three-month Treasury bills and on thirty-year Treasury
bonds dropped a little more than 40 basis points. Intermediate-term
rates fell by even more--from 60 to 70 basis points. This pattern sug-
gests that the drop in long-term rates was accounted for by downward
revisions of expected credit demands and inflation over the next few
years, rather than a reconsideration of longer-term inflation expec-
tations. Rates on fixed-rate home mortgages fell about 45 basis points
over the intermeeting period, somewhat less than yields on intermediate-
term Treasuries, partly reflecting a reassessment of prepayment risk as
a result of the unexpectedly sharp pickup in refinancing activity. In
other markets, spreads of yields on private securities over Treasury
issues remained quite narrow. Most broad stock price indexes were
little changed on balance over the period.
(3) The dollar's foreign exchange value on a weighted average
basis has declined about 2-1/2 percent since the last FOMC meeting, as a
depreciation of about 3-1/2 percent against the mark and other ERM cur-
rencies more than offset a slight appreciation against the yen. Since
its recent peak in mid-April the dollar has fallen 10 percent, more than
retracing the runup from year-end. The net depreciation of the dollar
over the intermeeting period mainly reflected a weakening of near-term
U.S. economic prospects and the associated declines in U.S. interest
rates. Although the Bundesbank raised its discount rate 75 basis points
on July 16, market interest rates in Germany moved only slightly higher.
However, against the backdrop of questions about the future of monetary
union, interest rates in other European countries rose somewhat more as
central banks had to tighten to support their currencies. The Desk
intervened on July 20, August 7, and August 11, purchasing a total of
$770 million against marks to moderate the dollar's decline.
The Bank of Japan lowered
its discount rate by 1/2 percentage point; short-term market rates in
Japan declined about 60 basis points, while long-term rates dropped by
six-year lows, while European stock markets fell 7 to 11 percent.
(4) M2 and M3 continued to contract in July, decreasing at
the parallel bands associated with their annual ranges. Both aggregates
were substantially weaker than projected, reflecting in part a shortfall
in the expansion of nominal income. In addition, velocities may have
shifted up a little more than anticipated, perhaps owing to a further
rechanneling of credit demands outside of the depository sector, encour-
aged by the drop in long-term market interest rates. Bank loans con-
tinued to slide in July and overall bank credit was flat. With little
need for additional funds, institutions cut rates on retail deposits
promptly following the July 2 easing. Rates on liquid deposits de-
creased substantially, but by less than the reduction in money market
yields, and growth of those deposits (including demand deposits, other
checkable deposits, savings deposits, and MMDAs) picked up.2 Yields
on retail time deposits were reduced more in line with declines in mar-
ket rates of comparable maturity, and small time deposits extended their
steep runoff. Outflows from retail money market mutual funds acceler-
ated, in contrast to the usual pattern following declines in short-term
yields. Faced with wide spreads between yields on M2 balances and rates
on both capital market instruments and household credit, many households
evidently have continued to redirect balances toward bond and stock
funds and the repayment of credit. Weakness in bank credit was also
reflected in sizable runoffs of large CDs, but the non-M2 component of
M3 was supported by flows into institution-only money market funds,
whose yields fell less quickly than market rates.
(5) Recent declines in long-term interest rates fueled ac-
tivity in bond and mortgage markets, but private debt growth overall
apparently remained sluggish. In the household sector, mortgage ap-
plications shot up as mortgage rates touched new lows; most such
applications were to refinance existing mortgages, but those for home
purchases climbed as well. Consumer installment credit contracted at a
Nonfinancial firms continued to issue bonds at a brisk pace in July,
mainly to refund high-cost debt and pay down short-term loans. Both
business loans at banks and commercial paper ran off in July, and over-
all funding needs appear to have remained modest. Senior lending
officers at commercial banks reported that underwriting standards on
business loans were about unchanged over the past three months, continu-
ing the trend of recent surveys; in contrast to previous surveys, banks
did not report further tightening in other terms of lending. Bond
offerings remained brisk in the tax-exempt sector, but a sizable pro-
portion of the issues were for refunding purposes, and a large volume of
bonds were retired with the proceeds of issues sold some time ago. With
federal debt continuing to expand at a rapid pace, overall nonfinancial
sector debt has increased at an estimated 4-3/4 percent rate through
July, leaving this aggregate just within its monitoring range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV'91
to
May June July July
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial
debt 5.2 5.5 4.9P  4.7P
Bank credit -.9 1.7 -.1 2.4
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 155 229 284
Excess reserves 1000 913 968
p - Partly projected.
1. Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
Policy Alternatives
(6) Three alternatives are presented below for consideration
by the Committee. Under alternative B, federal funds would continue to
trade around 3-1/4 percent in combination with an initial allowance for
adjustment plus seasonal borrowing of $250 million.3 Under alterna-
tive A, the federal funds rate would drop to 2-3/4 percent. This could
be achieved by a reduction in the borrowing allowance to $225 million
with the funds rate dropping below the discount rate, or by a cut in the
discount rate of 1/2 percentage point with an unchanged borrowing al-
lowance. Alternative C involves a return of the federal funds rate to
(7) Market sentiment of late seems to have tilted toward some
prospect of another policy ease in coming months. Although money market
interest rates might firm a bit over the intermeeting period under the
unchanged policy of alternative B, any increase would be limited if,
consistent with the Greenbook forecast, information continued to suggest
modest economic expansion. Bond rates also should remain around their
current reduced levels, and could even edge down if inaction by the
Federal Reserve, along with indicators of wages and prices, were seen as
reinforcing disinflationary trends. If political dynamics seem to
portend even higher budget deficits ahead, these downward pressures on
bond yields may tend to be offset. The dollar, under alternative B,
would be expected to trade around its recent lower levels.
(8) Under alternative A, short-term interest rates would fall
by nearly the full 50 basis point drop in the federal funds rate, espe-
cially were the easing to take the form of a discount rate cut, which
would be seen as implying that the reduction more likely would be sus-
tained. Banks would be expected to trim another 1/2 percentage point
off the prime rate, still preserving large spreads over funding costs.
Some market participants might read the easing as increased emphasis on
spurring economic activity, at the cost of limiting progress against
inflation. Nonetheless, given the outlook for tepid economic expansion
and slower inflation that recently has come to be more firmly embedded
in market expectations, nominal as well as real bond yields would be
likely to decline noticeably. Easing in the United States might lessen
constraints on more expansive monetary policies in a few other coun-
tries, but with many countries, especially in Europe, highly unlikely to
follow suit, the dollar would tend to depreciate significantly further.
(9) A reversal of the July easing would take market partici-
pants completely by surprise and short-term interest rates would rise by
at least 1/2 percentage point under alternative C. Bond rates, too,
would retrace some of their recent declines under this alternative, at
least initially, and quality spreads on private debt could widen if such
a tightening were seen as placing the recovery at risk. The dollar
would rebound appreciably.
(10) Growth rates of the monetary aggregates under the three
alternatives are presented below. The table gives projected money
growth rates through year-end, on the assumption that the contemplated
reserve conditions under each alternative are maintained over that
period. Growth rates for M2 and M3 are projected to be quite subdued.
For the June-to-September period, expansion in the broad aggregates is
likely to fall well short of the rates envisioned at the time of the
last Committee meeting, even if alternative A is adopted. Moreover,
growth of M2 and M3 over the rest of the year would remain damped,
leaving these aggregates below their annual target ranges under all
the alternatives.4  Ml, on the other hand, is likely to expand at a
double-digit pace over coming months, boosted by mortgage prepayments,
low time deposit rates, and special factors.5
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from June
to September
M2 1-1/4 1 3/4
M3 1/4 0 -1/4
Ml 13 12-1/2 12
Growth from September
to December
M2 3-1/4 2-1/4 1-1/4
M3 1 1/4 -1/2
Ml 11 9-1/4 7-3/4
Growth from 1991:Q4
to 1992:Q4
(11) Data for late July and early August indicate that ex-
pansion of the monetary aggregates is strengthening a bit, perhaps as
a consequence of the substantial decline across the maturity spectrum
in market interest rates since the last FOMC meeting. However, the
shortfall in July is not expected to be recovered, and underlying
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in billions
1992 June
August
September
October
November
December
Monthly Growth Rates
1992 June
August
September
October
November
December
Quarterly Ave.
1991 Q4
1992 Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Mar
Jun
Sep
Jun
Q4 91 to Q4 92
Q4 91 to Sep 92
Q4 91 to Dec 92
Alt. A
- Actual Level
SShort-Run Alternati
growth rates are expected to be slower than might have been antici-
pated at these lower interest rate levels. As noted above, weaker
expansion of income than previously anticipated likely plays an impor-
tant role in explaining the lower path of money. In addition, how-
ever, the forces restraining money relative to income appear to be
more intense than we thought. Spending is being financed out of in-
ternal funds and by drawing down money balances, and what net borrow-
ing there is seems likely to be even more concentrated in capital
markets and away from banks. Bank credit is now projected to increase
at only a 2 percent annual rate in the second half of the year. The
redirection of household funds to capital market instruments and debt
repayment will continue to be encouraged by the further declines in
deposit rates. Moreover, runoffs of brokered deposits may be acceler-
ating after the June 16 effective date of FDICIA restrictions.
(12) Under alternative B, M2 is expected to resume expanding
this month and to grow at a 2-1/4 percent pace on balance over the
remainder of the year. M2 growth will be supported by large inflows
to demand deposits in the months ahead, owing to the resumption of
strong mortgage refinancing activity and a buildup in compensating
balances occasioned by recent declines in market rates. With
flows into OCDs also strong, Ml is projected to expand at a 10 percent
pace over the balance of the year. Beyond Ml, outflows from M2
money funds are projected to abate, although the very steep yield
curve is expected to continue to draw balances from such accounts and
from retail time deposits to capital market investments. On a quar-
terly average basis, M2 would contract slightly this quarter, and
increase at a 2-1/4 percent rate in the fourth quarter. This projec-
tion assumes the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B ex-
tended through year-end and the Greenbook economic forecast. It im-
plies velocity growth at a 4 percent annual rate in the third quarter
and 3-1/4 percent in the fourth. With the assumed income and interest
rates, standard money demand models predict velocity decreases through
this period; experimental models that embody yield-curve effects and
other alternative measures of opportunity costs are predicting veloc-
ity increases in the second half of the year, though not as large as
embodied in the staff forecast.
(13) The firming in M2 under alternative B shows through in
part to M3, which bottoms out in coming months and then edges higher.
Acting to limit any pickup in this aggregate is the likelihood of
anemic advances in bank credit and funding needs and some further
declines in thrift credit. The failure of M3 to grow this year, as
implied in all the alternatives, would be unprecedented in the
official series, which begins in 1959. The extraordinary behavior of
M3 is a function not only of weak depository credit but of restrained
credit growth overall. With spending financed out of higher profits
and by drawing down liquid assets, the debt of nonfederal sectors is
projected to expand at only a 2-3/4 percent pace over the balance of
the year, implying a further drop in debt-to-income ratios for both
households and businesses. Continued strong federal borrowing will
boost total debt growth to 4-3/4 percent for the year--near the lower
end of its annual monitoring range.
(14) The lower interest rates of alternative A would be
expected to buoy money growth over the balance of the year. Although
there is some question about the strength of the near-term response of
M2 to lower short-term rates, the anticipated decline in long-term
rates under this alternative should damp additional adverse yield
curve effects. Over time, the lower real and nominal interest rates
would raise income growth and, through that channel, further augment
demands for money, though the effects through year-end would be small.
The slightly faster growth in M2 deposits would feed through partly to
M3, as would relatively more attractive rates on M3 money funds,
leading to a resumption of 1 percent expansion in this aggregate over
the balance of the year.
(15) Under alternative C, M2 and M3 would drop further below
their annual ranges, as opportunity costs widen, banks become even
more cautious lenders, and income growth is more restrained. The
effects on M1 would be especially marked in the fourth quarter, given
the drop in mortgage prepayments that would accompany the backup in
long-term rates. Still, M1 would be expected to increase at a 10 per-
cent rate from June to December.
Directive Language
(16) Draft language for the operational paragraph is pre-
sented below. Four alternatives for the last sentence, labeled a, b,
c, and d, are shown. The first, (a), would follow the usual practice,
retaining the current mid-quarter approach of updating the Committee's
expectations for the quarter. The second, (b), would retain the cur-
rent format but extend the money projections through year end. A third
alternative, (c), would give an indication of Committee expectations
for growth in M2 and M3, but would also suggest that continued expan-
sion at a subdued pace leaving the aggregates below their long-run
ranges would be acceptable in the context of unusual strength in
velocity. A fourth alternative, (d), would convey the same thought
without giving precise expectations for money growth.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/
INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on re-
serve positions. In the context of the Committee's long-
run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, slightly (SOMEWHAT)
greater reserve restraint might (WOULD) or slightly
(SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint (MIGHT) would be
acceptable in the intermeeting period.
(a) The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to
be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the
period from June through September at annual rates
of about ____ AND ____ [DEL: 2 and 1/2] percent, respec-
(b) The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to
be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the
period from June through [DEL: September] DECEMBER at
annual rates of about ___ AND ____ [DEL: 2 and 1/2] per-
cent, respectively.
(c) The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to
be associated with some pickup in the growth of M2
and M3 to annual rates of about ____ and ____ per-
cent over the period from June through December.
Such growth would leave the expansion of both
aggregates below the Committee's ranges for the
year but is anticipated to be consistent with the
Committee's policy objectives given the unusual
strength in velocity.
(d) The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to
be consistent with some pickup in the monetary
aggregates, but if unusual strength in velocity
persists, M2 and M3 below their annual ranges could
be consistent with the Committee's policy
August 14, 1992
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market I market
Monthly
Aug 91
Sep 91
Oct 91
Nov 91
Dec 91
Jan 92
Feb 92
Mar 92
Apr 92
May 92
Jun 92
Jul 92
Weekly
Apr 29 92
May 6 92
May 13 92
May 20 92
May 27 92
Jun 3 92
Jun 10 92
Jun 17 92
Jun 24 92
Jul 1 92
Jul 8 92
Jul 15 92
Jul 22 92
Jul 29 92
Aug 5 92
Aug 12 92
Daily
Aug 7 92
Aug 12 92
Aug 13 92
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II FOMC
Seasonally adjusted AUG. 17, 1992
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactions total loans U.S.
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
in M2 in M3 only investments'
LEVELS ($BILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
MEEKLY
1992-JULY 6 959.6 3455.8 2496.2 679.9 4135.7
AUG. 3 p 966.8 3457.1 2490.3 699.1 4156.2
discontinuities.
p-preliminary
pe-preliminary estimate
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures Class FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted AUG. 17, 1992
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual funds denomi- Short- Bankers
Demand checkable RPs and Savings nation general Institu- nation Term Term Savings term Commer- accep-
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars deposits' time purpose tions time RPs Eurodollars bonds Treasury cial paper' tances
NSA' deposits' and broker/ only deposits' NSA' NSA' securities
dealer'
JULY p 278.9 315.6 358.7 67.9 1134.3 941.7 349.8 207.7 389.8 67.2 50.2
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
SR mp s Nt rhass 3 agencies outrightPeriod Net 2 Redemptions Net Redemptions Net redemptions holdings 5
purchases (-) change yea 1-5 5-10 over 10 (-) Change (') total 4 Net RPs
Weekly
April 29
May 6
August 5
12
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)6
August 12
August 14, 1992
--- 4,150
--- 1,450
--- 1,815
--- 2,452
--- 3,730
--- 340
--- 850
--- 3,567
--- 300
--- 1,027
--- 1,425
--- 200
--- 3,530
