Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC May 14, 1993
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent developments
(1) The degree of pressure on reserve positions was left un-
changed over the intermeeting period. Federal funds generally traded in
the 3 percent area, despite the complications to Desk reserve management
posed by shortfalls in individual nonwithheld taxes, which showed
through to the Treasury balance, and by revisions to forecasts of re-
quired reserves. The allowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
was raised $50 million in two steps to $100 million, reflecting an in-
crease in seasonal credit. After spiking at the March quarter-end,
borrowing returned to around its allowance, before moving noticeably
above it in the last complete maintenance period.
(2) Short-term interest rates were narrowly mixed on balance
over the intermeeting period, while most longer-term market rates
increased 10 to 20 basis points. Early in the period, long rates backed
up sharply as data on hourly earnings and commodity prices sparked
inflation fears. These yields subsequently declined as signs of more
favorable price behavior and a much slower pace of economic expansion
more than countered increasing doubts about the prospects for additional
fiscal restraint. Late in the intermeeting period, bond rates again
moved higher in response to unfavorable inflation readings. On the
other hand, the interest rate on thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages has
fallen 15 basis points since the March meeting; its latest quote is only
a bit above its recent 20-year low. Quality spreads for most other
private rates were little changed, but they improved somewhat for specu-
lative-grade issues. Stock prices were mixed over the period. Bank
stocks dropped substantially, reflecting in part market perceptions that
net interest margins could narrow, especially in the absence of a pickup
in loan demands.
(3) The dollar's weighted average exchange value declined by
almost 3 percent, on balance, over the intermeeting period, reflecting a
variety of factors, including a less optimistic view regarding the pro-
spects for U.S. economic expansion. The dollar has dropped more than 4
percent on balance against the yen. A variety of statements by offi-
cials.in Japan and the United States fostered some market confusion for
a time and contributed to a strengthening of the yen. But a little of
the weaker tone of the dollar has dissipated since April 27, when the
Desk bought $200 million against yen for the accounts of the System and
the ESF in an effort to calm the market before the G-7 meeting on April
of Japan purchased nearly $7 billion for its own account in April and
early May. Japanese short-term rates were little changed. Other short-
term interest rates continued to move lower, with three-month German
rates falling nearly 50 basis points; French rates fell dramatically
(over 300 basis points) with the passing of devaluation fears after the
French election. Long-term interest rates rose in Japan, the United
Kingdom, and Canada, were little changed in Germany, and generally
declined elsewhere. The price of gold rose 10-1/2 percent; reported
reasons for the increase include inflation concerns in the United
States, rising demand from China and elsewhere in Asia, and supply
developments in Russia and South Africa.
(4) Over March and April, M2 fell at a 1/2 percent rate com-
pared with the 1-1/2 percent rate of growth that was projected in the
last bluebook, while M3 was unchanged, about as anticipated. Iden-
tifiable temporary factors accounted for most of the shortfall from the
M2 forecast. Rather than washing out over March and April as foreseen
in the last bluebook, these factors represented a depressant. In par-
ticular, individual nonwithheld tax payments in April came in well below
last year's level, rather than well above it, as had been expected.3
Hence, M2 was restrained by a slower buildup of liquid deposits in April
than implied by typical seasonal patterns. Abstracting from temporary
factors, the modest underlying growth of M2 over March and April was
only a bit below earlier expectations. Continued shifting to capital
market instruments doubtless held back underlying monetary expansion.
Inflows to bond and stock mutual funds were at a near-record pace in
March and reportedly were heavy in April.
(5) Broad money has surged in the two weeks ended May 10--M2
by $35 billion and M3 by $30 billion based on preliminary data--to
levels well above those embodied in the March bluebook.4 The burst
in liquid deposits in early May in part reflected unusually small draw-
downs to pay taxes. In addition, a resurgence in mortgage refinancing
activity, which had begun to boost the aggregates in April, evidently
intensified in early May. But these factors can explain only some of
the surge. Underlying M2, which had been flat on balance from the
fourth quarter through April, thus seems to have strengthened in early
May to a level higher than anticipated in the last bluebook, despite
weaker-than-expected nominal GDP in the second quarter. Although it is
possible that the build-up is primarily noise, the burst also could
signify a waning of the forces that have contributed to the weakness in
underlying M2 relative to nominal spending in recent quarters. Even
with this early May surge, though, M2 has grown at only a 1/4 percent
annual rate from the fourth quarter of 1992 through the week of May 10,
while M3 still has fallen, leaving both aggregates below their target
cones but above their lower parallel bands. (See charts.)
(6) Bank credit growth picked up to a 5-1/4 percent rate over
March and April, reflecting acquisitions of securities. After declining
further in March, bank lending edged higher in April. Business loans,
however, continued to fall rapidly in April, about offsetting stepped-up
offerings of commercial paper by nonfinancial firms. Larger nonfinan-
cial firms continued to draw on proceeds of brisk equity and debt
issuance to pay down loans. Business loans at small banks posted a
third month of gains in April. The May Senior Loan Officer Survey
showed some further relaxation of price and non-price terms for business
loans, as well as a modest easing of standards, including the first
signs of easier standards for large firms.
(7) The overall net borrowing of nonfinancial businesses has
remained sluggish, owing to limited capital outlays relative to internal
funds and heavy net equity issuance. Enhanced incentives to use credit
cards for transactions may have contributed to a pickup in growth of
consumer installment credit through March and a sharp rise in consumer
loans at banks in April. State and local governments in April continued
to issue an exceptional volume of debt, mainly for refundings. Total
nonfederal debt growth, at a 3-3/4 percent rate in March, about matched
its growth from the fourth quarter to that month. Federal debt growth
has risen in recent months on a seasonally adjusted basis, reflecting
lower tax receipts this year. Total domestic nonfinancial debt is
estimated to have expanded at a 6-1/2 percent rate in March, bringing
growth from the fourth quarter through March to a 5 percent rate--a
little above the lower bound of its monitoring range for 1993.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV
to
Mar. Apr. April1
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt 6.6 -- 5.2
Federal 14.9 -- 10.0
Nonfederal 3.7 -- 3.5
Bank credit 5.4 5.0 3.0
Reserve measures
Total reserves 5.3 0.8
Monetary base 8.9 7.5
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 91 73
Excess reserves 1213 1101
Policy alternatives
(8) Three policy alternatives are presented below for con-
sideration by the Committee. Under alternative B, federal funds would
continue to trade around 3 percent, in association with the allowance
for adjustment and seasonal borrowing initially being maintained at its
current level of $100 million.5 Under alternative A, the federal
funds rate would be reduced to 2-1/2 percent. This reduction could be
achieved either by lowering the initial borrowing allowance by $25
million or by reducing the discount rate 1/2 percentage point while
leaving the allowance unchanged at $100 million. Federal funds would
trade in the neighborhood of 3-1/2 percent under alternative C, in
association with an initial borrowing allowance of $125 million.
(9) In light of recent price reports, market participants now
generally seem to expect that the next change in the stance of monetary
policy is somewhat more likely to be toward tightening than toward ease,
but few appear to anticipate any move immediately after the May FOMC
meeting. Thus, market interest rates are unlikely to react to the
implementation of alternative B. The odds are that bond yields will
retrace at least some of their recent back-up if--as anticipated in the
greenbook forecast--the news on inflationary pressures proves more
favorable. The ongoing budget debates and the prospective announcement
of the Administration's health reform plan suggest that the volatility
associated with an uncertain fiscal outlook may persist. Shorter-term
rates could rise some with the approach of larger auction volumes of
bills and shorter-term notes. The value of the dollar on foreign
exchange markets probably would remain around current levels under
alternative B.
(10) The 1/2 percentage point reduction in the federal funds
rate under alternative A would surprise market participants and should
show through almost completely to other short-term interest rates. The
three-month bill rate would fall to around 2-1/2 percent, and the prime
rate probably would be reduced to 5-1/2 percent. With the economy
likely to exhibit a bit more strength than otherwise over the inter-
mediate run as a result of the easing, banks may feel a little more
confident about the ability of borrowers to repay loans. As a result,
banks might further ease other terms and standards on lending. Risk
premiums in short- and long-term market interest rates, already histori-
cally narrow, would probably remain around their current levels. Any
initial decline in longer-term yields could be limited by concerns that
the easier monetary policy stance indicated more emphasis on supporting
the economic expansion and less emphasis on containing inflation, par-
ticularly against the backdrop of the recent disappointing wage and
price behavior and uncertainty regarding the outcome of the fiscal
policy debate. Absent corresponding actions abroad to ease monetary
policy, downward pressure on the foreign exchange value of the dollar
would resume.
(11) Market participants also would be surprised by the policy
tightening under alternative C at this FOMC meeting. Bond yields may
well increase, but with the rise probably tempered by the sense that the
Federal Reserve was moving promptly to head off a resurgence of infla-
tion. Bill rates likely would jump by nearly the increase of 50 basis
points in the federal funds rate, and private money market rates could
rise a bit more, reflecting widening risk premiums. Banks would likely
boost the prime rate by 1/2 percentage point. Bank stock prices, which
have benefited from wide spreads between short-term deposit rates and
rates on longer-term assets, likely would extend their recent declines.
Overall stock price indexes probably would drop as well, and the result-
ing capital losses on bonds and stocks could restrain inflows to long-
term mutual funds, at least temporarily. The dollar would strengthen on
foreign exchange markets.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from April to June
M2 6 5-3/4 5-1/2
M3 4-1/4 4 3-3/4
M1 18-1/2 18 17-1/2
Growth from April to September
M2 4 3-1/2 3
M3 2-1/2 2-1/4 2
M1 12-3/4 12 11-1/4
(12) The table above presents monetary growth rates over May
and June thought consistent with these three alternatives; projections
for the April-to-September period also are shown, assuming the money
market conditions of the three alternatives are maintained over the
summer. (More detailed data are presented in the table and charts on
the following pages.) Under all the alternatives, M2 would be just a
bit above its fourth-quarter level at midyear and would strengthen only
marginally further by September, thus staying noticeably below its 2 to
to show a contraction through June but little change by September under
all the alternatives, hence also remaining below its 1/2 to 4-1/2 per-
cent range.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Levels in billions
1993 March
May
June
July
August
September
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Monthly Growth Rates
1993 March
May
June
July
August
September
Quarterly Ave. Growth Rates
1992 Q4
1993 Q1
Q2
Q3
Mar 93 to Jun 93
Apr 93 to Jun 93
Apr 93 to Sep 93
Jun 93 to Sep 93
Q4 92 to Q2 93
Q4 92 to Q3 93
Q4 92 to Apr 93
Q4 92 to Jun 93
Q4 92 to Sep 93
(13) Under alternative B, M2 is projected to increase at about
a 5-3/4 percent average rate over May and June, a considerable pickup
from recent months.6  Some of the strength in May, and to a lesser
extent in June, reflects reversals of previous temporary depressants
involving tax effects, the late-winter lull in mortgage refinancing
activity, and seasonal-adjustment distortions.7 Apart from effects
of these temporary factors, underlying M2 probably will exhibit a speed-
up over the two months, owing to an abatement of the more fundamental
influences that had boosted its velocity to a 5-3/4 percent growth rate
over the previous two quarters. Quarterly average growth of M2 for the
second quarter is projected at about a 1-1/2 percent rate, with
temporary factors having little net impact. Thus, with nominal GDP
expected to rise at about a 4-1/4 percent rate, M2 velocity would
increase at only about a 2-1/2 percent pace. If the money market condi-
tions of this alternative were maintained over the summer, M2 growth
would be expected to move up still nearer to that of nominal GDP in the
third quarter.
(14) M3 under alternative B is seen as accelerating to about a
the pickup in M2, as managed liabilities in M3, including large time
deposits, should resume running off over the two months. Bank credit
expansion is expected to remain moderate, with loan growth quite weak,
and the balance sheets of thrift institutions are anticipated to con-
tinue to contract. While inflows of core deposits are projected to meet
most of the added funding needs of banks and S&Ls, banks are likely to
obtain some funding from abroad and from other nondeposit sources, in
part to avoid higher deposit insurance premiums. Looking further ahead,
moderate average growth of M3 during the third quarter would be expected
to accompany retention of the specifications of alternative B over that
(15) Households and businesses are expected to stay cautious
in using credit in coming months. In the household sector, mortgage
refinancing activity is likely to remain brisk. Overall mortgage debt,
however, is expected to expand at about its first-quarter pace, as cash-
out refinancing activity continues to be limited and home purchases rise
only gradually. Growth of consumer credit is projected to remain
moderate, despite heavy promotion of credit cards with rebates and other
incentives. Given still-favorable conditions in longer-term markets
under alternative B, issuance of corporate bonds and stocks should
remain relatively heavy. With the shortfall of internal funds relative
to capital expenditures remaining small, businesses are likely to con-
tinue to use the proceeds of securities issuance to pay down higher-cost
bonds and bank loans. Treasury borrowing should pick up in coming
months to finance a widening deficit, with more issuance in the shorter
end of the market, reflecting the recent shift in debt management
policy. Domestic nonfinancial debt would be expected to move further
above the lower edge of its 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent monitoring range
through June.
(16) The lower interest rates of alternative A would be ex-
pected to provide some added lift to growth of the monetary aggregates.
Banks and thrifts, while continuing to price their deposits unaggres-
sively, likely would not immediately match the downward movement in
market rates. Yields on money market mutual funds, likewise, would lag
the decline in market rates. The lower opportunity costs of deposits
and money funds relative to short-term market rates should provide a
small boost to the aggregates, even though attractive yields would
continue to induce heavy inflows into bond and stock mutual funds. M2
growth over May and June would come in at about a 6 percent rate, with
much of the additional strength resulting from its M1 component. M3
would expand at a 4-1/4 percent rate. Despite the more rapid growth,
both of the broad monetary aggregates would remain well below their
annual ranges in June. M2 growth is projected to post a 2-3/4 percent
pace from June to September, bringing the rate of expansion for the
April to September period to 4 percent. Even with the lower interest
rates and consequent economic stimulus of this alternative later in the
year, M2 would be unlikely to reach the lower end of its annual range by
the fourth quarter.
(17) Under alternative C, the higher money market interest
rates and opportunity costs would restrain the monetary aggregates. The
restraint on the aggregates could be limited to the degree that capital
losses on bond and stock funds prompt investors to shift back into
deposits, but on balance the tighter monetary stance should act to slow
monetary growth. M2 would expand at only a 5-1/2 percent rate over May
and June, and M3 at a 3-3/4 percent pace. The moderate upward trajec-
tory of M2 expected under unchanged interest rates later in the year
would be trimmed, with growth from June to September likely at only a
range. Maintenance of the money market conditions of alternative C
probably would induce M3 to contract on the year.
Directive language
(19) Presented below is draft wording for the operational
paragraph that includes the usual options and updating.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future,
the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/maintain/INCREASE
SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving
careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary
developments, slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint
(WOULD/MIGHT) or slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint
would (MIGHT) be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with APPRECIABLE [DEL:a resumption of moderate] growth in the
broader monetary aggregates over the second quarter.
May 17, 1993
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
May 92
Jun 92
Jul 92
Aug 92
Sep 92
Oct 92
Nov 92
Dec 92
Jan 93
Feb 93
Mar 93
Apr 93
Weekly
Jan 27 93
Feb 3 93
Feb 10 93
Feb 17 93
Feb 24 93
Mar 3 93
Mar 10 93
Mar 17 93
Mar 24 93
Mar 31 93
Apr 7 93
Apr 14 93
Apr 21 93
Apr 28 93
May 5 93
May 12 93
Daily
May 7 93
May 13 93
May 14 93
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures class rFOMC
Seasonally adjusted MAY. 17, 1993
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit _ Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactions total loaln U.S.
Period M1 M2 components M3 L and government' other' total'
ANN. GROWTH RATES I()
ANNUALLY (Q4 TO Q4)
QUARTERLY AVERAGE
1992-2nd QTR.
1992-3rd QTR.
1992-4th QTR.
1993-1st QTR.
MONTHLY
1992-APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
LEVELS ($BILLIONS) :
MONTHLY
HEEKLY
1993-APR. 5
MAY 3 p
discontinuities.
p-preliminary
pe-preliminary estimate
averaging end-of-month levels of adjacent months, and have been adjusted to remove
Strictly Conidential (FR).
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures cla. l FOMC
seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted MAY. 17, 1993
Small Money market Large
Other Overnight denomi- mutual lunds denomi- Short- Bankers
Demand checkable RPs and Savings nation general Institu- nation Term Term Savings term Commer- accap-
Period Currency deposits deposits Eurodollars deposits
'  
time purpose tions lime RPs Eurodollars bonds Treasury cial paper' lances
NSA' deposlts' and broker/ only deposits' NSA' NSA' securities
deal
e
r*
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
Netpurchases 3 agencies outright
Period Net Redemptions Net rNtpu s Redemptions Net redemptions holdings
purchases (-)n 10 over Change total4 Net RPspurchases 2 change 1 year 1-5 5-10 over 10 Change total 4
Weekly
January 20
May 5
12
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)6
May 12
--- 375
--- 11,282
--- 19,365
--- 2,452
- 3,730
- 5,927
- 7,256
--- 3,141
--- 200
--- 3,530
--- 595
--- 5,332
--- 200
--- 6,756
--- 300
asury and agency securities.
rchase transactions (-), and matched purchase sale transactions (+).
May 12
within
1 year 1-5 5-10 over 10 total
May 14, 1993
