Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC August 12, 1994
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments1
(1) Consistent with the Committee's decision to maintain the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions, the intended federal
funds rate was kept unchanged at 4-1/4 percent during the intermeeting
period. The allowance for adjustment and seasonal borrowing was
raised in several steps over the period, by a total of $125 million,
to accommodate increasing demands for seasonal credit. The federal
funds rate averaged 4.28 percent in the intermeeting period.2
(2) Other market interest rates showed mixed changes
over the intermeeting period. Rates generally edged lower in the
first half of July, after the FOMC left policy unchanged at its meet-
ing and as incoming data seemed to suggest continued moderation in
aggregate demand and a lower trajectory for System firming. (See
upper panels of chart.) However, after the Chairman's Humphrey-
Hawkins testimony and the strong employment report made substantial
near-term tightening appear considerably more likely, rates began to
back up. Most of the net rate increases over the intermeeting period
were registered on short-term Treasuries, which may have been affected
as well by expectations of a large swing in bill issuance from the
second to the third quarter. Expected bond market volatility con-
tinued to decline (chart), helping to hold down long-term yields, and
spreads on the standard mortgage instruments stayed relatively nar-
Federal Funds Futures
t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 7/1 7/12 7/22 8/2 8/12
1994
Implied Bond Volatility
Weekly
FOMC FOMC FOMC F
Percent
Treasury Yield Curves
July FOMC
-.
row. With corporate profit reports for the second quarter gener-
ally better than expected, most stock prices rose 3 to 4 percent over
the intermeeting period.
(3) The weighted-average foreign exchange value of the dol-
lar was little changed, on balance, over the intermeeting period. The
currency continued to move lower in early July but seemed to gain some
support from statements about the desirability of a stronger dollar by
U.S. Treasury officials and by Chairman Greenspan at the Humphrey-
Hawkins hearing. In Japan most interest rates rose 20 to 25 basis
points in response to increasing indications of a turnaround in the
Japanese economy. Three-month interest rates showed little net change
in Germany, but bond yields there rose 25 basis points. Bond yields
in Europe generally increased sharply late in the period in the wake
of discount rate increases in Italy and Sweden intended to support the
lira and the krona.
; the Desk did
not intervene.
(4) Growth of all of the monetary aggregates in July was
considerably stronger than projected at the time of the last FOMC
meeting; although data for early August suggest a return to subdued
expansion, on balance the broad aggregates remain above expected
levels. M2 and M3 increased at 5 and 6 percent rates, respectively,
last month, leaving these aggregates slightly above the lower ends of
their annual ranges. Despite the likely depressing effects of declin-
ing mortgage refinancings and compensating balances, demand deposits
expanded at a rapid pace last month, helping to boost M1 growth to a
buoyed the nontransaction components of M2 and M3. Even aside from
these volatile components, however, M2 accelerated in July, perhaps
owing partly to a resumption of runoffs in bond mutual funds.5
Flows into money market funds were particularly strong, likely bene-
fitting from their close substitutability with bond funds within a
family of funds. In addition, the contraction of savings and MMDAs
slowed a bit, and the expansion of other checkable and small time
deposits picked up in July, perhaps partly reflecting a greater
appreciation of the protection of principal in deposits. Rates on
small CDs continued to increase, but their response to rising market
rates this year has been unusually sluggish, and an especially wide
gap to market rates remains. The continuing attraction of direct
holdings of short- and intermediate-term market instruments is indi-
cated by persistently high levels of noncompetitive tenders in Trea-
sury auctions. Rather than bid aggressively for retail deposits,
banks have relied on wholesale sources--especially funds raised by
their foreign offices and, recently, in the domestic large CD market--
to finance increases in bank credit.
(5) Bank credit surged in July. Growth of security holdings
rose, but that pickup primarily reflected revaluation of banks' off-
balance sheet positions; banks reduced their holdings of U.S. govern-
ment securities slightly.6 Much of the jump in overall bank credit
growth was accounted for by a strong pickup in lending. Business
loans rose at an 17 percent annual rate. According to responses to
the August Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, demand for business
loans has increased, reflecting needs to finance inventory and fixed
investment. Reduced financing in the capital markets as well as bor-
rowing to finance mergers also appear to have prompted a portion of
the recent growth in business loans.7  In the household sector,
consumer loans expanded sharply at banks in July, suggesting that
overall consumer credit about maintained June's strong pace. In the
aggregate, the expansion of the debt of nonfederal sectors is esti-
mated to have continued in recent months at about the 5 percent pace
of earlier this year. From the fourth quarter of 1993 through June,
total debt rose at a 5-1/2 percent rate, leaving this aggregate well
within its 4-to-8 percent monitoring range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV.
to
May June July July
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial
debt 4.8 5.2 -- 5.4
Federal 4.2 6.7 -- 6.2
Nonfederal 5.1 4.7 -- 5.1
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 200 333 458
Excess reserves 915 1105 1086
QIV to June for debt aggregates.
Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
Monetary Policy Alternatives
(6) Three monetary policy alternatives are presented for
consideration by the Committee. Under alternative B, federal funds
would continue to trade around 4-1/4 percent in association with re-
taining the $450 million allowance for adjustment plus seasonal bor-
rowing.8 Under alternative C, the federal funds rate would be
raised to 4-1/2 percent and the initial borrowing allowance to $475
million. Under alternative D, the funds rate would be moved to 4-3/4
percent, either through an increase in the initial borrowing allowance
to $500 million or a hike in the discount rate to 4 percent and un-
changed adjustment plus seasonal borrowing.
(7) In the staff economic forecast, the federal funds rate
rises a full percentage point by early next year and remains at that
higher level over the balance of 1995. The economy is already essen-
tially at potential, and aggregate demand will continue to be bol-
stered by, among other factors, the aggressive lending posture adopted
by banks and by foreign demands for the U.S. goods and services owing
to the lower dollar and stronger growth abroad. In these circum-
stances, further policy tightening is seen as needed to hold total
output at potential to keep inflation from rising. The Greenbook rate
assumption does not necessarily entail a tightening at the August FOMC
meeting itself, but it does imply that the upward trajectory of short-
term rates will be resumed fairly promptly.
(8) Alternative B might be preferred if it were thought that
there would be less strength in the economy than in the staff fore-
cast. Such a view might follow from placing more weight on recent
soft spending indicators, on undesired inventory buildups, or on the
effects of previous policy tightenings. Waiting for more clarifica-
tion of how much slowing in spending growth is already in train would
be seen as posing fewer risks than implied in the staff forecast if it
were thought that favorable readings on price indexes suggested that
some slack remained in the economy.
(9) Market participants now seem to expect at least a 25
basis point increase in the federal funds rate at the August meeting,
with some possibility of a 50 basis point increase; a 4-3/4 percent
funds rate is anticipated by late September. In these circumstances,
the choice of no change in the stance of policy under alternative B
would result in some decline in short-term interest rates, and the
dollar might tend to weaken on foreign exchange markets. Long-term
rates could move lower, at least initially. Market participants might
view the absence of action as indicating a milder degree of tightening
into the future as well--perhaps because the Federal Reserve saw less
inflation in the outlook than previously thought. However, rate de-
clines would be limited to the extent that market participants ques-
tioned the Fed's anti-inflation resolve; absent subsequent data point-
ing to further weakening in aggregate demand or surprisingly modest
price pressures, concerns about inflation would mount, pushing up
longer-term interest rates.
(10) A tightening of reserve conditions might seem appropriate
if the Committee saw significant risks of greater inflation from the
pressure of demand on available resources under an unchanged policy. An
immediate rise in short-term interest rates might also be seen as more
consistent with the Committee's longer-run intention to make progress
toward price stability. The question in these circumstances would be
how large an increase in the federal funds rate should be sought.
(11) Alternative C embodies a move of 25 basis points. An
increase of this size, by itself, would be unlikely to have a substan-
tial effect on spending or prices, but a small tightening could lend
assurance that policy had firmed enough to keep the economy around its
potential. Although further tightening could prove to be necessary, the
Committee might judge that the case for a larger move is not yet estab-
lished. As noted above, alternative C is about what is built into the
structure of market interest rates, and neither interest nor exchange
rates are likely to react very strongly to such an action. However,
this would be the first move since the announcement in May that excess
accommodation had been substantially removed and could be seen as mark-
ing a return to the usual practice of reacting to incoming data with
small changes in reserve conditions. Markets could become somewhat more
unsettled and volatile, especially if the rise in short-term rates were
perceived as less than needed and therefore likely to be followed by
another increase but of uncertain timing.
(12) The more forceful move of alternative D might be chosen
if the Committee viewed the economic situation as highly likely to
require substantial additional monetary tightening, for example, of the
scope embodied in the steep tilt to the yield curve over the next few
years. Alternatively, the Committee also might take this action if it
believed that only moderate further tightening were required to hold
inflation in check. In this regard, the 50 basis points of alternative
D would imply more assurance of this outcome than alternative C and,
therefore, would be more likely to be followed by a period of stability
of short-term rates. Given these alternative rationales, the Committee
might want to explain its reasoning publicly--an opportunity for which
would naturally occur if the increase were accomplished through a hike
in the discount rate. The market response might depend importantly on
how the action was perceived. If the market saw it as one of a series
of further steps, interest rates could rise substantially along the
maturity spectrum. On the other hand, if markets saw the increase as
the last at least for a time, short-term rates would rise, but inter-
mediate- and possibly long-term rates might move very little. Some
forward rates would be revised down and reductions in expected volatil-
ity might lower risk premiums on longer-term assets.
(13) Under all of the alternatives, borrowing by nonfederal
sectors is expected to remain around the pace of recent months. Bor-
rowing by nonfinancial businesses will be buoyed by further increases in
external financing needs and large cash-for-equity merger transactions.
The more aggressive posture of bank lenders and the higher levels of
bond rates since earlier this year suggest that banks will continue to
be a major source of credit in the months ahead, although businesses
are likely to take advantage of any intermittent rallies in the bond
market to lengthen debt maturities. Still-large outlays for housing and
consumer durables will boost growth in mortgage and consumer credit to a
pace roughly in line with that of personal disposable income. With
federal debt growth firming a bit in the months ahead, total debt of
domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to grow at nearly a 5 percent
pace over the remainder of the year--placing annual growth in this
aggregate at 5-1/4 percent, in the lower half of its 4 to 8 percent
monitoring range.
(14) Growth of the monetary aggregates over July to December
is presented below for alternatives B and D. The path for alternative B
is based on the assumption of no change in the federal funds rate for
the rest of this year. Alternative D assumes a 50 basis point increase
in the funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter.9  (Money
growth under the reserve conditions of alternative C would lie half way
between alternatives B and D.)
Alt. B Alt. D
Growth from July to December
M2 1-1/2 1
M3 3/4 1/2
M1 3 2-1/4
Implied growth 93Q4 to 94Q4
M2 1-1/2 1-1/4
M3 1/2 1/2
M1 4 3-1/2
(15) M2 would grow at a 1-1/2 percent rate over the July-to-
December period under alternative B, down from the July pace but
quicker than that over the first six months of the year. Acting to
boost growth in this aggregate would be some narrowing of opportunity
costs as deposit rates, especially those on small time deposits, moved
up in lagged response to earlier increases in market rates. Renewed
outflows from bond mutual funds over recent weeks, even as bond rates
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. B Alt. D
Alt. B Alt. D
Alt. B Alt. D
Levels in Billions
May-94
Jun-94
Jul-94
Aug-94
Sep-94
Oct-94
Nov-94
Dec-94
Monthly Growth Rates
Jun-94
Jul-94
Aug-94
Sep-94
Oct-94
Nov-94
Dec-94
Quarterly Averages
94 Q1
94 Q2
94 Q3
94 Q4
Growth Rate
From
Dec-93
Jul-94
To
Jul-94
Dec-94
have fluctuated around levels attained in the spring, suggest that
households may continue to rebalance portfolios in a way that might
also impart some upward tilt to growth of the broader aggregates.
Restraining monetary growth is some projected slowing of nominal
income growth, even under the unchanged interest rate assumptions of
this alternative.10 M2 velocity would rise at around a 3 percent
rate in the third and fourth quarters, somewhat slower than over the
first half and about in line with predictions of traditional models of
money demand.11 M3 is projected to grow at a 3/4 percent pace in
the July-to-December period, a bit less slowly than in the first half
of the year. Abstracting from the effects of FIN 39, we expect a
little more growth in bank credit over the second half of the year--
though not a persistence of the unusually rapid increase in July.
Moreover, with short-term rates unchanged under alternative B, insti-
tution-only money funds should be stable after large runoffs through
the spring.
(16) Under alternative D, M2 would grow at a 1 percent rate
over the July-to-December period. Opportunity costs would widen under
this alternative, particularly damping M1 and savings deposits. How-
ever, if bond yields backed up under this alternative, the additional
capital losses might accentuate a redirection of savings back into M2,
offsetting some of this restraining effect. M3 would grow at only a
funds ran off appreciably owing to their lagging yields.
Directive Language
(17) Presented below is draft wording for the operational
paragraph that includes the usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/ main-
tain/INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions. In the context of the Commit-
tee's long-run objectives for price stability and sus-
tainable economic growth, and giving careful considera-
tion to economic, financial, and monetary developments,
slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint would/
MIGHT or slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint
WOULD/might be acceptable in the intermeeting period.
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming
August 1b, 1994
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
Aug 93
Sep 93
Oct 93
Nov 93
Dec 93
Jan 94
Feb 94
Mar 94
Apr 94
ay 94
Jun 94
Jul 94
Weekly
Apr 27 94
May 4 94
May 11 94
May 18 94
May 25 94
Jun 1 94
Jun 8 94
Jun 15 94
Jun 22 94
Jun 29 94
Jul 6 94
Jul 13 94
Jul 20 94
Jul 27 94
Aug 3 94
Aug 10 94
Daily
Aug 5 94
Aug 11 94
Aug 12 94
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
AUGUST 15, 1994
Seasonally adjusted
_____Moiney stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic noninancial debt'
nontransactions components
total loans
Period M1 M2 M3 L and U. S. other' total2
In M2 In M3 only investments' government'
Levels ($Billion) :
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
AUGUST 15. 1994
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
Money market
Overnight Small mutual funds Large
Other RPs and denomi- general denomi- Term Term Short-term ank
P o Currency e checkable uro- Sain nation purpose Institutions ntion AP' Euro- Savings er Commercal B e
LevelsJ ( Bi.L.ons) :
Annually (4th Qtr.)
Monthly
1993-JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY p
p preliminary
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
eNet urchases 3 agencies outright
Period Net 2 Redemptions Net wi t hin e pwithi nRedemptions Net redemptions holdings g
purchases (-) I change year 1-5 5-10 | over 10 (-) Change total 4 Net RPs
Weekly
April 27
May 4
August 3
10
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)6
August 10
--- 7,749
1,268
--- 2,164
--- 6,639
--- 902
--- 366
- 1,394
August 10
August 12, 1994
