Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC June 30, 1994
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments 1
(1) At the conclusion of the May 17 FOMC meeting, the
Federal Reserve issued a press release stating that the Board had
voted to raise the discount rate from 3 to 3-1/2 percent and that the
Committee had decided that this change should pass through fully to
reserve market conditions. The press release also indicated that
these and earlier actions were viewed by policymakers as substantially
removing the degree of monetary accommodation that had prevailed
during 1993. The intended federal funds rate was increased 1/2 per-
centage point, to 4-1/4 percent, where it remained over the inter-
meeting period.2 Over that span, the federal funds rate has traded
close to its intended level.
(2) As shown in the upper left panel of Chart 1, interest
rates beyond the three-month maturity moved lower immediately follow-
ing the announcement of the System's action.3 Apparently, the size
of the change in reserve market conditions and its implementation by a
hike in the discount rate, as well as the wording of the associated
press release, suggested to market participants that the Committee
would not be raising rates in the next few months as quickly as they
Chart 1
Market Reaction to the Policy
Announcement, May 17
(announced at 2:30 p.m.)
Net
2 p.m. 4 p.m. change
(2) (1) (2)-(1)
basis
Federal Funds Futures Rates
May
16
May
17
June
14
June
30
Implied Bond Volatility
Percent Daily close
I- 5/17
Treasury Security Yield Curves
Percent
-- May 16
........ May 17
- June 14
7.s- -- June 30 ,**
had previously anticipated; these revisions in expectations can be
seen in the federal funds futures rates in the first two columns of
the upper right panel of the chart. Lessened uncertainty about the
timing and extent of subsequent policy action, as suggested by the
decline in a forward-looking measure of the volatility of bond prices
(the lower left panel), seemed to reduce risk premiums embedded in
longer-maturity rates. Moreover, market participants may have been
encouraged that timely action would reduce the degree of tightening
needed later. As a consequence, in contrast to the response to pre-
vious tightenings, forward rates all along the term structure moved
down, as evidenced by the parallel shift in the coupon yield curve
(the lower right panel).
(3) For several weeks following the FOMC meeting, financial
markets generally at least preserved the price gains that were posted
on May 17. In part encouraged by sluggish spending indicators, favor-
able readings on inflation, and statements of Federal Reserve offi-
cials, the sense that policy was temporarily on hold gained a firmer
footing among market participants, and federal funds futures rates
edged lower. In the last few weeks of the intermeeting period, how-
ever, bond yields have risen about 1/4 percentage point in often
volatile trading, in part as the sizable decline in the dollar's value
on exchange markets suggested additional pressures on prices and
possibly higher inflation expectations. These developments, in turn,
were interpreted to have increased the likelihood of near-term mone-
tary policy action and raised the level of uncertainty, perhaps feed-
ing through to higher risk premiums. On balance, intermediate- and
longer-term rates ended the intermeeting period a bit above where they
had begun. Most major equity indexes, which were up early in the
period and then moved lower later in sympathy with bond prices and the
dollar, lost 1 percent over the intermeeting period.
(4) The dollar's weighted average exchange value declined
all of this decline occurred after early June, reflecting evidence of
stronger growth abroad and associated increases in foreign bond
yields, as well as increasing concerns about potential inflationary
pressures in the U.S. economy. The shrinking prospects for any pro-
gress in U.S.-Japanese trade negotiations in light of the uncertain
political situation in Japan also tended to strengthen the yen against
the dollar. While short-term rates abroad were little changed,
foreign long-term interest rates rose 55 basis points, on average.
U.S. monetary authorities sold $1,560 million equivalent of yen and
marks in concerted operations on June 24.
(5) Growth of the broad monetary aggregates over May and
June now appears to be considerably weaker than was thought at the
time of the previous FOMC meeting. M2 fell at an average rate of
celeration that had been anticipated. Capital markets appear to have
retained considerably more appeal to investors than we had thought
would be the case. The exodus from bond funds that had begun when the
System moved toward restraint in February came to a halt by the end of
May, and flows turned positive in June, albeit well below the volumes
recorded over much of last year; inflows to equity funds picked up as
the intermeeting period progressed. In addition, declines in mortgage
refinancing were greater than expected, with associated depressing
effects on liquid deposits.
(6) More generally, M2 appears to have been significantly
restrained by the increases in short-term rates thus far this year.
Households have withdrawn funds from liquid deposits and money market
funds, only some of which have been redeposited in small time depos-
its. Growth of M2 and, in particular, its small time deposit com-
ponent has been held down by the apparent reluctance of depositories
to increase their offering rates by as much as past episodes of rising
market rates would have suggested. The relative attractiveness of
assets outside the standard monetary aggregates is suggested by the
sizable pickup in net noncompetitive tenders at Treasury auctions, as
well as continued flows into bond and stock mutual funds.4  The
effects of rising opportunity costs were particularly evident on Ml,
which grew at only a 3-1/4 percent rate over May and June, despite a
pickup in currency growth to a 10 percent rate.5  The sluggish
performance of M2 over the past two months has brought the aggregate
to near the lower arm of its target cone. The 1.1 percent growth rate
for M2 from the fourth quarter of 1993 to June was about one-half the
pace anticipated for that period in the January bluebook. The short-
fall largely reflected the effects on opportunity costs of the Sys-
tem's tightening, which significantly outstripped the policy firming
incorporated in the January forecast.
(7) M3 declined at an average rate of 1-3/4 percent over May
and June. Within the non-M2 portion of M3, institutional money market
mutual funds have run off sharply, as investors, impatient with the
lagged adjustment of their yields to market rates, have increasingly
turned to open market instruments. Counterbalancing this somewhat,
banks have issued more large CDs over the past two months on net to
offset some of the decline in retail deposits and a slowing in borrow-
ing from overseas branches. All told, the decrease in the broad
aggregate over the past two months places M3 just below its 0-to-4
percent annual growth range. The standstill in M3 from the fourth
quarter of 1993 to June is in contrast to the staff's expectation in
the January bluebook that the broad aggregate would advance at a 1-1/2
percent rate over that period. Bank credit has expanded at a 6-1/4
percent rate from the fourth quarter of 1993 to June, about in line
with the staff's projection in January after abstracting from the
effects of accounting rule changes.6  In retrospect, however,
depositories have chosen to rely more on nondeposit sources than we
had anticipated, reflecting a wider cost advantage favoring Eurodollar
(8) The rise in long-term interest rates has sharply cur-
tailed the refinancing of high-cost debt by households, businesses,
and state and local governments and has shifted net borrowing away
from long-term, fixed-rate obligations. Net borrowing by these
sectors, however, continued in April and May at about its previous
pace of 4-1/2 percent. The enthusiasm of households to borrow has
shown little sign of letting up: Consumer credit appears to have
expanded at a brisk pace in May and June, based on bank data adjusted
for securitizations. Net mortgage borrowing has slowed only a touch.
despite the drop in gross flows, with a growing share at adjustable
rates. Overall business borrowing also has edged lower and remains
concentrated at banks and finance companies rather than in the bond
markets. On balance, from the fourth quarter of 1993 through May,
nonfederal debt grew at about a 5 percent rate and total nonfinancial
debt at about a 5-1/4 percent rate. This placed total debt in the
lower half of its 4-to-8 percent monitoring range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV.
to
Apr. May June June
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial
debt 4.5 4.5 -- 5.2
Federal 2.9 4.2 -- 6.1
Nonfederal 5.1 4.6 -- 4.9
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 124 200 269
Excess reserves 1151 918 965
QIV to May for debt aggregates.
Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
Alternative Long-Run Scenarios
(9) This section addresses several issues related to the
conduct of monetary policy over the next several years. The first set
of simulations considers the effects of alternative monetary policies,
given the staff's assessment of the strength of aggregate demand and
associated inflation pressures. The next two sets show the conse-
quences of different assumptions about the natural rate of unemploy-
ment and underlying demand. The baseline scenario, to which the
alternatives are compared in all the simulations, embodies the Green-
book forecast through 1995 and a judgmental extension thereafter. The
effects of differences in assumptions relative to the baseline under
each alternative were derived using staff econometric models of the
U.S. and foreign economies.
(10) These scenarios have been developed within a framework
that contains several key assumptions. On the supply side, the change
in the inflation rate is related mainly to the gap between the natural
rate of unemployment and the actual rate; a 1 percentage point gap,
when maintained for a year, reduces the actual rate of inflation by
about 1/2 percentage point per year. The natural rate of
unemployment is about 6-1/4 percent (except where assumed otherwise in
the second set of scenarios), and potential GDP grows at about a 2-1/2
percent rate over the remainder of the decade.8  On the demand
side, the fiscal stance of the federal government follows the
Greenbook projections of the federal deficit out through 1995:Q4 when
the deficit is projected to be 2-1/2 percent of nominal GDP. It is
assumed that actions are taken subsequently that reduce the deficit to
is based on a gradual return to a more typical alignment with that of
nominal income; the forces disrupting this relationship are assumed to
ebb as the yield curve returns to a more normal slope and portfolios
become more fully adjusted to the enhanced availability of bond and
stock mutual funds.
(11) In the baseline scenario, policy acts to keep inflation
at 3 percent. (The table below and Chart 2 give the results for the
baseline and tighter policy scenarios.) This outcome requires un-
employment to remain in the neighborhood of its recent levels, which
are judged to be around its natural rate. The real federal funds rate
needs to rise by another percentage point to about 2-1/4 percent--a
little above its assumed longer-run neutral level. The higher level
of the real funds rate offsets some of the prospective strength in
aggregate demand and inflation pressures arising in part from the
decline in the exchange value of the dollar. The associated increase
in the nominal federal funds rate in the staff forecast--to 5-1/4
percent by early 1995--is roughly in line with what is expected in the
market for this period and should keep long-term interest rates--both
real and nominal--close to their recent readings into 1995. The
dollar is projected to remain at about its current level through the
forecast period. After 1995, the funds rate can be brought down some,
and gradually declining long-term real rates in the out years offset
the effects on aggregate demand of continuing fiscal restraint.
Alternative Strategies for Monetary Policy
(QIV to QIV percent change)
CPI inflation--excluding food
baseline 3.1
tighter 3.0
Nominal GDP growth
baseline
tighter
Real GDP growth
baseline
tighter
(fourth-quarter level, percent)
Unemployment Rate (1994-survey basis)
baseline 6.3 6.4
tighter 6.3 6.6
(QIV to QIV percent change)
(fourth-quarter level, percent)
Federal funds rate
baseline
tighter
baseline
tighter
(12) Under the tighter alternative, the Committee strives to
bring CPI inflation down to around 1-1/2 percent--close to effective
price stability--by the end of the decade. Achieving this outcome
requires a considerably tighter policy stance over the next two years
than in the baseline. Lower money growth and higher real interest
rates, with the real federal funds rate moving above 4-1/2 percent by
the end of 1995, pushes the unemployment rate a little over 7 percent
for a time. To avoid falling below the inflation objective late in
the period, policy needs to be eased substantially in 1996, with a
marked decline in short-term interest rates and step-up in money
growth, so that the unemployment rate is approaching the natural rate
at the end of the simulation period.
(13) Different assumptions about the level of the natural
rate of unemployment, along with policy responses to the resulting
economic conditions, are embedded in the simulations shown in Chart 3.
The baseline simulation is the same as in Chart 2 above and retains
the assumption that the natural rate of unemployment is 6-1/4 percent.
In light of considerable uncertainty about the precise level of the
natural rate, however, the two alternatives incorporate natural rates
that are either 1/2 percentage point higher or lower over the forecast
period. In the case of a lower natural rate of unemployment, monetary
policy needs to reduce the real interest rate to bring spending in
line with the higher level of potential GDP. However, the Committee
is assumed to recognize and respond to the unexpectedly low natural
rate only as inflation falls perceptibly short of the path in the
baseline simulation. The unemployment rate remains above the lower
level of the natural rate for a time, and the Committee takes
advantage of the opportunity presented by this circumstance to make
lasting progress toward price stability. In contrast, a half-point
higher natural rate means that the economy is already producing above
capacity and an accelerating inflation process is underway. To
contain this process, the Committee needs to tighten to bring the
unemployment rate to its higher natural level; in the simulation, the
Committee tightens even more to avoid a permanently higher inflation
rate, implying a period of slack in the economy.
(14) The third set of simulations, shown in Chart 4, con-
siders the implications of stronger or weaker aggregate demand than in
the staff forecast. The aggregate demand shocks embody a one percent
higher or lower level of real spending (relative to the baseline
forecast) by the first quarter of next year. As the positive shock to
demand becomes evident in the data, the Committee moves the federal
funds rate up, though owing to uncertainty about the size and
persistence of the shock, rates do not rise rapidly enough to
forestall a dip in the unemployment rate, to below the natural rate,
and a rise in inflation for a time. The negative shock to aggregate
demand induces the Committee to keep the federal funds rate unchanged
through 1995. Nonetheless, the unemployment rate rises above its
natural rate, and inflation decelerates.
Long-Run Ranges
(15) As background for Committee discussion of ranges for
money and debt for 1994 and 1995, the table below presents the current
ranges for 1994, as well as the growth rates of money and debt
realized through June and projected for 1994 and 1995.10
M3 0 to 4 -.2 0 1
Nonfederal 4.91 4-3/4 4-1/2
M1 4.0 3-1/2 1
Memo:
Nominal GDP 5-3/42 5-1/2 4-1/2
(16) The staff projections of money and debt are intended to
be consistent with the economic and financial market forecast describ-
ed in the Greenbook. Growth in nominal GDP is seen as slowing over
the second half of this year to a 5 percent rate before leveling out
at a 4-1/2 percent pace over next year. Monetary policy is assumed to
move the federal funds rate up to around 5-1/4 percent by the begin-
ning of next year and hold it at that level for the balance of 1995.
By contrast, long-term interest rates are expected to remain near
current levels this year before moving down somewhat next year.
(17) Over the last six months of 1994, M2 growth is projected
to maintain its 1 percent pace of the year to date. Moderating expan-
sion of nominal GDP and previous as well as projected increases in
opportunity costs will be exerting additional restraint on demand for
M2 in the second half of the year. The rise in opportunity costs
results not only from the assumed increase in short-term market inter-
est rates but also from a continued unusually sluggish response of
depositories in raising retail deposit rates; loan growth is seen as
moderate and banks may prefer to limit acquisitions of securities or
to issue managed liabilities rather than raising offering rates
aggressively to the broad base of retail customers.11 As an offset
to these influences, declines in mortgage prepayments are anticipated
to wane, reducing their depressing effects on money growth. 12 Port-
folio shifts between capital market investments and deposits are a
persisting source of uncertainty for future money growth. After the
experience of the first half of the year, households likely have a
more realistic assessment of the risks of holding long-term mutual
funds. The staff forecast of relatively stable long-term rates over
the balance of the year suggests no significant further capital
losses, and we do not project additional net withdrawals from bond
funds. However, a flatter term structure will narrow yield differen-
tials favoring bond mutual funds. With the reduced yield incentive
and better investor appreciation of risks, we are projecting that
inflows into bond and stock mutual funds will remain substantially
below the record pace of last year.13 M2 velocity is projected to
increase over the second half of the year at the same average pace as
since mid-1991. (See Chart 5.)
(18) M3 over the rest of 1994 is expected to remain little
changed from its level in the fourth quarter of last year. Bank
credit is likely to expand over the next six months somewhat below its
pace for the year to date (abstracting from the effects on "other
securities" of the accounting change that did not alter bank financing
needs). The slowing reflects reduced acquisitions of government
securities, as projected loan growth rises gradually. However, in
light of prospects for stronger credit demands in foreign economies,
banks' funding preferences will likely shift toward large time depos-
its and away from borrowing from offices abroad, thereby supporting
the growth of M3.
(19) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected
by the staff to continue growing at about a 5 percent rate over the
remainder of the year, keeping this aggregate in the lower half of its
percent growth track, a bit below the pace of nominal GDP expansion.
In the household sector, consumer borrowing should ease a bit from its
recent brisk pace, while mortgage borrowing remains restrained by the
topping out of the housing market and lessened "cash outs" of equity
as refinancing activity declines further. With the gap between cor-
porate financing needs and internally generated funds widening some,
business borrowing may firm a little; in contrast to 1993, companies
are likely to rely substantially on both short- and long-term debt
sources. On the supply side of the credit markets, conditions should
remain quite favorable. Narrow quality spreads are likely to persist
in securities markets, and banks and other intermediaries may become
even more aggressive in pursuit of lending opportunities as the eco-
nomic expansion continues at a good pace.
(20) In 1995, growth of nonfinancial sector debt is projected
to hold at a 5 percent rate. Federal debt growth edges up to a 6-1/2
percent pace, but a slight easing of nonfederal debt expansion,
reflecting slower growth in nominal spending, serves as an offset.
With opportunity costs essentially flattening, M2 growth is expected
to pick up--to 2 percent--despite capital gains on bond funds and the
slight further downshift in growth of nominal GDP. The faster M2
expansion partly shows through to M3, which is projected to resume
growing at a 1 percent rate. 14
Ranges for 1994
(21) Although in recent years the Committee has de-emphasized
monetary and debt aggregates as policy guides, the selection of par-
ticular ranges does impart to the Congress and the public the Commit-
tee's sense of the prospective growth of these financial quantities
that is likely to be consistent with the economic outlook of the
Governors and Presidents. The table below shows two alternative sets
of ranges for money and debt growth over 1994. Alternative I repre-
sents the current ranges, while alternative II reduces the upper and
lower bounds of all three ranges by 1 percentage point. The alterna-
tive II ranges for M2 and M3 better encompass the staff projections,
and the center of the alternative II range for debt corresponds to the
staff forecast.
Alternative Money and Debt Ranges for 1994
(percent)
Alt. I Memo:
(current Staff
ranges) Alt. II Projection
M2 1 to 5 0 to 4 1
M3 0 to 4 -1 to 3 0
Debt 4 to 8 3 to 7 5
(22) Alternative II might be chosen not on the technical
grounds used last year of a shift in money demand, but rather to allow
more comfortably for the effects on money growth of further increases
in short-term interest rates, as in the staff forecast. That is,
growth of the money and debt aggregates under this alternative is less
likely to fall below the lower ends of these ranges, even if the staff
has underestimated either the depressing impact of further increases
in the federal funds rate or the prospective underlying weakness in
money and credit relative to nominal GDP. Alternative II would also
seem to provide scope for an even more pronounced tightening in policy
than assumed by the staff, should the Committee wish to lean toward
still more policy restraint. Such restraint on demand might be sought
to return to a path of disinflation--as in the tighter strategy of the
last section--or could become necessary should an untoward deprecia-
tion of the exchange value of the dollar threaten a general inflation-
ary upturn.
(23) Alternative I could be seen as more consistent with a
judgment that relatively stable short-term interest rates will ade-
quately foster attainment of the FOMC's objectives for the economy and
inflation. The associated forecast for money and debt would involve
faster growth rates this year than in the staff projections, placing
their probable levels late in the year more clearly within their cur-
rent ranges. The alternative I ranges also could be viewed as a long-
run benchmark for money growth consonant with the attainment of nomi-
nal GDP expansion over time consistent with price stability and the
return to a more normal behavior of M2 velocity. Even if such veloc-
ity behavior does not emerge soon, keeping the current ranges in place
rather than lowering them could avoid the necessity of an upward
adjustment of the ranges in the future, which could be misperceived as
a weakening of the Committee's anti-inflationary resolve. An under-
shoot of the current ranges this year could perhaps be explained by
the continued aberrant behavior of velocity.
Ranges for 1995
(24) Two alternative ranges for money and debt growth over
projections for money and debt growth.
Alternative Money and Debt Ranges for 1995
(percent)
Memo:
Alt. I. Alt. II Staff projection
M2 1 to 5 0 to 4 2
M3 0 to 4 -1 to 3 1
Debt 4 to 8 3 to 7 5
(25) Many of the same considerations relating to the choice
of the ranges this year apply to the selection of provisional ranges
for next year. To be sure, the staff's projected stepup in M2 and M3
growth places both aggregates further within the alternative I ranges,
reducing the risk of an undershoot. However, considerable uncertain-
ties remain regarding the portfolio behavior of households and the
sensitivity of money balances to the structure of interest rates. In
addition, the behavior of interest rates that will be needed to pro-
mote the Committee's macroeconomic objectives in 1995 is, of course,
unclear. Given these uncertainties affecting velocity, a case can be
made for carrying over to 1995 whichever set of ranges is selected for
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(26) Three alternatives for the near-term stance of policy
are presented below for consideration by the Committee. Under alter-
native B, federal funds would continue to trade around 4-1/4 percent
and the allowance for adjustment and seasonal borrowing would remain
at $325 million. 15 The federal funds rate would be boosted 1/4
percentage point to 4-1/2 percent under alternative C, and the borrow-
ing allowance would be raised to $350 million. Alternative D would
increase the federal funds rate 1/2 percentage point to 4-3/4 percent.
(27) The staff forecast of rising interest rates does not
necessarily assume tightening at this meeting, but would seem to call
for aggressive action later in the quarter should underlying demand
for goods and services turn out to be as strong as implied in the
staff outlook. Alternative B might be chosen by the Committee if it
wished to await confirmation of the strength of aggregate demand,
perhaps because there were questions about whether that strength would
in fact be forthcoming. This alternative might also be preferred if
the Committee felt the staff had overestimated probable inflationary
pressures. Market participants seem somewhat uncertain about the
likelihood of Committee action at the July meeting; some anticipate
that the Federal Reserve will pause a little longer in its process of
firming to assess the effects of its actions so far, but on balance
they seem to have put the odds on a quarter-point move at greater than
a little after the meeting under alternative B. Long-term rates are
not likely to decline, however, under this alternative; the dollar
might remain under some downward pressure, and the markets might
continue to focus on the potential for greater inflation, especially
if data confirm brisk growth.
(28) The Committee could see alternative C as appropriate if
it believed that sufficient evidence had accumulated to warrant a
continued gradual tightening of policy to prevent the economy from
overheating. Because the 25-basis-point firming in the federal funds
rate under this alternative is not fully incorporated in current mar-
ket quotes, other short-term interest rates would probably edge up in
response. This action could provide some support for the dollar;
however, if it were undertaken in the context of a seriously weakening
dollar, and were seen as intended primarily to prop up the currency,
it could well be viewed by the market as insufficient. That circum-
stance aside, greater market confidence that inflation pressures might
be restrained could help limit increases in intermediate- and long-
term interest rates in response to this alternative. With market
portfolios now generally aligned to expectations of gradually rising
money market interest rates, the move seems unlikely to prompt further
increases in actual and implied volatility in bond markets.
(29) Concerns that the recent behavior of the dollar and
commodity prices might imply rising prices more broadly and might be
associated with a ratcheting up of inflation expectations could moti-
vate the Committee to select alternative D. The 50-basis-point hike
in the funds rate would be seen by market participants as motivated
importantly by a desire to bolster the dollar, which might well
recover some of its recent losses, especially if the action were
implemented through a hike in the discount rate. If the dollar did
rebound and the action were seen as lowering the odds on a pickup of
inflation, any increases in bond yields could be quite limited. On
the other hand, such an action is not currently anticipated in the
market and could prompt increased uncertainty about the future path of
interest rates, with adverse effects on bond and possibly stock
markets. In any case, banks would be likely to match the increase in
the federal funds rate with a similar hike in the prime rate.
(30) Growth of the monetary aggregates under the three
alternatives is presented in the table below. (The table and charts
on the next three pages contain more detail on the projections.)
Under all of the alternatives, M2 growth from June to September is
expected to be in a narrow range around a 1-1/2 percent rate and M3 at
or just above a 1/2 percent rate. Such growth rates would represent
some pickup from the surprisingly weak performance over the March-to-
June period. In effect, we are projecting that the relationships of
money to income and interest rates prevailing over recent years will
reassert themselves. All the alternatives would leave M2 in September
a bit above the lower end of its 1-to-5 percent annual range and M3 at
the lower edge of its 0-to-4 percent range.
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D
Growth from June
to September
M2 1-3/4 1-1/2 1-1/4
M3 3/4 1/2 1/2
M1 3-1/2 3 2-1/2
(31) As noted in the previous section, M2 growth will be
restrained by the slower pace of nominal income growth projected by
the staff in the third quarter as well as by the effects of the pre-
vious and expected further widening of opportunity costs. Moreover,
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D Alt. B Alt. C Alt. D
Chart 10
DEBT
Billions of Dollars
- Actual Level
* Projected Level
ON D J F MA M J J A S ON D J
1993 1994
the volume of flows into bond and stock funds is expected to pick up a
little as concerns about capital losses in these markets diminish. 16
Partly offsetting these influences should be the gradual levelling out
of mortgage refinancing activity. With interest rates on small CDs
rising more quickly than those on liquid deposits, inflows to small
time deposits should account for an appreciable proportion of M2
growth. Although currency growth also is expected to remain rapid
owing to continued strength in foreign demands, transaction deposits
are expected to be about flat on balance, as average yields below 2
percent on NOW accounts limit flows into other checkable deposits and
as compensating balances fall in response to increases in earnings
credit rates. M1 is expected to increase at only a 3-1/2 percent rate
from June to September under alternative B.17
(32) Expansion of M3 is projected to pick up only slightly in
the next few months. Funding needs of depository institutions should
remain moderate. Under the staff forecast, bank credit expands at
about a 4 percent rate over the second half of the year, with total
loan growth rising a little while securities acquisitions fall off;
the expansion of thrift balance sheets picks up only slowly.
Institution-only money fund shares are likely to continue to decline
in response to increasing yields on direct money-market holdings,
particularly under alternatives C and D. However, banks may slow
their reliance on borrowing from foreign offices and step up issuance
of domestic CDs, contributing a little to growth of M3. Overall debt
growth is projected to remain close to 5 percent over the remainder of
Directive Language
(33) Presented below for Committee consideration is draft
directive wording relating to the Humphrey-Hawkins ranges for 1994 and
Paragraph for 1994 and 1995 Ranges
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability
and promote sustainable growth in output. In furtherance
of these objectives, the Committee REAFFIRMED at THIS its
meeting THE RANGES IT HAD ESTABLISHED in February
established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 per-
cent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from the
fourth quarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of 1994. [IN
FURTHERANCE OF THESE OBJECTIVES, THE COMMITTEE AT THIS
MEETING LOWERED/RAISED THE RANGES IT HAD ESTABLISHED IN
FEBRUARY FOR GROWTH OF M2 AND M3 TO RANGES OF ____ TO ____ AND
____ TO ____ PERCENT RESPECTIVELY, MEASURED FROM THE FOURTH
QUARTER OF 1993 TO THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1994.] The
Committee anticipated that developments contributing to
unusual velocity increases could persist during the year
and that money growth within these ranges would be consis-
tent with its broad policy objectives. The monitoring
range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was
set MAINTAINED at 4 to 8 percent [LOWERED/RAISED TO ___ TO
____ PERCENT] for the year. FOR 1995, THE COMMITTEE AGREED
ON TENTATIVE RANGES FOR MONETARY GROWTH, MEASURED FROM THE
FOURTH QUARTER OF 1994 TO THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1995, OF ____
TO ____ PERCENT FOR M2 AND ____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR M3. THE
COMMITTEE PROVISIONALLY SET THE ASSOCIATED MONITORING RANGE
FOR GROWTH OF DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEBT AT ____ TO ____ PER-
CENT FOR 1995. The behavior of the monetary aggregates
will continue to be evaluated in the light of progress
toward price level stability, movements in their veloci-
ties, and developments in the economy and financial mar-
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/MAINTAIN/
increase somewhat the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions [DEL: , taking account of a possible increase in
the discount rate]. In the context of the Committee's long-
run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, slightly (SOMEWHAT)
greater reserve restraint MIGHT/WOULD or slightly
(SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint might (WOULD) be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
