Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC November 10, 1994
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The System left the intended degree of reserve pressure
unchanged during the period since the FOMC meeting on September 27.
Apart from some tightness in the reserves market around the end of the
third quarter, federal funds traded close to their expected level of
The allowance for adjustment and seasonal borrowing was reduced $250
million in six steps during the intermeeting period to $225 million in
view of the typical autumn decline in the demand for seasonal credit
at the discount window. Actual borrowing averaged close to its
allowance over the period.
(2) Other interest rates rose appreciably over the intermeet-
ing period in response to economic data generally indicating sustained
momentum in aggregate demand, high levels of output relative to poten-
tial, and persistent signs of price pressures at early stages of pro-
duction. In light of these developments, market participants have
revised upward their expectations of monetary tightening as the expan-
sion proceeds. As to their near-term outlook, quotes on federal funds
futures, shown in the upper left-hand panel of Chart 1, suggest that
markets now incorporate noticeably higher federal funds rates than in
late September. Most short- and long-term term rates jumped 1/4
to 1/2 percentage point, bringing rates on thirty-year Treasuries
above 8 percent and yields on fixed-rate mortgages above 9 percent for
the first time since early 1992. The largest advances were registered
at the two- to five-year maturities, a pattern that was reflected in a
bulge in forward rates over the next few years; for example, the one-
year forward rate at the three-year mark increased 60 basis points
while the one-year forward rate ten years out rose only 35 basis
points. This pattern suggests that some of the increase in market
yields represents higher real interest rates, reflecting market par-
ticipants' presumption that the unanticipated strength in spending
implies that monetary policy will need to lean harder against building
inflationary pressures than previously thought. Some of the run-up in
nominal rates also likely owed to increased inflation expectations,
though the evidence on this is mixed. Available measures of inflation
expectations based on surveys of households and business forecasters
have suggested no recent upward trend, and the price of gold has
fallen slightly. However, broad commodity price indexes have con-
tinued to move up on balance over the last several weeks, and the
foreign exchange value of the dollar came under renewed downward pres-
sure during the intermeeting period despite considerable increases in
nominal interest rates.
(3) After weakening over much of the period, the dollar's
exchange value recovered somewhat in November to end the period down,
on balance, 1 percent against the mark, 1/2 percent against the yen,
and 1/2 percent on a weighted-average basis. Although the dollar's
soft tone earlier appeared mostly to reflect the market's perception
of heightened inflation risks in the United States, some of the dol-
lar's weakness against the mark may have stemmed from a lessening of
political uncertainty in Germany with the Kohl coalition's reelection.
Short-term interest rates rose 15 basis points and long-term rates
edged lower in Germany; in Japan, short-term rates were about
unchanged while long-term rates rose 20 basis points. When the dollar
touched lows of DM1.4907 and Y96.12 on November 2, the Desk began to
intervene to buy dollars. On that day and the next, U.S. monetary
authorities purchased $1.3 billion against yen and an equal amount
against marks. That intervention seemed to support the dollar, per-
haps in part by reinforcing market expectations of an imminent
tightening of monetary policy. (Federal funds futures rates jumped a
few basis points during the intervention.) The dollar seemed to
receive a further boost from the U.S. election results and the release
of the PPI for October.
(4) Ml and M2 remained weak in October, mostly reflecting the
increase in market interest rates resulting from the tightening of
monetary policy this year. M2 contracted at a 1 percent annual rate
last month after falling in the previous two months and was at the
lower bound of its 1 to 5 percent annual range. Its Ml component
dropped at a 3-1/2 percent rate. Demand deposits have been depressed
by reduced compensating balance requirements, as earnings credit rates
have risen in response to climbing market rates, and by declines in
deposit balances associated with the plunge in mortgage refinancing
activity. Interest rates on other checkable and savings deposits,
including MMDAs, have responded sluggishly, and the resulting sharp
increase in the opportunity cost of these assets has apparently
prompted some depositors to shift funds into small time deposits and
money fund shares, where yields have risen more briskly.2  Noncom-
; through October, $2.2 billion
(Footnote continues on next page)
petitive tenders for Treasury securities have strengthened during the
year, indicating the attractiveness of direct holdings of open market
instruments relative to M2 assets. Nonetheless, even after taking
into account opportunity costs, the extent of the recent weakness in
M2 has been surprising, especially in view of a sharp drop-off of net
inflows into bond and stock mutual funds in recent weeks and the
persistent strength in spending indicators. 3
(5) M3, by contrast, was a bit stronger than was expected at
the time of the last FOMC meeting. This aggregate increased at a
fast clip to finance strong growth of loans and to replace a runoff in
nondeposit sources, which had been expanding rapidly earlier in the
year; banks also reduced their holdings of securities to fund loan
(6) Both nonfederal sector debt and total domestic nonfinan-
cial sector debt appear to have continued to expand at only a moderate
pace over the summer months and into October, despite continued easing
of credit availability at banks. Through September, total debt
increased at about a 5 percent rate from the fourth quarter of 1993,
leaving it in the lower half of its 4 to 8 percent monitoring range.
(Footnote continued from previous page)
of balances are estimated to have been shifted out of OCDs by this
program. Partly in association with the contraction in transaction
deposits, total reserves dropped at a 6-1/4 percent annual rate in
October. Growth of currency, however, rebounded from the more
moderate rates of August and September, boosting the expansion of the
monetary base to a 6-1/2 percent rate.
With long-term rates continuing to back up, bond issuance by corpora-
tions remained near the depressed third-quarter pace in October.
However, business borrowing from banks was robust last month and
commercial paper borrowing accelerated, partly to finance impending
mergers. Issuance of bonds by state and local governments also was
damped by higher interest rates, and outstanding tax-exempt debt is
estimated to have declined as a result of heavy retirements. In the
household sector, data from banks for October indicate that consumer
borrowing was again quite rapid; however, the limited information
available for home mortgage borrowing suggests a moderate pace of
activity. On the supply side of the credit markets, the most recent
survey of bank loan officers revealed a further easing of terms and
standards on business loans and increased willingness to extend credit
to consumers. In the open markets, quality spreads on lower-rated
corporate bonds and commercial paper have remained quite narrow even
as the general level of rates has backed up.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV
to
Aug. Sept. Oct. Oct.
Money and credit aggregates
M1 -2.1 .9 -3.4 2.7
M2 -2.0 -.5 -1.1 1.0
Domestic nonfinancial
debt 5.9 5.4 -- 5.1
Federal 6.1 6.0 -- 5.7
Nonfederal 5.8 5.1 -- 4.8
Reserve measures
Total reserves -6.0 -.7 -6.3 -1.8
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 469 487 380
Excess reserves 1004 1060 795
QIV to September for debt.
Includes "other extended credit" from the Federal Reserve.
Policy Alternatives
(7) Two monetary policy alternatives for Committee considera-
tion are presented formally below. Alternative B would keep the
intended federal funds rate unchanged at 4-3/4 percent, in association
with retaining an allowance of $225 million for adjustment plus sea-
sonal borrowing at the discount window.4  Alternative C embodies a
accomplished either by an equal rise in the discount rate to 4-1/2
percent with the borrowing allowance kept at $225 million or by an
increase in the borrowing allowance to $275 million at the current
discount rate of 4 percent. A still larger increase in the federal
funds rate than envisioned under alternative C is also discussed.
(8) The staff economic forecast assumes that a relatively
steep upward trajectory for the federal funds rate over coming months
will be necessary to restrain inflation next year. The Committee is
assumed to raise the federal funds rate 150 basis points by the spring
of next year and to keep it at that 6-1/4 percent level through most
of 1995. In conjunction with the earlier policy tightenings, this
path is seen as engendering financial conditions sufficiently restric-
tive to hold the growth of aggregate demand below that of potential
real GDP over next year and into 1996. The resulting return of the
unemployment rate to a level above its estimated natural rate of 6
percent or so will tend to reverse an incipient acceleration of infla-
tion and thereby keep any near-term inflationary uptick from becoming
embedded in the expectations that enter into wage- and price-setting
decisions. Market participants appear to have a trajectory for the
federal funds rate roughly similar to the staff's assumption built
into short-term spot rates and futures quotes through next spring. In
contrast to the staff assumption, however, rates further out the term
structure can be read as suggesting expectations of additional tight-
(9) Choice of the unchanged policy of alternative B might be
based on the judgments that most of the effects of previous increases
in interest rates are still in the pipeline, that convincing signs of
higher inflation have not yet appeared, and that under these circum-
stances the Committee can await evidence indicating whether the
effects of previous monetary tightening will be sufficient to restrain
spending adequately. The weakness in the monetary aggregates and
moderate expansion of overall measures of credit may be seen as
offering support for the view that financial conditions are not con-
ducive to a sustained pickup in inflation. Indeed, even without
another tightening move, M2 seems likely to come in just below the
come in at only 2 percent.
(10) Market expectations are for substantial increases in the
funds rate over the balance of the year. Opinions reportedly have
coalesced around either increases of 50 basis points at both the
November and December FOMC meetings, or a 75 basis point increase at
the November meeting, which would reduce the odds of a further policy
tightening this year. Thus, the absence of a tightening move at this
meeting would catch market participants off guard. Heightened con-
cerns that the Federal Reserve would not move sufficiently to contain
inflation would generate a further depreciation of the foreign
exchange value of the dollar, and probably induce a significant
selloff in note and bond markets. Some decrease in short-term inter-
est rates might accompany the decision not to adjust policy at this
meeting, although a sense that tightening action could be postponed
only for a short time would limit the decline.
(11) The 50 basis point rise in the funds rate under alterna-
tive C could be favored on the grounds that the incoming data on
economic activity again have been stronger than expected. With the
economy perhaps overshooting its potential rather than settling into a
"soft landing," the risks of an associated future pickup in inflation
pressures would seem to have increased. A 1/2 point move in the
federal funds rate, perhaps accompanied by an equal increment to the
discount rate, could be seen as keeping pace with the need for policy
firming in a deliberate manner consistent with the size and frequency
of recent policy actions. The resulting real federal funds rate would
be a bit above its long-run average, but restraint of at least this
magnitude might be appropriate in light of the current pressure on
capacity and the stimulative effects of the drop in the dollar and the
easing of terms and standards of bank lending.
(12) With market participants generally appearing to have
built in a move of at least this size, interest rates could exhibit
little initial reaction to the implementation of alternative C. The
receipt of information on output and price developments over the
intermeeting period along the lines of the relatively robust Greenbook
forecast might reinforce the market's perception that additional
System tightening is required, and interest rates could edge higher
later in the period. The foreign exchange value of the dollar could
remain around recent trading levels if nominal interest rates move
sufficiently higher to offset the effects of a heightened sense of
potential inflationary pressures.
(13) The Committee might wish to consider an even more sub-
stantial tightening of reserve market conditions--for example, on the
order of 75 basis points. This step could be judged as more suited to
the strength of the emerging threat that the economy may be overshoot-
ing its potential, setting in motion a gradual self-reinforcing pro-
cess of increasing inflation. Under these circumstances, a more
decisive move toward restraint would be needed to avoid an upward
ratcheting of inflation. Market sentiment has deteriorated during the
hiatus in policy tightening, judging by the rise in bond yields and
weakness in the exchange value of the dollar. By more clearly notch-
ing up monetary policy to a firmer posture, a larger step might better
assure market participants that the Federal Reserve was acting force-
fully enough to head off future inflation and might forestall the
perceived need on the part of the market participants for another
tightening move this year. If so, the action could spur a near-term
rally in bond markets and strengthen the dollar. Some increases in
very short-term market interest rates would likely result, of course,
from the somewhat larger-than-expected rise in the funds rate, and
banks could immediately raise their prime rate by a comparable amount.
(14) With regard to credit flows over coming months, the
staff sees continued moderate expansion and perhaps some slowing in
the pace at which bank lending terms are being eased. The debt of
domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to grow during the fourth
quarter at near the same 5 percent pace averaged over the first three
quarters of the year. In the first quarter of next year, overall debt
is projected to edge up to a 5-1/4 percent rate of growth, owing to a
step-up in federal borrowing. Nonfederal debt growth is likely to
about maintain its pace of earlier this year, remaining somewhat below
the projected growth of nominal GDP. Nonfederal debt growth will
probably continue to be led by the household sector, although expan-
sion of home mortgage and consumer debt is likely to edge lower over
the next two quarters. In the corporate sector, by contrast, some
pickup in credit market borrowing may be in the offing, reflecting a
further widening in the financing gap as spending for fixed capital
and inventories increases relative to internal sources of funds. The
financing mix should remain heavily weighted toward bank loans and
short-term paper, with bond issuance staying depressed. Anecdotal
reports of recent resistance by banks to pressures for further reduc-
tions in lending spreads, along with concerns about credit quality
expressed by regulators, suggest that credit terms and standards may
not be easing quite so rapidly over coming months.
(15) Forecasted growth rates of the monetary aggregates from
October to March and from the fourth quarter of this year through
March under both policy alternatives are shown below.5  (More
detailed data appear on the table and charts on the following pages.)
Under alternative B, offering rates through the first quarter would
continue to adjust upward in the face of steady money market rates.
As a result, retail deposit inflows are projected to strengthen
gradually, yielding growth rates for M2 of 1 percent over the October
to March interval and 1-1/2 percent from the fourth quarter of 1994 to
March. The resumption of quarterly average growth, at a 1 percent
rate in the first quarter, combined with a projected slowing of
nominal GDP, would be associated with a reduced growth rate of 4-3/4
percent of M2 velocity, down from a projected increase of 7-1/4 per-
cent in the fourth quarter. M1 is projected to decline at a 1 percent
rate from October to March under alternative B, as currency flows
abroad remain robust but demand and other checkable deposits continue
to decline. The staff does not expect banks to continue to run
off securities at the recent pace, so that the growth of bank credit
should pick up. Rapid issuance of large time deposits will continue
to fill some of the gap left by still-sluggish retail deposits, and
thus M3 is projected to outpace M2 from October to March, likely
expanding at a 2-1/2 percent rate under alternative B.
Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from October
to March
Implied growth from
1994:Q4 to March
M2 1-1/2 1/2
M3 2-1/2 2-1/4
M1 0 -1-1/4
(16) Under the 50 basis point increase in the funds rate of
alternative C, both M2 and M3 would record slower growth over the next
five months than under alternative B. Given the sluggish upward
adjustment of offering rates on M2 balances, households would divert
still more savings into direct holdings of market instruments. M2
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C
is projected to be flat on balance over October to March, implying an
increase from the fourth quarter of this year to March at only a 1/2
percent rate--below the Committee's provisional range for 1995 of 1 to
as higher interest rates damp spending and borrowing, M3's growth from
October to March would be reduced to a 2-1/4 percent rate.
Directive Language
(18) Presented below is draft wording for the operational
paragraph that includes the usual options for Committee consideration
and a reference to a possible increase in the discount rate.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/main-
tain/INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions, TAKING ACCOUNT OF A POSSIBLE
INCREASE IN THE DISCOUNT RATE. In the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful con-
sideration to economic, financial, and monetary develop-
ments, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint
would (MIGHT) or (SOMEWHAT) slightly lesser reserve
restraint (WOULD) might be acceptable in the intermeet-
ing period. The contemplated reserve conditions are
expected to be consistent with modest growth in M2 and
M3 over [DEL: the balance of the year] COMING MONTHS.
Monthly
Nov 93
Dec 93
Jan 94
Feb 94
Mar 94
Apr 94
ay 94
Jun 94
Jul 94
Aug 94
Sep 94
Oct 94
Weekly
Jul 27 94
Aug 3 94
Aug 10 94
Aug 17 94
Aug 24 94
Aug 31 94
Sep 7 94
Sep 14 94
Sep 21 94
Sep 28 94
Oct 5 94
Oct 12 94
Oct 19 94
Oct 26 94
Nov 2 94
Nov 9 94
Daily
Nov 4 94
Nov 9 94
Nov 10 94
November 11, 1994
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
p -preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class FOMC
Seasonally adjusted NOVEMBER 14, 1994
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt1
nontransactions components total loan
total loans
Period M1 M2 M3 L and U. S. other' total
In M2 In M3 only investments government
Levels ($Billions):
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
NOVEMBER 14, 1994
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
Money market
Overnight Small mutual funds Large
SOther RPs and denomi. general denomi- Term Term ort-term ra nker
riod urrency checkable Euro- Savis' nation purpose Institutions nation RP's Euro- Savings Tres ommercial Bane
dupoyits deposits dollars deposits time and only time NSA' dollars bonds paper' aocept
NSA' deposits
a
broker/ deposits NSA' u s
~ 2 3 4_ --- - _ 
4 -dealer4
Annally (4th Qtr.)
1991
1992
1993
Monthly
1993-OCT.
NOV.
DBC.
p preliminary
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT. p
November 11, 1994
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
SI Nt urhases 3 Iagences outright
Period Net Redemptions Net Net purchases 3 eredemptions holdings
purchases ( change year 1-5 5-10 over 10 ) Change tota 4 Net RPs
--- Q1
--- 02
---03
---04
Weekly
August 3
November 2
9
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)6
November 9
--- 7,749
--- 1,268
--- 2,164
6,639
1,610
asury and agency securities.
rchase transactions (-), and matched purchase sale transactions (+).
within
1 year 1-5 5-10 over 10 total
--- 100
--- 4,642
--- 3,281
440 4,599
--- 155
November 9
