Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Class I FOMC
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC December 16, 1994
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Immediately after the Committee meeting on November 15,
the System announced a 3/4 percentage point increase in the discount
rate, from 4 to 4-3/4 percent, that was passed through fully to re-
serve market conditions.2 Market participants, who almost univer-
sally.expected a policy action, were nevertheless surprised at the
extent of the tightening, and other money market interest rates firmed
a bit as a result. Major commercial banks raised the prime rate 3/4
percentage point, to 8-1/2 percent. Perhaps because the Committee's
action lent some assurance that the Federal Reserve was determined to
contain inflation, rates further out the Treasury yield curve increas-
ed only a few basis points, at most, and the rate on the thirty-year
bond actually fell that day.
(2) In subsequent weeks, the Treasury yield curve flattened
further. Data releases on economic activity were on the firm side of
expectations and tended to strengthen the notions that the economy
retained considerable buoyancy and that more policy restraint than was
previously anticipated would be forthcoming. By December 5, short-
term interest rates had risen 1/2 percentage point from levels just
before the FOMC meeting. Rates have retraced a portion of these in-
creases in recent days as favorable data on inflation, against the
backdrop of skittish conditions in financial markets, have led market
participants to all but eliminate the prospects for policy tightening
at the December meeting. Still, on balance over the intermeeting
period, the term structures of federal funds and Eurodollar futures
rates shifted up appreciably, and short-term rates rose 25 to 50 basis
points (Chart 1). In contrast to earlier this year, strong
economic data did not have an adverse impact on the bond market. In
fact, over the intermeeting period, longer-term yields shed 15 to 25
basis points. The relatively good inflation data, together with the
more aggressive policy action, seemed to increase the confidence of
market participants that policy would be firmed sufficiently to pre-
vent a breakout of inflation. Under that interpretation, real inter-
est rates may have risen across much of the maturity spectrum, which
would be consistent with the recent strength in the value of the
dollar on foreign exchange markets. In weighted-average terms, the
U.S. dollar has appreciated about 2 percent since the last FOMC meet-
ing and nearly 5 percent from November 1, just prior to the U.S. mone-
tary authorities' exchange market intervention.4 Also suggestive
of a rise in real rates, and perhaps of more risks to the profit out-
look than were expected at the time of the last FOMC meeting, major
equity market indexes fell from 1-1/2 to 4-1/2 percent.
(3) Financial markets were focused for a time on the events
surrounding the difficulties of an investment fund run by Orange
County, California that pushed the fund and the County into filing for
bankruptcy. The municipal market bore the brunt of these develop-
ments, and rates rose relative to comparable Treasury issues, as in-
vestors and rating agencies traced out the ripple effects on the cash
flows of the municipalities invested in the fund and speculated as to
whether other state and local issuers may have followed Orange
County's investment strategy. Uncertainty abated when, amid intense
public scrutiny, only a few other problem situations emerged, and the
ratio of municipal to Treasury yields returned to its level before the
Orange County revelations. More generally, many risk premiums have
edged higher over the intermeeting period, but remain thin by
historical norms, and some measures of expected volatility have
(4) M2 resumed growing in November, at a 3/4 percent rate,
and was appreciably stronger than had been anticipated at the time of
the last bluebook. This strength probably reflected some substitu-
tion out of mutual funds, as well as the surprising vigor of nominal
spending. Bond mutual funds were hit hard by outflows throughout the
month, while inflows to equity funds slowed markedly in November.5
Small time deposits and money market mutual funds, whose offering
rates have at least partly adjusted to higher market rates, grew at
double-digit rates in November. In contrast, the rates on liquid
deposits have moved very little this year, and those deposits con-
tinued to contract last month. The higher opportunity cost of M2
has induced households to seek investment alternatives, and, indica-
tive of that pursuit, net noncompetitive tenders at Treasury auctions
were again strong in November. On a quarterly average basis, the
velocity of M2 is expected to increase at a 7 percent rate in the
fourth quarter, pulling up its rise on the year to 5-1/2 percent. In
contrast to the previous several years, the rise in velocity in 1994
is broadly consistent with the predictions of standard models that
rely on the relative movements of deposit and short-term market rates.
From the fourth quarter of 1993 to November, M2 has grown at a 1 per-
cent rate, at the lower bound of its 1 to 5 percent annual range.
(5) The growth of M3 outpaced that of M2 again in November,
but slowed from the previous month, leaving this aggregate about 1-1/4
percent at an annual rate above its level in the fourth quarter of
last year--in the lower half of its annual range of 0 to 4 percent.
Institution-only money funds decelerated appreciably last month, owing
to redemptions by sophisticated investors as they switched toward
direct holdings after the November 15 policy move. Bank issuance of
large time deposits continued to be brisk, but bank emphasis on other
managed liabilities lessened a bit further last month. Apparently,
they again relied on selling some of their securities holdings to fund
loan growth. Overall bank credit increased at about a 3 percent rate
in November--close to the pace in each of the previous three months--
with total loans expanding at more than an 8 percent annual clip.
(6) Available data suggest that the growth of the debt of
nonfederal sectors has continued at a moderate pace in recent months.
In the business sector, a widening financing gap and a pickup in the
pace of merger activity have apparently pushed nonfinancial firms
toward external funding, which has remained focused on bank loans
and the commercial paper market. Households' appetite for consumer
debt has shown no sign of flagging; consumer credit recorded another
two-digit growth rate in October and was on track for another strong
month in November, at least according to bank data. Despite higher
interest rates, little evidence of a slowdown in mortgage borrowing
has emerged. Growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt over October
and November appears to be in line with that of previous months, leav-
ing this aggregate in the lower half of its monitoring range. With
growth from the fourth quarter of 1994 just a shade over 5 percent,
total debt will likely expand at a slower rate than nominal GDP this
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial
debt
Bank credit
Reserve measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Monetary base
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
ing, are calculated by prorating averages for two-week reserve
maintenance periods that overlap months. Reserve data incor-
porate adjustments for discontinuities associated with changes
in reserve requirements.
Policy Alternatives
(7) Two policy alternatives are presented below for con-
sideration by the Committee. Alternative B would keep the intended
federal funds rate at 5-1/2 percent. The associated level of adjust-
ment plus seasonal borrowing would initially be $125 million, but
borrowing would subsequently drift lower in keeping with the typical
winding down of demands for seasonal credit. Alternative C entails a
either through an equivalent increase in the discount rate with the
same path for the borrowing allowance or an increase in the initial
borrowing allowance to $175 million, with the same seasonal reductions
(8) In light of the prospects for aggregate demand and the
likelihood that the economy already is operating a little beyond its
sustainable potential, the staff believes that damping inflation pres-
sures will require a substantial further tightening of policy before
very long, although not necessarily at this meeting. The Greenbook
economic forecast assumes a further increase of 100 to 150 basis
points in the federal funds rate by early spring. Financial markets
appear to have built in a similar amount of policy tightening through
next spring (though still more thereafter), and the prospective rise
in short-term rates should keep real long-term rates at or slightly
above current levels and preserve the recent gains in the real ex-
change value of the dollar. This restraint is viewed as reducing
pressures on resources enough to stabilize inflation in 1996 at just
over 3 percent.
(9) Keeping the stance of policy unchanged, as under alter-
native B, might appear warranted in light of the size of the recent
action and of current financial conditions. Real short- and long-term
interest rates now look to be somewhat above longer-term averages, the
dollar has moved higher, and all money measures have remained slug-
gish. If the Committee thought these developments implied a reason-
able probability that policy actions to date had put in place suffi-
cient restraint to contain inflation, it might want to await addi-
tional information in gauging the appropriate scope and timing of any
future action. Moreover, the Committee might have gained some leeway
to pause in its tightening, despite persistent strength in production
and spending indicators, because the larger move in November, together
with favorable wage and price data, has helped to calm developing
inflation fears. Furthermore, after the news on Orange County and on
derivatives-related difficulties at some bank holding companies, mar-
ket participants seem to be especially wary of additional announce-
ments of large losses on leveraged or derivatives positions. Through
year-end, lenders are likely to be particularly conscious of possible
credit quality problems of the counterparties that show up on their
published statements. While a policy tightening on December 20 is
unlikely to trigger market dislocations, such a possibility cannot be
ruled out; in any case, the chances of such problems will be even more
remote after year-end.
(10) As noted above, market participants now assess the
probability of a near-term tightening as fairly low, but they see an
intermeeting move before the next scheduled FOMC meeting on January 31
and February 1 as more likely. In these circumstances, and given the
seemingly greater confidence of late in financial markets that the
System will act as appropriate to counter a buildup in inflationary
pressures, interest rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar
are unlikely to change very much in the immediate aftermath of a deci-
sion to leave policy unchanged, as under Alternative B. Movements in
financial markets subsequently will depend, of course, on the nature
of incoming data. Continued strength in employment or final demand,
especially if accompanied by adverse wage and price developments,
would firm market expectations of System action early next year.
Inaction in the face of such data could risk the re-emergence of con-
cerns that the Federal Reserve was falling behind in its efforts to
contain inflation, raising long-term interest rates and weakening the
foreign exchange value of the dollar.
(11) The 1/2 percentage point rise in the federal funds rate
under alternative C might be favored if the Committee viewed the
recent string of surprisingly strong economic data as clearly indicat-
ing that the risks are still tilted in the direction of sustained
faster inflation. The resulting 6 percent federal funds rate would
imply a real federal funds rate that falls more assuredly in a zone
that could be characterized as moderately restrictive. Following so
soon after the November move, a policy tightening at this meeting
would consolidate, or even extend, the gains made in reducing infla-
tion expectations in financial markets. The inclination to adopt
alternative C would be bolstered by a belief that financial markets
have largely absorbed the Orange County shock and the risks of further
disruptions are de minimus.
(12) Under alternative C, money market interest rates would
firm somewhat, especially those at the shortest end, as the tightening
would come somewhat sooner than now expected. To the degree that
market participants saw such an action as evidence of an even stronger
anti-inflationary resolve of the Committee, nominal forward rates at
intermediate- and longer-term maturities would tend to decline, limit-
ing any increase in longer-term rates. Real interest rates, however,
would rise, bolstering the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
Quality spreads could widen a bit as higher rates increased debt-ser-
vicing burdens and raised questions about the ongoing strength of the
(13) Borrowing by nonfederal sectors through early 1995
should remain moderate. Nonfinancial businesses are projected to
reduce their borrowing, particularly from the commercial paper market
and banks, partly because we see the recent spate of debt-financed
share retirements as an unusual bulge that is not likely to be sus-
tained. Acting to cushion this slowdown will be borrowing to finance
rising capital outlays as profits flatten out. Household debt, too,
is projected to decelerate--to a pace more in line with that of
earlier this year. This moderation owes to a projected slowing in
the growth of consumption outlays, especially on durables, and to a
decline in residential housing activity. The sustained contraction of
the debt of state and local governments is expected to draw to a
close, once past a substantial volume of retirements at the beginning
of next year. On balance, debt of nonfederal sectors is projected to
grow at around a 5 percent pace over the period from November to
March, about in line with the average pace of 1994 as a whole, and the
total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors to expand through March at
a 5-1/4 percent annual rate.
(14) Projected growth rates of the monetary aggregates from
November to March are shown below under both alternatives. (More
detailed data appear on the table and charts on the following pages.)
The staff expects the growth of the monetary aggregates to remain
damped over coming months, restrained by prior (and under alternative
C, current) increases in opportunity costs. Nonetheless, growth rates
for the aggregates generally are a little faster than envisioned in
November. Expansion in nominal income is now seen as stronger over
the late months of 1994 and early months of 1995. In addition, the
broader aggregates are likely to be buoyed slightly by shifts from
longer-term mutual funds in the wake of less attractive returns and
unfavorable publicity; however, with deposit rates still well short of
market rates, most of the savings diverted from mutual funds is likely
to continue to go into direct purchases of securities.
Growth from November
to March Alt. B Alt. C
M2 1-1/4 1/2
M3 2-1/4 2
M1 -1 -2
(15) Under alternative B, M2 would strengthen to a 1-1/4
percent rate over the November-to-March period. Opportunity costs of
holding M2--especially the small time deposit and money market mutual
funds components--should narrow from current high levels as retail
deposit and money fund rates continue to adjust upward to recent in-
creases in market rates. As a result, growth in M2 velocity would
slow to a 5 percent rate in the first quarter of next year from a 7
percent rate in the current quarter. M1 would continue to edge down-
ward in response to previous increases in opportunity costs, although
the drag from the slowdown of mortgage refinancing activity will be
diminishing as such activity stabilizes at relatively low levels.7
Boosted in part by faster growth in M2, M3 would be expected to grow
at a 2-1/4 percent rate over the November-to-March period. In
addition, a pickup in M3-type money market mutual funds, as rates on
such funds catch up with market rates, would act to lift M3 growth.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C
Bank issuance of large CDs is expected to remain brisk, despite some
moderation in loan growth, as bank reliance on nondeposit funding
continues to abate.
(16) Under alternative C, opportunity costs would tend to
increase as the rise in money market rates outpaced those on M2 com-
ponents. M2 would expand at only a 1/2 percent rate over the Novem-
ber-to-March period, restrained by faster runoffs of M1 and savings
deposits (including MMDAs) than under alternative B. By March, M2
would stand about 1/2 percent above its fourth-quarter 1994 base, a
little below the bottom of its provisional growth range for 1995. M3
would expand at a 2 percent pace through March, damped by outflows
from M3-type money market mutual funds. Growth in M3 from the fourth
quarter of 1994 to March would be at a 2 percent rate, at the midpoint
of its provisional range for 1995.
Directive Language
(17) Presented below is draft wording for the operational
paragraph that includes the usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT
(SLIGHTLY)/MAINTAIN/increase significantly (SOMEWHAT/
SLIGHTLY) the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions, [taking account of a possible increase in the
discount rate]. In the context of the Committee's long-
run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, somewhat
(SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint (WOULD/MIGHT) or
somewhat (SLIGHTLY) lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT)
be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contem-
plated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
December 19, 1994
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary marke t market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
Dec 93
Jan 94
Feb 94
Mar 94
Apr 94
May 94
Jun 94
Jul 94
Aug 94
Sep 94
Oct 94
Nov 94
Weekly
Aug 31 94
Sep 7 94
Sep 14 94
Sep 21 94
Sep 28 94
Oct 5 94
Oct 12 94
Oct 19 94
Oct 26 94
Nov 2 94
Nov 9 94
Nov 16 94
Nov 23 94
Nov 30 94
Dec 7 94
Dec 14 94
Daily
Dec 9 94
Dec 15 94
Dec 16 94
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures Class II 
FO MC
Seasonally adjusted DECEMBER 19,1994
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt
1
nontransactions components total loans
total loans
Period M1 M2 M3 L and U . other total2
In M2 In M3 only investments' government
Levels ($Billions):
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class II FOMC
DECEMBER 19, 1994
Money market
Overnight Small mutual funds Large
Other RPs and denomi- general denomi- Term TermShortrm
Period Currency mand checkable Euro- ag nation purpose Institutions ation RP's Euro- Savings ote Commercial Bankers
deposits deposits dollars deposits
2
time and only ime NSA' dollars bonds Treasury paper accetan-
NSA' deposits' broker/ deposits' NSA' securities ces
Annually (4th Qtr.)
1991
1992
1993
Monthly
1993-NOV.
p preliminary
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV. p
December 16,1994
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
Net purchases 3  agencies outrightPeriod Net 2 Redemptions Net i th Redemptions Net redemptions holdings 5
purchases (-) change 1 1-5 5-10 over 10 (-) Change I total 4 Net RPs
Weekly
September 7
December 7
14
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
December 14
- .
- 11,282
- 19,365
December 14
