Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC May 19, 1995
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments 1
(1) At the time of the FOMC's March meeting, market par-
ticipants apparently anticipated that the stance of monetary policy
would remain unchanged for a time but that the next policy move would
be to tighten. The Committee's decision at that meeting to leave the
intended federal funds rate at 6 percent thus had little immediate
impact on financial markets. However, data becoming available since
the meeting have portrayed a considerably slower economic expansion
than had been thought, and market interest rates have fallen on
balance. Although the expectation that the federal funds rate would
stay at 6 percent over the near term was little affected by this news,
the market's assessment of the probable direction of the next policy
move has shifted toward ease. This can be seen, for example, in rates
on federal funds futures contracts five months ahead, which shifted
down almost 40 basis points to just under 6 percent--a level that
probably includes some liquidity premium (chart). In association with
this revision, most money-market rates edged down over the period;
federal funds continued to trade at rates averaging close to 6 per-
(2) Longer-term rates have dropped more than 1/2 percentage
point since the March meeting, with the largest declines at inter-
mediate maturities. Supplementing weaker economic data, signs that
Congress was more serious about taking difficult steps to make major
reductions in budget deficits seemed to contribute to the drop in
yields. Among other effects, Congressional actions may have encour-
aged purchases of dollar assets as suggested by the simultaneous rise
in the foreign exchange value of the dollar late in the intermeeting
period. Intermediate-term rates now have fallen about 1-1/2 percent-
age points and long-term rates 1-1/4 percentage points from their
peaks in late 1994 and early 1995 (chart), reversing about half their
previous rise. The rally in securities markets was set back only
temporarily by the release of somewhat disappointing inflation numbers
for April. Available information from surveys of price expectations
along with relatively flat commodity prices suggest little change or
perhaps even a small improvement in the underlying inflation outlook
in recent months. Thus, the bulk of recent substantial declines in
yields since their peaks likely represents a drop in real rates.
Rising odds on sustained growth and low inflation, coupled with recent
positive corporate earnings surprises, have kept quality spreads on
private debt instruments narrow and have boosted broad indexes of
share prices to new records.
(3) The dollar's weighted average exchange value rose
appreciated about 3-1/2 percent, net, against the mark, while depreci-
ating by lesser amounts against the yen and the Canadian dollar. The
dollar had continued to drop over the first half of the period, how-
ever, prompting U.S. intervention purchases of dollars against marks
and yen on two days in early April. The dollar moved sharply
higher in early May. Just as the dollar's weakness in April was not
obviously related to fundamentals, neither was the rebound in early
May; as noted above, though, markets did seem to be buoyed by the
budget actions taken in Congress. Foreign long-term interest rates
declined about as much on average as U.S. rates over the period, in
part benefiting from some reduction in political uncertainties in
France, Italy, and Canada. Foreign three-month rates declined more
sharply than those in the United States, about 70 basis points on
average; the Bundesbank and the Bank of Japan eased official rates to
offset the tightening effects of earlier appreciations in their
currencies. The financial situation in Mexico appears to have
stabilized a bit: The peso appreciated through April before levelling
out; over the period, interest rates have declined substantially and
stock prices have risen.
(4) M2 growth picked up in April to a 4 percent rate, close
to expectations at the time of the last FOMC meeting. M2 was boosted
last month by the need to fund unusually heavy payments of non-with-
held taxes resulting from last year's stronger economy and new tax
regulations allowing individuals to delay a larger share of federal
tax payments until April. In addition, processing delays earlier this
tax season caused refunds to run at a stronger-than-average rate in
April. 5 Moreover, after a year of increases, M2 opportunity costs
have edged down since January; ebbing household demands for securities
that compete with M2 are suggested by a substantial weakening in non-
competitive tenders at Treasury auctions in recent months. M2 in
April was in the lower half of its 1-to-5 percent growth range.
(5) M3 grew more rapidly in April than anticipated at the
time of the last FOMC meeting, expanding at around a 6 percent pace
for the second consecutive month. The strong performance of M3 again
reflected the needs of commercial banks to fund heavy credit demands.
Also contributing to the strength in M3 was a rapid expansion of in-
stitution-only money funds, whose rates lagged the decline in market
rates. M3 rose further above its 0 to 4 percent growth range in
(6) The limited evidence available suggests that relatively
strong borrowing by households and businesses has continued in recent
months. Credit demands in the business sector have been focused main-
ly at the short end. Large accumulations of inventories have boosted
business loans at banks, while commercial paper expansion, importantly
to help fund mergers and acquisitions, also has been brisk. Banks
report that they have continued to ease terms and conditions for loans
and back-up lines of credit over recent months. Although the rally in
securities markets has sparked some increased bond offerings in recent
weeks, funds raised in longer-term debt markets by nonfinancial firms
have been limited overall. Consumer credit growth, though still quite
brisk, has edged lower, held down by reduced automobile financing, but
there are early signs that mortgage borrowing has begun to respond to
declines in rates. State and local bond issuance has picked up a bit
of late but remains well below the pace of retirements associated with
advanced refundings. The growth of federal sector debt has slowed
most recently as a consequence of strong tax inflows and is running
below the pace of 1994. Total nonfinancial debt has expanded at about
a 5-1/2 percent pace through March, a bit above the midpoint of its
monitoring range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Feb. Mar. Apr. Apr.
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt 6.9 5.3 -- 5.6
Federal 10.7 7.3 -- 6.1
Nonfederal 5.5 4.6 -- 5.4
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Excess reserves 946 794 752
are calculated by prorating averages for two-week reserve main-
tenance periods that overlap months. Reserve data incorporate
adjustments for discontinuities associated with changes in reserve
requirements.
Monetary Policy Alternatives
(7) Three monetary policy alternatives are presented below
for consideration by the Committee. Under alternative B, federal
funds would continue to trade around 6 percent. Under alternative C,
the federal funds rate would be boosted 1/2 percentage point, to 6-1/2
percent. Alternative A would reduce the intended trading level of the
funds rate to 5-1/2 percent. 7
(8) Incoming data show both rising inflation and a weakening
of economic activity over recent months. Looking forward, a key issue
for monetary policy is whether either of these developments will per-
sist. In the staff forecast, with short-term interest rates main-
tained at current levels, neither of these risks materializes. In
effect, interest and exchange rates close to their prevailing con-
figuration are seen as consistent with the economy producing just
above its long-run capacity. A near-term inventory correction limits
the expansion of production in the second and third quarters, taking
pressure off resources. The unemployment rate ends up close to the
natural rate, growth is at its potential, and the core rate of con-
sumer price inflation runs at just over 3 percent in 1996. If the
Committee sees the staff forecast as the likely and desired outcome
and the risks around it to be reasonably well-balanced, then selection
of unchanged reserve market conditions, as under alternative B, would
be favored.
(9) Market participants generally anticipate no change in
the stance of monetary policy at this meeting. Thus, market rates
would not be expected to react to selection of alternative B by the
Committee. However, the recent shifts in the yield curve seem to
embody expectations of continued underlying softness in aggregate
demand sufficient to induce the Federal Reserve to ease policy later
in the year. Under the staff forecast, incoming information on spend-
ing would suggest a bit more vigor in the economy than would be con-
sistent with the market's outlook, and interest rates may tend to edge
higher on balance over the intermeeting period. Market conditions
could remain volatile. Expectations about the economic and policy
outlook may be especially prone to revision, given the size and
recency of the shift in sentiment. In addition, financial asset
prices may be sensitive to progress through the Congress of the
various fiscal policy initiatives currently under discussion.
(10) The fifty-basis-point firming of alternative C might be
favored by the Committee if it wished to provide more assurance that
pressures on resources would soon diminish, so as not to perpetuate
the recently elevated rate of inflation and, over time, to return the
economy toward a disinflationary path. The depreciation of the dol-
lar, the rise in bond and equity prices, and the continued relaxation
of terms and conditions on bank loans this year have in effect eased
financial conditions substantially. Markets seem to have reacted
strongly to what could prove to be only a moderate downshift in
underlying demand conditions, and current financial conditions may
therefore provide excessive stimulus to an economy already operating
around its potential.
(11) With markets apparently having concluded that rates are
unlikely to rise significantly further, the response in the financial
markets to the 50 basis point increase of alternative C could be sub-
stantial. Short-term rates, including the prime rate, would likely
rise by the full amount of the increase in the federal funds rate, and
intermediate-term rates would climb considerably as well. The boost
to nominal yields on long-term Treasuries would be limited by any
reductions in premiums for expected inflation, but yield spreads on
private paper--including bank funding instruments--could widen if
market participants saw a significantly greater risk of a downturn in
business activity or if higher interest rates were seen as impairing
profit margins. Bond market volatility could be appreciable as market
participants attempted to sort out the implications of unanticipated
tightening for inflation, the strength of the expansion, and credit
risks. The dollar probably would strengthen noticeably, extending the
firming evident over the past week or so.
(12) The Committee might consider the easing of monetary
policy under alternative A appropriate if it saw substantial risks
that the recent sluggish growth of final demand and the associated
inventory correction could develop into a prolonged period of growth
below potential. In this view, the declines this year in the dollar
and market interest rates might not be adequate in themselves to sus-
tain the expansion, given underlying trends in aggregate demand. Real
rates could be seen as still too high; for example, the 6 percent
funds rate implies short-term real rates above longer-term averages,
assuming inflation settles down at 3 percent as in the staff forecast.
Committee members might have particular concerns about the level of
real rates if they perceived strong odds of a significantly tighter
stance of fiscal policy than is incorporated in the staff forecast.
Such a policy shift would lower "equilibrium" real interest rates by
directly reducing government spending and, perhaps, by increasing
private saving propensities. Markets do not currently appear to have
built in a trajectory to a balanced budget and would probably respond
to credible measures to reach this target by bidding down longer-term
yields. These declines would, by themselves, help to bolster activity
in the near term. To cushion the fiscal restraint adequately, how-
ever, declines in long-term rates might need to be reinforced through
an easing in monetary policy.
(13) Short-term market rates under alternative A would like-
ly drop close to one-half percentage point. Long-term markets could
rally further and lower rates would persist, at least until economic
data pointed to a vigorous bounceback in economic activity. The
foreign exchange value of the dollar would decline.
(14) Growth of the monetary and credit aggregates under the
unchanged reserve market conditions of alternative B is presented in
the table below. (Additional data, including monetary projections
under alternatives A and C, are shown on the table and charts on the
following pages.)
(15) Credit flows to private sectors are expected to moder-
ate a little in coming months in the staff projection, and be more
concentrated in long-term markets and less at depository institutions.
With the financial position of most intermediaries solid, borrowers
showing few signs of being overextended, and macroeconomic conditions
still favorable, lenders should remain quite willing to extend credit,
although further easing of terms and conditions is less likely as the
economy settles into a pattern of sustainable growth. Credit demands
Alt. B
Growth from April
to September
M2 2-1/2
M3 3-3/4
M1 -3/4
Domestic nonfinancial
sector debt 4-3/4
Growth from 94:Q4
to September
M2 2-1/4
M3 4-1/4
M1 -1/4
Domestic nonfinancial
sector debt 5
from the household sector should slow a little in association with the
diminished growth of spending on durables and housing. In the busi-
ness sector, the financing gap, while remaining wide, may narrow
slightly as inventory investment drops and growth of fixed investment
expenditures is trimmed, but merger activity will contribute to a
still-brisk (though diminishing) pace of borrowing. Lower market
interest rates and continued narrow quality spreads should encourage
a rebound in issuance of longer-term instruments, especially corporate
bonds, implying somewhat reduced reliance on bank loans and commercial
paper. Debt of state and local governments should continue to con-
tract, as bonds that had previously been refunded mature. In the
federal sector, strong tax receipts are leading to relatively light
borrowing in the second and third quarters. From the fourth quarter
of 1994 through September, the growth of domestic nonfinancial sector
debt is projected to edge down to about 5 percent under all of the
alternatives, leaving this aggregate in the middle of its 3-to-7 per-
cent monitoring range.
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
(16) M3 is projected to decelerate appreciably to a 3-3/4
percent pace over the April-September period. With business and
household credit growth running a bit slower than over the first few
months of the year and shifting toward longer-term markets, the growth
likely prompt a slackened pace of issuance of managed liabilities,
including large time deposits, repurchase agreements, and borrowings
from foreign offices. Nonetheless, M3 is projected to remain above
the upper end of its current 0-to-4 percent annual range through
September under alternative B, and even the tighter reserve market
conditions of alternative C would not likely be adequate to bring M3
within its range by September.
(17) M2 growth, by contrast, is projected to edge up slight-
ly from that of the previous four months, to a 2-1/2 percent pace over
April through September; this aggregate would remain in the lower half
of its l-to-5 percent annual range under alternative B. Although
slower growth of nominal income over the second and third quarters
will damp the demand for money, opportunity costs of holding M2 assets
have leveled off and begun to fall; as the depressing effects of
earlier increases in opportunity costs diminish, M2 should grow more
closely in line with income. M2 velocity is projected to continue
(Footnote continues on next page)
to rise over the second and third quarters, but at only a 1-1/2 per-
cent average annual rate--far more slowly than the 5 percent increase
over the previous four quarters. The projected growth rate of M2
averages just a bit below predictions of the standard staff model over
the second and third quarters--consistent with the recent small pre-
diction errors of the model and the staff's judgment that deposit
rates will run below what historical patterns would suggest. Flows
into stock and bond mutual funds are expected to continue at around
the modest pace experienced over the first four months of the year,
and M2+ is forecast to expand at about a 4 percent rate over the
April-September period, bringing its growth from the fourth quarter
of 1994 to 3-1/2 percent.
(Footnote continued from previous page)
projected to fall somewhat over the April-to-September period; the
monetary base is nevertheless expected to expand at about a 7-1/4
percent annual rate, supported by continued strong net shipments of
currency abroad.
Directive Language
(18) Presented below is draft wording for the operational
paragraph that includes the usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/main-
tain/INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. In the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, somewhat
(SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint would (MIGHT) or
(SOMEWHAT) slightly lesser reserve restraint (WOULD)
might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be con-
sistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming
May 19, 1995
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
May 94
Jun 94
Jul 94
Aug 94
Sep 94
Oct 94
Nov 94
Dec 94
Jan 95
Feb 95
Mar 95
Apr 95
Weekly
Feb 1 95
Feb 8 95
Feb 15 95
Feb 22 95
Mar 1 95
Mar 8 95
Mar 15 95
Mar 22 95
Mar 29 95
Apr 5 95
Apr 12 95
Apr 19 95
Apr 26 95
May 3 95
May 10 95
May 17 95
Daily
May 12 95
May 17 95
May 18 95
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
Seasonallyadjusted MAY 22,1995
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domi stic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactlons components
total loans
Period M1 M2 M3 L and U. S. other' total'
In M2 In M3 only Investments' government'
Levels tSbillions)
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Strictly Confidential (FR).
Class II FOMC
MAY 22, 1995
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
Money market
Overnight Small mutual funds Large
Other RPs and denoml- general denomi- Term Terhortterm ank
Period Currency D checkable Euro- nation purpose Institutions nation RP's Er- S avs Sreaial andeposits deposits dollars deposits, time and time NSA dolla bonds epaper ceS
_NSA__ dpot_ debroker o deposits$ NSAc
dealer'
Annual (Q4)
1992
1993
1994
Monthly
1994-APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR. p
p preliminary
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
Si Netpurhass agencies outright
Period Redemptions Net purcases Redemptions Net redemptions holdings
purchases (-) change 1 year 1-5 5-10 over 10 (-) Change ( total 4 Net RPs
Weekly
January 25
May 3
10
17
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
May 17
i00 11,486
--- 17,717
--- 17,484
--- 2,164
--- 6,639
--- 1,610
--- 7,071
-- _
asury and agency securities.
rchase transactions (-), and matched purchase sale transactions (+).
May 17
within
1 year 1-5 5-10 over 10 total
May 19, 1995
