Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential FR
Class I - FOMC September 22, 1995
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Over the intermeeting period, the federal funds rate
averaged 5-3/4 percent, the Committee's intended level.1  Other
market interest rates fell appreciably over most of the period, though
they have reversed a portion of those declines in recent days. On
net, yields on short-term Treasury securities decreased 15 to 25 basis
points and longer-term Treasury yields dropped about 35 basis points.
Lower interest rates, together with optimism about prospects for cor-
porate earnings and a continued brisk pace of merger announcements and
share buybacks, propelled broad stock price indexes to record levels
during the period, though they have ended off their highs.
(2) Contributing to the drop in rates were further evidence
of subdued price pressures and indications that the rebound in output
growth would be modest; as a consequence, the gradual fall-off in
inflation expectations evidenced in survey data in recent years prob-
ably has been extended (chart). Greater confidence that the budget
process would produce a significant reduction in federal deficits may
also have fostered declines in rates. Changes in forward rates,
which--atypically--dropped as much at longer horizons as at inter-
mediate horizons, are consistent with the inference of downward revi-
sions to market forecasts of the secular paths of federal deficits and
inflation. Market participants see a greater likelihood of further
monetary policy easing over the balance of the year now than they did
in mid-August, but little chance of a move at the September meeting.
In recent days, expectations of ease have been trimmed and market
rates have backed up, associated in part with a reversal of previous
dollar strength.
(3) The dollar's weighted-average exchange value declined
ing; the dollar rose 2-1/2 percent against the yen but fell against
other major currencies. For most of the period, the weighted-average
dollar had moved higher, owing in part to monetary easings abroad.
German short- and long-term rates declined about 35 and 15 basis
points, respectively, as the Bundesbank reduced its official lending
rates by 1/2 percentage point. The Bank of Japan lowered its discount
rate 1/2 percentage point and call money rates nearly as much on
September 8. Japanese bond yields declined substantially, reversing
much of the backup in earlier weeks. The Japanese policy easing was
accompanied by massive intervention to strengthen the dollar against
the yen, which was apparently successful at least for a time. Aug-
menting the dollar's rise against the yen were Japanese trade figures
for July, which showed Japan's current account surplus finally turning
down in dollar terms. Late in the period, however, the yen reversed
course after the announcement of the new Japanese fiscal package, and
the mark rose as prospects for European monetary union seemed to dim;
the dollar declined against other major currencies as well. Dollar
weakness may have been exacerbated by concern about the possibility of
a default by the U.S. Treasury on its debt.
The U.S. monetary authorities did
not intervene during the period.
(4) Private debt growth appears to have moderated in recent
months from the pace set earlier this year. The expansion of business
loans at commercial banks slowed to an annual rate of just 3 percent
in August, owing in part to stronger commercial paper issuance, and
has remained sluggish this month. Issuance of corporate bonds in
public markets also was light in August; a resurgence has been evident
in the first half of September in response to declining interest
rates, and the calendar of pending issues is full. In the household
sector, bank loan data adjusted for securitizations indicate that
consumer credit growth has continued to decelerate. Home mortgage
borrowing, however, likely has been buoyed by declining interest rates
and stronger home sales. Credit supply conditions remain favorable.
Banks still seem to be eager providers of funds to businesses, where
delinquency rates remain low, and spreads of loan rates over market
rates continued to narrow this summer. In the household sector, how-
ever, some evidence of rising debt service difficulties appears to be
prompting a shift toward a less aggressive stance by banks. In the
open markets, yield spreads on junk bonds have widened slightly but
remain relatively low, and spreads on higher-rated private paper rela-
tive to Treasuries have stayed narrow. Federal debt has been about
flat over August and September, as the Treasury has financed the
deficit mainly by drawing down its cash balance. Total domestic
nonfinancial sector debt rose at only a 3-1/4 percent annual rate in
August, bringing growth from the fourth quarter to 5-1/2 percent, near
the middle of its 3-to-7 percent annual range.
(5) The broad monetary aggregates have decelerated somewhat
in September, though their trend growth remains fairly strong. M2
and M3 are estimated to be expanding this month at rates of 3-3/4 and
ably above the upper ends of their annual ranges. The velocities of
the broad aggregates appear to have fallen significantly in the
current quarter as they did in the second quarter, marking the first
back-to-back declines in more than four years. The drop in market
interest rates, and associated declines in the opportunity costs of M2
assets, seems to be the primary factor behind the decline in the
velocity of this aggregate, which is being mirrored in sluggish
demands for some instruments outside of M2. Net noncompetitive
tenders for Treasury securities, for example, have turned negative
since earlier this year, and flows into bond mutual funds have
remained anemic. Purchases of shares in stock funds, however, have
stayed heavy.2 M3 growth has continued to be supported by brisk
issuance of the managed liabilities included in the aggregates as well
as by institution-only money funds.
(6) In contrast to the broader aggregates, M1 growth has been
quite weak in recent months; this aggregate has contracted at a 4-1/2
percent pace in September and has fallen 1 percent at an annual rate
since the fourth quarter of 1994. M1 has been depressed appreciably
this year by the introduction by additional banks of programs to sweep
NOW account balances into nonreservable MMDAs. Apart from the effects
of such sweep accounts, M1 has expanded at an estimated 2-1/2 percent
rate in September and at a 1-1/2 percent rate for the year to date.
(A more detailed discussion of OCD sweep arrangements and their ef-
fects on the monetary and reserve aggregates appears in an appendix.)
Currency growth has remained moderate in September, perhaps reflecting
a continuation of slower net shipments of U.S. currency abroad.3
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV
to
Jul Aug. Sept. Sept.
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial
debt 3.0 3.3 -- 5.5
Federal 4.1 1.9 -- 5.1
Nonfederal 2.6 3.9 -- 5.7
Bank credit 3.2 5.3 -- 8.8
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 371 282 272
Excess reserves 1090 985 935
Policy Alternatives
(7) The incoming information since the last FOMC meeting has
not altered the general patterns of the staff economic forecast. The
staff projection assumes no change in the federal funds rate until
late in 1996, with bond yields foreseen as staying around their recent
lower levels. Output is still projected to expand at a pace just
below that of its potential through the end of next year, while the
unemployment rate drifts up to 6 percent. The staff projects infla-
tion in the CPI to come in a little below 3 percent this year and
next; with the level of output slightly below its potential in 1996,
core CPI inflation moderates a little next year. The staff outlook
for output growth and unemployment is consistent with the central ten-
dencies of the July forecasts of the Governors and Presidents for
these two years. The outcomes for the total CPI would undershoot the
central tendency for this year but would be well within the central
tendency specified for next year. In 1997, the staff's forecast of
economic growth in the 2 percent area and CPI inflation around this
year's pace is accompanied by a slight easing in the nominal funds
rate at the end of 1996.
(8) The staff forecast assumes that aggregate spending is not
significantly disrupted in the process of determining the new federal
budget. The first potential difficulty occurs over the intermeeting
period when budget authority for annual appropriations expires on
October 1. However, Congress and the Administration are discussing
continuing resolutions that would permit spending while negotiations
are ongoing. In any case, a lapse in appropriations, even if it were
to persist for several weeks, would not have much direct effect on
GDP. in part because a considerable volume of government spending
would persist. Moreover, multiplier effects are likely to be minimal
as government employees draw on savings to maintain consumption
levels in the face of a temporary income loss. With normal government
spending and revenue patterns disrupted, however, projections of the
Treasury balance, and hence reserve supply, would be more uncertain.
(9) The staff currently estimates that a cash constraint
owing to the debt ceiling will become binding on November 15--the date
of the next scheduled FOMC meeting--assuming no unprecedented steps by
the Treasury to avoid default. A default on federal debt, even if
interest on accrued obligations were paid belatedly, would add a risk
premium to interest rates on Treasury debt. The impact on private
securities markets is difficult to predict. On the one hand, default
risk on private issues would not necessarily increase, and indeed,
demands for these securities may benefit as substitutions for Trea-
suries. On the other hand, market psychology could deteriorate, with
some possibility of a more generalized flight from dollar assets. In
addition, in the event of default, innumerable problems of clearing
and settlement could arise and the liquidity position of individual
transactors counting on timely Treasury payments could be impaired.
Either a shutdown or a default would necessitate a more flexible pro-
vision of liquidity by the Federal Reserve--both through open market
operations and the discount window. Whether an adjustment to the
stance of policy itself might be warranted by such developments might
be seen as best determined on the basis of information available at
the time.
(10) The case for keeping the funds rate at 5-3/4 percent as
under alternative B could rest on an assessment that the current funds
rate may well provide the appropriate monetary impulse, at least for
the time being. The staff forecast could be viewed as representing
both a likely occurrence under a stable funds rate, even with the
substantial fiscal restraint assumed, and a satisfactory balance be-
tween the Committee's inflation and employment objectives. Moreover,
with the dollar recently under downward pressures, and financial mar-
kets looking for clues as to how the Federal Reserve evaluates and
will respond to the evolving fiscal situation, any change in the
stance of policy could risk market overreaction and misinterpretation.
Under these conditions, even if the Committee saw some odds that the
economy or inflation would come in below the staff forecast, it might
choose to stand pat until easing was more clearly called for by incom-
ing economic data.
(11) Although the data received over the intermeeting period
have strengthened market participants' conviction that Federal Reserve
easing has become more likely by year-end, only a small probability of
a move at the September meeting is seen. Thus, choice by the Commit-
tee of alternative B's unchanged funds rate likely would engender just
a minor increase of short-term rates. Any immediate reaction in bond
or foreign exchange markets should be muted. Over the upcoming inter-
meeting period, economic reports consistent with the subdued growth in
the staff forecast could keep alive expectations of subsequent mone-
tary easing, allowing intermediate- and long-term interest rates to
remain near current trading ranges. The exchange value of the dollar
would be little changed. Of course, markets may be buffeted by
developments in the legislative process suggesting shifting odds on
the extent of deficit reduction.
(12) If the Committee saw reasonably high odds of more
restrictive effects on the economy than the staff forecast, it might
favor an easing of the funds rate, as under alternative A. Such
effects would come at a time when the economy already is expected to
be expanding at a rate less than the growth rate of its potential and
with monetary policy possibly seen as also on the restrictive side.
In July, the Committee reversed only a portion of the move toward
policy restraint it made last winter when the risks to the economy of
rising inflation were much larger. Real rates across the maturity
spectrum remain elevated by historical standards, though, to be sure,
the level of equilibrium real rates is uncertain. Moreover, real
rates could move up a little further over time with an unchanged funds
rate, as current expectations of a policy ease were frustrated.
(13) The downward adjustment of short-term market interest
rates that would accompany the unanticipated implementation of alter-
native A would be a little smaller than the 1/2 percentage point cut
in the funds rate operating target. Market participants may well
interpret the action as responding to prospective fiscal restraint or
to receding inflation pressures, so inflation expectations might not
react adversely. On the other hand, they are not likely to project
significant further rate cuts pending new information on these fac-
tors, limiting rate decreases. On balance, the associated declines in
intermediate- and longer-term interest rates probably would be smaller
than the fall in short-term rates, which is the historically typical
market reaction. The dollar's exchange value could be expected to
extend its most recent decline.
(14) The 1/2 percentage point policy tightening of alterna-
tive C could be favored if the inflation performance projected by the
staff to accompany an unchanged federal funds rate were seen as repre-
senting an insufficiently rapid approach to the Committee's ultimate
objective of price stability. Indeed, the staff forecast shows very
little downward tilt to inflation rates. Moreover, the current un-
employment rate is a little below the staff's estimate of the NAIRU,
and economic growth going forward at a pace below potential is by no
means assured--especially in light of current bond rates and stock
prices. On the basis of relationships embodied in the Greenbook
alternative simulation, a policy tightening of the dimensions of
alternative C would nudge economic growth to below 2 percent over the
next two years, opening up enough slack in labor and product markets
to make more noticeable progress toward price stability in 1997 and
(15) The 1/2 percentage point hike in the funds rate of
alternative C would catch market participants off guard. Their inter-
pretation of the action, of course, would be conditioned by the word-
ing of the accompanying announcement, which presumably would emphasize
more aggressive pursuit of the Committee's longer-run price stability
objective. In that context, the sharp jump in money market interest
rates may be accompanied by a much more muted increase in bond yields,
if longer-term inflation expectations were favorably affected. If the
impact on inflation expectations were negligible, though, an appreci-
able selloff in the bond market could result. In any event, some
intermediate-term rates--real and nominal--would rise significantly as
market participants revised up their expected path for short-term
rates for some time into the future. The exchange value of the dollar
likely would strengthen.
(16) Without serious disruptions to governmental operations,
federal debt growth should slow from its pace earlier in the year to a
federal debt growth would continue at a 4-1/4 percent pace over the
same interval. For businesses, borrowing will remain below the first
half of the year, held down by lower inventory investment and slower
growth in capital spending; the composition of borrowing, however,
should tilt back toward the bond market. For households, some pickup
in mortgage borrowing should counter a further moderation in consumer
credit. Concerning credit supply conditions, banks remain comfortably
positioned to lend, although the growing strains on households may
lead to a little more caution in this area. As shown in the table be-
low, total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to ex-
pand at a 4 percent rate over the final four months of this year,
placing this aggregate in the fourth quarter a little more than 5 per-
cent above its year-earlier level.
Implied
Sept. to1  1994-Q4 1995
December to 1995-Q4 Ranges
(17) The broad monetary aggregates are expected to grow over
the remainder of this year somewhat more rapidly than forecasted in
the last bluebook. The additional projected strength primarily owes
to the recent decline in market interest rates, both short- and long-
term, which has further narrowed the opportunity costs of holding
retail money balances.4 Under alternative B, M2 is projected to
grow at a 5-3/4 percent rate over the final three months of the year.
M3 is foreseen as expanding at a 6 percent rate, somewhat faster than
the staff's projection of bank credit expansion, reflecting the an-
ticipated ongoing shift from nondeposit to deposit sources of funding.
In the fourth quarter, the velocities of both monetary aggregates
would continue to decline, albeit at a reduced pace. M2 in the fourth
quarter would be quite near the top of its 1 to 5 percent annual
growth cone, while M3 would be well above its 2 to 6 percent annual
growth range. (A table showing the growth rates of the monetary
aggregates over the balance of the year under each of the alternatives
is attached.)
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in Billions
Jul-95
Aug-95
Sep-95
Oct-95
Nov-95
Dec-95
Monthly Growth Rates
Jul-95
Aug-95
Sep-95
Oct-95
Nov-95
Dec-95
Quarterly Averages
95 Ql
95 Q2
95 Q3
95 Q4
Growth Rate
From
Dec-94
Jun-95
Sep-95
To
Sep-95
Sep-95
Dec-95
Directive Language
(18) Presented below is draft wording for the operational
paragraph that includes the usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE (SOMEWHAT/
SLIGHTLY)/maintain/INCREASE (SOMEWHAT/SLIGHTLY) the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. In
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater
reserve restraint (WOULD/MIGHT) or slightly (SOMEWHAT)
lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable in
the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve con-
ditions are expected to be consistent with [DEL: more moderate]
growth in M2 and M3 over [DEL: coming months] THE BALANCE OF
THE YEAR NEAR THE PACE OF RECENT MONTHS.
Appendix: Sweeps of Transaction Deposits into MMDAs
In January 1994, commercial banks began instituting sweep
programs for retail customers. In such programs, household NOW
account balances (included in the "other checkable deposits" (OCD)
component of M1) are swept into money market deposit accounts (MMDAs).
Retail sweeps of this nature legally reduce a bank's required re-
serves. Assuming a 10 percent marginal reserve requirement and in-
vestment of the reserve balances freed by the sweep at a 5-3/4 percent
federal funds rate, a bank earns 58 basis points of interest per dol-
lar swept. Improvements in automation over the years have reduced the
cost of installing and operating the software required for such a
system, making this financial innovation advantageous for many in-
While information about the detailed features of retail sweep
programs is not available from many of the banks that have implemented
them, the typical program appears to be structured as follows. The
bank sets up two separate subaccounts for each depositor, a NOW
account and a special-purpose MMDA. Each night, any funds in the NOW
account in excess of some upper limit, say $1,000, are transferred to
the MMDA. If debits to the NOW account threaten to reduce its balance
below zero, enough funds are transferred back from the MMDA to re-
plenish the NOW account to a $1,000 balance. While there are no
limits on transfers out of NOW accounts, only six transfers per month
out of MMDAs are permitted under Regulation D. Because of that limit,
if a sixth transfer is made from the MMDA to the NOW account within
the same statement month, then the entire remaining balance is
transferred and no further sweeps from the NOW account to the MMDA
occur until the following month.
Recently, two banks reported an alternative type of program
in which all balances in NOW accounts are swept into MMDAs each Friday
night, and returned to the NOW accounts on Monday. With a maximum of
five Mondays per month, there is no risk of triggering a sixth trans-
fer. This "weekend-sweep" reduces OCD balances to zero for three-
sevenths of each week--implying a smaller reduction in OCDs than the
is very simple to implement.
Through edit checks and other reports from Reserve Banks,
Board staff have learned of the existence of retail sweep programs at
banks within a holding company.2 No data are available on the
ongoing amount of funds that reside in MMDA accounts as a result of
sweep activity. However, Board staff have tallied estimates of the
total volume of balances swept out of OCD accounts on the day each
program was implemented. The cumulative estimated impact effects
through September 1995 are $34 billion.3
The creation of retail sweep programs has no effect on M2,
since OCD balances are being swept into MMDAs, which are themselves a
component of M2. However, adjustments need to be made to narrow
measures of money and to reserves to avoid misinterpretations arising
from new sweep programs. Such adjustments are reported below, based
on cumulative impact effects.
Before Adjustment
After Adjustment
Net Sweep Effect
Before Adjustment
After Adjustment
Net Sweep Effect
Monetary Total
M1 OCD Base Reserves
(percentage annual rates of growth)
-------- (1993:Q4 to 1994:Q4)---------
- .9 -2.4 - .3 -1.6
----- (1994:Q4 to September 1995)-----
As shown, the establishment of sweep programs reduced the
growth rate of M1 by about a percentage point in 1994, and by about
September of 1995. The growth rate of total reserves was lowered by
an estimated 1-1/2 percentage points in 1994 and 4-3/4 percentage
points so far this year. Because currency represents a large share of
the monetary base, OCD sweeps have had considerably less effect on
growth of the base--only 1/4 percentage point in 1994 and 3/4 percent-
age point so far in 1995.
While Board staff are aware of several other banking organi-
zations that are considering the implementation of retail sweep pro-
grams, it is unclear how far this innovation will spread. Small banks
who can meet reserve requirements entirely with vault cash would gain
nothing from it, and banks with a 3 percent marginal reserve require-
ment might not find it cost effective.4 If sweeps were implemented
only by banks that had ex ante a 10 percent marginal reserve require-
ment and were required to hold balances at the Federal Reserve, then
OCD would be reduced by perhaps another $160 billion, assuming that
about three-quarters of such balances are swept on average. Required
reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve would be reduced from the
current level of about $20 billion to $7 billion in consequence.
This may be a high estimate of OCD sweep effects, as it includes some
large banks having no interest in reducing required reserves, since
they hold Federal Reserve balances on the margin for clearing pur-
However, the new sweeping techniques may not be applied only
to NOW accounts. One institution recently began sweeping a small
amount of personal demand deposits into MMDAs, and there is no real
impediment to the spread of this innovation to corporate demand
deposits as well. (Given the uncertainty of corporate payment flows,
weekend sweeps may be the technique banks come to use to avoid the
reserve requirement tax on demand deposits.) If sweeps of both OCD
and demand deposits become widespread, required reserve balances held
at Federal Reserve Banks could fall to a very low level.
Major declines in required reserve balances and associated
structural changes in reserve demand would have important effects on
the maximum volume of deposits ($50 million) subject to the 3 percent
reserve requirement, they were all OCD, and 80 percent were swept, the
maximum potential earning would amount to $70,000 annually.
the implementation of monetary policy, and could potentially increase
substantially the volatility of the federal funds rate.
Depositories hold balances at the Federal Reserve to meet
reserve requirements, to make payments, and to access Federal Reserve
services. Overdrafts can occur because of large unpredictable trans-
actions between a bank's customers and the customers of other banks.
Required reserve balances provide some cushion against the risk of
overdrafts. If such balances fall persistently below the levels
needed for clearing purposes, a bank may choose to establish a re-
quired clearing balance, which earns credits against priced Federal
Reserve services. When the marginal dollars in reserve accounts are
being held to meet required reserves or required clearing balances,
banks have considerable flexibility in managing balances at the
Federal Reserve from a day to day. Because such requirements are met
on a two-week average basis, banks can arbitrage the federal funds
rate within days and across days, and, given carryover, across
maintenance periods to a limited extent. This flexibility is an
important reason why the funds rate remains close to the FOMC's
desired levels.
However, a bank can benefit from required clearing balances
only to the extent that it uses Federal Reserve services.6  If
required balances in total are low, a bank's reserve management will
be dominated by the daily risk of overdrafts, rather than by the need
to meet two-week average requirements. It may, for example, seek
excess reserves in the form of precautionary balances early in the day
and late-day balances to cover unexpected payments. Depending on the
distribution of reserves among banks and the degree to which credit
lines in the federal funds market have already been filled, the funds
rate could become quite volatile late each business day, as some banks
try to work down unneeded precautionary balances while others scramble
to line up funding for clearing needs. Furthermore, predicting the
aggregate reserves needed on a daily basis at the time of the Desk's
reserve demands are based on daily, and even intraday, needs rather
than the more smoothly-evolving estimates of maintenance-period
average demands for required balances.
Heightened volatility in the federal funds rate was evident
in early 1991, after the Federal Reserve reduced to zero the reserve
requirements on nontransaction deposits. The upper panel of chart A-1
shows the sharp increases in the intraday trading ranges of the
federal funds rate at that time.7  However, funds rate volatility
declined rather quickly as banks adjusted to the lower level of re-
quired reserves (in part by establishing required clearing balances),
and as required reserves themselves grew rapidly along with M1
deposits in the declining interest rate environment.
As shown in the lower panel, the extreme volatility of the
funds rate in early 1991 was associated with an unusually low level of
required operating balances, the sum of required reserve and required
clearing balances. While such balances are currently several billion
dollars above the lows reached in 1991, they could drop well below
such levels by the time the new sweep programs have become fully
Chart A-1
Intraday Federal Funds Rate Trading Range
(Maintenance Period Averages)
Percentage Points
Required Operating Balances
(Maintenance Period Averages)
Billions of Dollars
- 25
- 20
However, the current wave of transaction account sweeps is
unlike the experience of early 1991 in several respects. The 1991
reserve requirement cut was an industry-wide change implemented by the
Federal Reserve without a long lead-time, while in contrast sweep
programs are being established voluntarily by commercial banks self-
selected for an interest in reserve management on schedules they them-
selves choose. Moreover, improvements in reserve management since
early 1991, including greater awareness of the advantages of estab-
lishing required clearing balances, may mitigate the impact of the new
sweeps on federal funds rate volatility.
Nevertheless, the uncertainties are considerable. Staff at
the Board and the Desk are closely monitoring the diffusion of this
financial innovation for signs of potential adverse effects on the
implementation of monetary policy, and have begun studying possible
modifications to regulations and operating procedures that could
mitigate any such effects.
September 25, 1995
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market I market
Monthly
Sep 94
Oct 94
Nov 94
Dec 94
Jan 95
Feb 95
Mar 95
Apr 95
May 95
Jun 95
Jul 95
Aug 95
Weekly
Jun 7 95
Jun 14 95
Jun 21 95
Jun 28 95
Jul 5 95
Jul 12 95
Jul 19 95
Jul 26 95
Aug 2 95
Aug 9 95
Aug 16 95
Aug 23 95
Aug 30 95
Sep 6 95
Sep 13 95
Sep 20 95
Daily
Sep 15 95
Sep 21 95
Sep 22 95
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
Seasonlyaduted SEPTEtMER25,1995Seasonallyadjusted
Money stock measures and liquid as: ets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactions components toal loanstotal loans
Period M1 M2 M3 L and U. S. other2  total'
In M2 In M3 only investments' government 2
Levels ($billions)
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class II FOMC
SEPTEMBER 25, 1995
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
Money market
Overnight Small mutual funds Large
Other RPs and denomi- general denomi- Term Term Short-term Bankers
Period ur rency Demand checkable Euro- avings nation e Insttutons naton Rs Euro- Savings rer Commerci an
deposits deposits dollars deposits time and only time NSA seurities acceptan-
NSA' deposits brokert deposits NSA'
uevej8a b ao ions)
Annual (04)
Monthly
1994-AUG.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG. p
p preliminary
September 22,1995
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
Net purchases 3 agencies outrightPeriod Net 2 Redemptions Net t puRedemptions Net redemptions holdings 5
purchases (-) change 1 year 1-5 5-10 over 10 (-) Change total 4 Net RPs
Weekly
June 7
September 6
13
20
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
September 20
--- 2,164
-- ,639
- 2,549
--- 200
25 2,208
asury and agency securities.
irchase transactions (-), and matched purchase sale transactions (+).
within
1 year 1-5 5-10 over 10 total
