Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC January 27, 1995
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The federal funds rate averaged close to the intended
level of 5-1/2 percent during the intermeeting period. In the
days approaching year-end, the Desk met heavy reserve demands by re-
peatedly arranging overlapping term System RPs. In the event, the
federal funds rate averaged a little below 5-1/2 percent on the last
trading day of the year, and year-end pressures in the money markets
were not atypical. Reserve demands remained substantial into the
first few days of the new year, and the Desk continued to arrange
System RPs in size.
(2) Economic data released since the last FOMC meeting were
broadly in line with market participants' expectations of high and
rising levels of resource utilization and continued robust growth in
output. However, some unexpected softening in indicators of final
demand, surprisingly good price performance, and Mexico's difficulties
prompted market participants to push back and trim somewhat the
trajectory of expected monetary tightening, as shown in Chart 1.
Consequently, many short- and long-term rates declined 15 to 20 basis
points over the intermeeting period.2 Nonetheless, markets con-
tinued to anticipate further substantial monetary tightening, and the
yield curve remained steeply upward sloped through the first few
years. Political discussion of sharp cuts in outlays to conform with
the requirements of a balanced budget amendment appears to have had
little effect to date in markets.
(3) Skittishness in domestic financial markets seemed to
diminish during the intermeeting period. In the tax-exempt market,
concerns waned about the implications of the Orange County problems
for the financial condition of other municipal governments, abetting a
considerable decline in tax-exempt yields. Some quality spreads on
private paper had widened slightly before year-end as investors sought
to move toward safer instruments in anticipation of the publication of
their year-end financial statements; after the turn of the year,
spreads retraced that movement, leaving them generally quite narrow.
Spillover effects from Mexico's difficulties into U.S. financial
markets to date have been quite limited. Outflows from emerging-
market stock and bond mutual funds picked up for a while. But U.S.
banks with exposure to Mexico generally have experienced little net
change in their share prices and no unusual difficulties in raising
funds on wholesale markets. Expected bond market volatility inferred
from options prices fluctuated around the lower levels established
late last fall: on balance, measures of volatility have rolled back
most of their runup since February. Boosted by strong earnings re-
ports for the fourth quarter, broad stock price indexes rose 2 to 5
percent over the intermeeting period, bringing most within a few
percent of record highs.
(4) The dollar's weighted average exchange value against
G-10 currencies declined 2-1/2 percent over the intermeeting period.
The dollar may have been held down by uncertainty about the implica-
tions for the U.S. economy of the Mexican economic and financial tur-
moil, perhaps including the possibility that the Federal Reserve would
feel constrained in responding to U.S. inflation pressures. The dol-
lar declined nearly 4 percent against the mark, which was also buoyed
by safe-haven demand against weaker European currencies. Against the
yen, the dollar depreciated only 1 percent, with the strength of the
yen limited by the negative effects of the earthquake damage, which
also sent Japanese stocks 6-1/2 percent lower. Interest rates in
foreign industrial countries were little changed, on average. The
Mexican peso depreciated about 40 percent against the U.S. dollar,
Mexican interest rates soared, and the stock market declined 10 per-
cent in peso terms; in Argentina and Brazil, equity indexes declined
around 20 percent. The Canadian markets were also under pressure
because of concerns about the fiscal situation and Quebec separatism:
Canadian short- and long-term rates rose 125 and 20 basis points,
respectively, as the Canadian dollar fell a further 1-3/4 percent
against the U.S. dollar.
(5) The monetary data in this bluebook incorporate new
benchmark and seasonal adjustments. These data confirm that M2
grew 1.0 percent from 1993:Q4 to 1994:Q4, at the lower end of its
(Footnote continues on next page)
a little more than previously estimated, leaving this aggregate well
within its 0-to-4 percent annual range. With both aggregates continu-
ing to expand sluggishly relative to nominal income, their velocities
increased substantially again in 1994. In contrast to the previous
few years, the increase in velocities appears attributable primarily
to rising opportunity costs resulting from the increases in short-term
market rates rather than to portfolio shifts into bond and stock
mutual funds. Over the year as a whole, flows into such funds were
far smaller than in 1992 and 1993. With bond prices falling during
the year, M2 plus the value of bond and stock mutual funds rose an
estimated 1 percent in 1994, well below its average of 5-1/4 percent
in the previous two years, and its velocity surged after exhibiting
little change on balance over the previous several years.
(6) Growth in the monetary aggregates was stronger over
December and January than had been anticipated at the time of the last
FOMC meeting, with M2 and M3 expanding at 3-1/4 and 4-3/4 percent
rates, respectively, over the two months.5 Much of the pickup in
M2, however, was in its most volatile components--demand deposits,
overnight RPs, and overnight Eurodollars; no factors have been iden-
tified to explain these increases. Excluding the contribution from
(Footnote continued from previous page)
deposits were also restrained by declining mortgage refinancing
activity, and other checkable deposits by the introduction of sweep
account programs by two large regional bank holding companies. To-
gether, these two factors are estimated to have depressed M1 growth by
around 3 percentage points in 1994. Acting to strengthen M1 were
continued strong demands from abroad for U.S. currency, which helped
maintain overall currency growth at 1993's rate of 10-1/4 percent.
those instruments, M2 eked out a 1-1/4 percent gain. Underlying pat-
terns of monetary growth extended those seen over 1994. The more
liquid accounts remained anemic, consistent with the very sluggish
increases in their interest rates, while small time deposits expanded
briskly. Data on bond and stock funds, although difficult to
interpret owing to large cash distributions around year end, suggest
continued weakness in demand for these investment vehicles. 7 This
weakness does not appear to have boosted the growth of the monetary
aggregates, but rather was reflected in direct investment in market
instruments, as indicated by continued strong noncompetitive tenders
at Treasury auctions. Institution-only money funds jumped in January,
contributing to the acceleration of M3. With the slow expansion in
retail deposits, depository institutions continued to bid for whole-
sale funding to finance relatively robust growth of bank credit.
(7) As in much of 1994, the debt of nonfinancial sectors in
recent months is estimated to have grown at a moderate pace--below
that of nominal GDP--and borrowers have continued to rely signifi-
cantly on shorter-term sources of funds. In the business sector, C&I
loans have expanded at a brisk pace in each of the last two months,
buoyed in part by lending to support merger and acquisition activity.
Supply conditions for business credit at banks have become even more
favorable: Senior loan officers at a significant number of banks
reported a further easing of terms on business loans over the three
months ending in December, although only a few institutions reduced
their standards further. Issuance of commercial paper has also stayed
strong in the last two months. With longer-term rates near their
recent peaks, however, gross offerings of corporate bonds have been
light. Issuance of tax-exempt bonds has been slow and, and owing to
sizable retirements, municipal debt outstanding appears to have con-
tracted in the last two months. In the household sector, data on bank
loans suggest that growth in consumer installment and mortgage credit
was strong in December and January. With a lull in federal borrowing,
overall domestic nonfinancial sector debt expanded at a 4 percent
annual rate in December, bringing the increase for 1994 to 5-1/4 per-
cent, in the lower half of the 4-to-8 percent monitoring range for
this aggregate.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Dec. Jan. 94:Q4 Jan.
Money and credit aggregates 1
Domestic nonfinancial
debt 4.2 -- 5.3
Federal 1.2 -- 5.7
Nonfederal 5.3 -- 5.1
Reserve measures 2
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 209 94
Excess reserves 1147 1203
Long-Run Scenarios
(8) This section addresses several issues related to longer-
run strategies for monetary policy and their interaction with underly-
ing macroeconomic conditions. The first set of scenarios examines two
alternative strategies for monetary policy. The strategies embed
different assumptions about the economic outcomes that the Committee
would find acceptable but assume the same underlying macroeconomic
forces and relationships. The baseline strategy begins with the
Greenbook's baseline projection for 1995 and 1996; it envisions a
gradual rise in the unemployment rate to its natural rate by 2000 to
cap inflation, which levels off at about 3-1/2 percent. The tighter
strategy extends the Greenbook's "alternative simulation" and puts
inflation on a downward path consistent with achieving price stability
early in the next decade. The next two sets of scenarios involve
alternative assumptions about fiscal policy and the level of the
natural rate of unemployment.
(9) A key assumption behind most of the scenarios, including
the baseline, is a sharp turn toward fiscal restraint to put the bud-
get in balance by the year 2002. Based on current-service projections
that show the deficit rising above $300 billion early in the next
decade, such a fiscal policy would require average incremental cuts
of roughly $45 billion per year over the next seven years (we have
assumed $20 billion in FY 1996 and slightly more than $45 billion
thereafter). The effect of this fiscal restraint is to trim equili-
brium real interest rates over time by about 1-1/2 percentage points.
In the baseline, the reduction in long-term rates in response to fis-
cal restraint occurs gradually over time, consistent with a view that
the deficit reduction process will gain credibility only as cuts in
outlays are actually legislated. Such an assumption is consistent
with market uncertainty about the eventual ratification of the
balanced budget amendment by the states or skepticism that adequate
steps actually will be taken to implement it. Of course, it is pos-
sible that long-term rates might move sooner and by more in anticipa-
tion of substantial forthcoming fiscal restraint, with potential im-
plications for the conduct of monetary policy that are discussed
(10) The staff econometric model of the U.S. and foreign
economies was used to derive the effects relative to the baseline of
the differing assumptions about monetary policy, fiscal policy, and
the labor market. That model embodies neither a productivity bonus in
the long run from permanently reducing inflation nor forward-looking
expectations. Thus, it does not allow for special effects from mone-
tary or fiscal policy credibility. On the supply side of the model as
well as in the baseline, the natural rate of unemployment is assumed
to be 6 percent and the growth rate of potential GDP to be just under
one percentage point, the slack in the labor market tends to reduce
the inflation rate by about 1/2 percentage point.
(11) Under the baseline strategy, the Committee maintains
the federal funds rate at 5-1/2 percent until mid-1998 (Chart 2 and
the table below). With the unemployment rate currently 1/2 percentage
point below its natural rate, the increases in inflation believed to
be already in train would lower real short-term interest rates 75
basis points by mid-1998. But this decline in the real funds rate
does not stimulate activity because the model's estimated equilibrium
real rate falls even faster from the effects of ongoing deficit
reduction. In the latter part of the simulation period, actual and
equilibrium real rates move into rough alignment and the unemployment
rate stabilizes at 6 percent. Meanwhile, the protracted overshoot of
(QIV TO QIV percent change)
CPI inflation--excluding
baseline 2.8
tighter 2.8
Nominal GDP growth
baseline 6.6
tighter 6.6
Real GDP growth
(fourth-quarter level,
(QIV to QIV percent
baseline
tighter
(fourth-quarter level, percent)
Federal funds rate
baseline
tighter
output beyond its potential pushes the inflation rate to 3-1/2 percent
late in the decade. The drop in real interest rates lowers the
Should financial market participants come to be convinced of the ul-
timate scope of fiscal restraint more promptly than is assumed in the
baseline, long-term interest rates could come under substantial down-
ward pressure in the near term. Absent cutbacks by households and
businesses in anticipation of prospective income losses, output would
be boosted further beyond its potential and inflation would rise
unless policy tightened.
(12) Progress toward price stability under the tighter
policy involves raising the federal funds rate to 7 percent by 1995:Q3
and holding it there through the first half of 1996. This rise in the
federal funds rate appears to be about what is built into the current
term structure of market yields, but its effects on unemployment and
inflation are greater than market participants appear to be anticipat-
ing. The relatively weaker economic activity reflects both the
staff's assumption of tighter fiscal policy and its assessment of less
strength in underlying private demands than appear to be embodied in
market forecasts. Against the backdrop of these underlying forces,
policy action raises the real federal funds rate substantially above
its equilibrium level, producing sufficient slack in the economy to
bring the inflation rate down toward price stability by the end of the
simulation period. In an effort to limit overshooting, the Committee
eases the nominal funds rate beginning in mid-1996 to keep pace with
the decline in inflation and with the ongoing effects of fiscal con-
traction. By the end of the simulation period, the inflation rate has
declined to 1-3/4 percent. The initial degree of tightening required
to achieve this inflation outcome would have to be even greater if
long-term rates tended to decline in anticipation of deficit reduction
without offsetting decreases in private demands.
(13) The alternative scenario presented in Chart 3 considers
some of the consequences if the fiscal restraint implied by the
balanced-budget program never materializes. In these circumstances,
the Committee would have to raise the federal funds rate about a per-
centage point over coming years just to keep the inflation rate from
rising beyond the 3-1/2 percent endpoint of the baseline. Federal
funds rates appreciably above 7 percent for a time would be required
to make significant progress on inflation.
(14) The lack of a pickup of inflation yet, even though the
unemployment rate has dropped to 5-1/2 percent, raises some question
about whether the natural rate of unemployment is lower than 6 per-
cent. Chart 4 considers the implications for monetary policy of a
the Committee can maintain a 5-1/2 percent funds rate for some time
and still make as much progress toward price stability as with much
higher interest rates when the natural rate is 6 percent. The higher
level of aggregate supply implies that real interest rates don't have
to be as high to restrain aggregate demand relative to the economy's
potential. Consequently, a given degree of slack in the economy and
pace of disinflation can be achieved with lower real interest rates.
Long-Run Ranges
(15) As background for discussion by the Committee of money
and debt ranges for 1995, the table below presents staff projections
of key money and debt aggregates and nominal GDP. Projections are
given for both the Greenbook baseline forecast, which assumes no
change in the federal funds rate through 1996, and for the Greenbook
alternative simulation based on a 150 basis point increase in the
federal funds rate by the end of the third quarter. These also cor-
respond to the baseline strategy and the tighter strategy in the pre-
vious section of this bluebook.
Staff Projections
1995 1996
Growth rates Actual Baseline Tighter Baseline Tighter
(Q4 to 04 1994 Strategy Strategy Strategy Strategy
Nonfederal
component 5.1 5-1/4 5 5-1/4 4-1/4
M1 2.3 1-1/2 0 3-1/2 1
Nominal GDP 6.4 4-3/4 4-1/2 5 3-1/2
(16) Under either strategy the growth in nominal GDP moder-
ates substantially in 1995. The higher short-term rates of the
tighter strategy are associated with an elevated path for long-term
rates as well, but much of their effects on spending is not felt until
relatively larger effects on the composition of financial flows this
year, and hence on some of the monetary aggregates under the two
(17) Despite the appreciable slowing in nominal GDP,
aggregate measures of nonfinancial debt are expected to increase at
roughly the same pace as in 1994 under the baseline forecast. Debt
velocity would flatten after several years of small increases (chart
remain intense given healthy lender capitalization, banks and other
institutional lenders are not likely to continue to ease standards and
shave already thin lending margins much further. Moreover, many
administered rates, such as those on consumer loans, will continue to
adjust higher in lagged response to earlier increases in market rates
and rising retail deposit costs. This may contribute to a slackening
in household borrowing, which will also be responding to sluggish
housing activity and a slowdown in growth in purchases of consumer
durables as a consequence of past increases in interest rates. But in
the business sector, borrowing should be well maintained, as advances
in capital outlays remain healthy while a flattening in profits con-
strains internal funds, and as stock retirements from mergers and
acquisitions and share buy-back programs continue to be financed in
part by debt. Even though bond issuance should pick up in 1995 as
bond rates move lower under the baseline forecast, the financing needs
of businesses are expected to remain focused on banks and the paper
market. And growth in the debt of state and local governments should
strengthen somewhat, owing primarily to fewer retirements of advance
refunded bonds. Debt of the federal government is projected to grow
about in line with that of nonfederal sectors as government spending
cuts hold down the size of the deficit. The higher interest rates and
moderation in spending associated with the tighter alternative should
damp the growth of private debt and focus borrowing even more on
short-term sources of funds. However, the federal government deficit
could be a little higher under this scenario, limiting the slowing of
overall debt growth.
(18) Continued strong lending at commercial banks and a
resumption of asset expansion at thrifts should show through to faster
M3 growth in 1995 under the Greenbook baseline. Indeed, M3 is pro-
jected to grow 3 percent in 1995, its most rapid rate of expansion
since 1989, producing the smallest rise in velocity since 1988. Re-
ductions in FDIC insurance premiums for commercial banks should lead
to lessened use of nondeposit funding sources outside M3, such as bor-
rowing from foreign offices. Also acting to boost M3 under the base-
line should be institution-only money funds, which are expected to
expand after running off sharply in 1994 in the wake of rising market
interest rates. Under the tighter alternative strategy, the increase
in rates would cause these money funds to drop further, damping M3
growth. Moreover, as in 1994, rising rates may cause banks and
thrifts again to rely more heavily on managed liabilities--including
nondeposit sources of funds--though to a lesser extent than in 1994
owing in part to lower FDIC premiums. As a consequence, with growth
in bank credit strong, growth in M3 would still strengthen from 1994--
to about 2-1/2 percent.
(19) With regard to M2, the effects of slower growth in
nominal spending are more than offset by a narrowing of opportunity
costs in the baseline, and expansion of this aggregate is expected to
pick up to 2-1/2 percent. Velocity would still increase, but at the
slowest rate since 1991 (chart 6). The relative attractiveness of
deposits should be enhanced by a continuing rise in their yields--in
lagged response to the increase in market rates last year--while
short-term market rates in 1995 hold steady. In an environment of
stable or declining long-term rates and a still-steep yield curve
under the baseline case, bond mutual funds will again become attrac-
tive investment options for some savers. After the experience of
instruments. Consequently, projected growth of M2 would be below the
rates from conventional money demand models--but only by about a per-
centage point, far less than in the 1990-1993 period. The rising
rates of the alternative scenario would significantly damp M2 demand,
as returns on M2 assets continued to lag those available on market
instruments. Under these conditions, M2 might increase only 1-1/2
percent in 1995, registering another sizeable increase in its
(20) M1 is forecast to grow only 1-1/2 percent in 1995 with
flat short-term interest rates. The moderation of nominal income
growth contributes to slower currency expansion as well as to damped
demand for transactions balances. Opportunity costs on demand depos-
its and other checkable deposits remain high, and continued adjustment
to this configuration restrains growth of M1 deposits relative to in-
come. M1 velocity increases 3-1/4 percent in 1995, down from 4 per-
cent last year. M1, of course, will be even weaker (about flat) and
its velocity higher under the rising rates of the alternative
(21) Shown below for consideration by the Committee are
three alternative sets of 1995 ranges for money and debt.10 While
the Committee has in recent years deemphasized the money and debt
aggregates in its policy deliberations and public statements, choice
of ranges may facilitate the Committee's efforts to communicate to the
public its expectations for financial conditions consistent with
desired economic performance. The first, alternative I, contains the
provisional ranges established last July. Alternative IA makes a
technical upward adjustment to the provisional ranges to account for
the more normal M3 behavior that seems to be evolving. Alternative II
contains a lower range for M2 and maintain the provisional range for
Alternative Money and Debt Ranges for 1995
(Percent)
Alt. I
(provisional Memo: Staff
ranges) Alt. IA Alt. II Projection
Baseline Tighter
M2 1 to 5 1 to 5 0 to 4 2-1/2 1-1/2
M3 0 to 4 1 to 5 0 to 4 3 2-1/2
Debt 3 to 7 3 to 7 3 to 7 5-1/4 5
(22) Under alternative I, staff baseline projections for
growth of M2 and debt are reasonably well centered. The staff projec-
tion for M3, though, is in the upper end of its alternative I range.
The Committee might wish to consider raising the M3 range for techni-
cal reasons. Now that the contraction in the thrift industry has
ended and bank credit is displaying more typical behavior, M3 is no
longer expected to grow less rapidly than M2, implying an M3 range
more in line with that for M2. This is given as alternative IA.
(23) Being reasonably well centered on projected M2 growth
under the baseline, the alternative I range allows for a good bit of
unpredictability in M2 velocity, as might be implied particularly by
uncertainties regarding the appeal of mutual funds, without breaching
the upper or lower ends of the range. Moreover, this range contains a
fair amount of scope for the effects of a more restrictive policy
stance; thus, it would accommodate some further policy tightening
should the Committee find the upward drift in inflation in the staff
economic forecast to be unacceptable. Taking a longer perspective,
alternative I might provide a benchmark under the Federal Reserve Act
for long-run growth of M2 "commensurate with the economy's long run
potential to increase production so as to promote effectively the
goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term
interest rates" if it were believed that the unusual factors depress-
ing M2 growth might be abating. This would imply a return to essen-
tially trendless M2 velocity and growth of both M2 and nominal GDP
averaging in the neighborhood of 3 percent over time. In these cir-
cumstances, selection of a lower range for M2 could well require a
reversal later, with attendant possibilities for confusion on the part
of market participants regarding the Committee's intentions.
(24) The lower ranges for M2 growth under alternative II
would be better centered around the slower rate of expansion fore-
cast by the staff under the tighter strategy. Thus, choice of this
alternative might be favored if the Committee wished to underscore its
commitment to resisting higher inflation in the near term and bringing
inflation down over time. The experience of 1994--in particular, M2
growth of only 1 percent--suggests that considerable further policy
tightening, along with some slowing of nominal income growth from the
brisk pace of last year, could result in a shortfall from the 1 per-
cent lower bound of the provisional M2 range. The M2 range of alter-
native II also would better accommodate substantial shortfalls in M2
demand relative to historical patterns, as have characterized a number
of recent years.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(25) Two policy alternatives are presented below for con-
sideration by the Committee. Under alternative B, federal funds would
continue to trade around 5-1/2 percent, in association with keeping
the allowance for adjustment plus seasonal borrowing at $75 million.
Under the tighter alternative C, the federal funds rate would be
raised 1/2 percentage point, to 6 percent, either by an equivalent
rise in the discount rate to 5-1/4 percent with the same borrowing
allowance or by an increase in the borrowing allowance to $125 million
with the same discount rate.
(26) Choice of alternative B might be viewed as appropriate
if the Committee desired additional readings on the extent of the
economy's forward momentum and of underlying inflationary pressures to
provide a firmer basis for judging whether incremental restraint will
be required to damp aggregate demand sufficiently. In the staff
economic forecast, real GDP growth slips below 2 percent in the second
half of this year, even with an unchanged federal funds rate. Some
recent signs of hesitancy in consumer spending and a considerable rise
in inventories might be seen as pointing to a risk in the economic
outlook that, especially with more monetary policy tightening, an
undesirable degree of economic weakness could emerge later this year.
Current levels of real short- and long-term interest rates are some-
what above secular averages and trend growth of money and debt has
been relatively slow, suggesting that monetary policy restraint is
already in place. Moreover, fiscal policy over the next few years may
turn even more restrictive than the staff has built into its forecast,
spurred on by political initiatives to make more visible progress
toward balancing the federal budget early in the next century. The
effects on U.S. exports of the Mexican crisis, and its possible fur-
ther spillover to other economies represent potential additional de-
pressants on aggregate demand; the current situation could be exacer-
bated by another U.S. monetary policy tightening, which could render
the currencies of those countries even less attractive to interna-
tional investors. Postponing any action would allow time for the
fiscal and Mexican situations to become clearer. Finally, the recent
surprisingly quiescent U.S. price reports may also be signalling that
pressures on domestic productive capacities are not as intense as
conventionally estimated, so that a slowing in economic growth even
along the lines projected by the staff could keep inflation in check.
(27) While market participants currently anticipate a 50
basis point increase in the federal funds rate at this meeting, their
response to the Committee's selection of alternative B would depend on
how the decision were interpreted. On the one hand, the market reac-
tion could be muted if the decision were seen as only a delay in tak-
ing the inevitable next step, perhaps until the Mexican situation
settles down somewhat. In that circumstance, delay might be seen as
the prudent response to a potentially volatile situation, and little
adverse concern about potential inflation would be engendered. Some
edging lower of short-term interest rates might transpire, but bond
yields and the value of the dollar could remain near recent quotes.
On the other hand, the unexpected delay in policy tightening could
create some confusion about the Federal Reserve's intentions and
strategy. If market participants viewed the delay as unwarranted by
the domestic economic situation and as signalling a possible change in
Federal Reserve priorities, heightened inflation concerns could cause
an adverse reaction in the fixed income and foreign exchange markets.
Such a reaction could be compounded by data suggesting continued
strength in employment and a pickup in inflation--both of which are
expected over the near term in the Greenbook forecast.
(28) Concern about the possibility of an adverse market
reaction, combined with a view that the economic situation still
pointed to significant risk of accelerating inflation, would argue for
the 50 basis point firming in the federal funds rate associated with
alternative C. In a situation in which the economy already has over-
shot its potential, the robust advance of economic activity through
last quarter might well signify the likelihood that monetary policy
still has not put in place sufficient restraint to slow the growth of
future aggregate demand enough to forestall a sustained upward drift
in inflation. Moving up the federal funds rate to 6 percent would
more clearly place real short-term interest rates in a range that
could be characterized as moderately restrictive. Even if slower real
GDP growth emerges than in the staff economic forecast, which assumes
unchanged short-term interest rates, such an outcome would aid in
bringing resource use over time back to less potentially inflationary
and, hence, more sustainable levels.
(29) The 1/2 percentage point rise in the federal funds rate
embodied in alternative C, by matching current financial market expec-
tations, would have few initial repercussions on market interest rates
or exchange rates against our other G-10 trading partners. However,
some strengthening of the dollar against the peso cannot be ruled out.
Banks likely would hike the prime rate by a commensurate amount and
might become somewhat more cautious in their other lending terms and
standards as they saw a slowing in economic growth as more clearly in
(30) Projected growth of the monetary aggregates from
January to June under the two alternatives is given in the table be-
low, along with implied growth from the fourth quarter of last year.
(More detailed data appear in the table and charts on the following
Alt. B Alt. C
Growth from January
to June
M2 2-1/4 1-1/2
M3 2-1/2 2
M1 1 -1/4
Growth from 1994:Q4
to June
M2 2-1/2 2
M3 3 2-3/4
M1 1 1/4
(31) Under the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative
B, M2 growth would be supported by some narrowing of its opportunity
cost, as offering rates on retail deposits rise further in partial
catch-up to earlier increases in short-term interest rates. Even so,
this aggregate's expansion would remain well below that of nominal
GDP--projected to grow at a 5-1/2 percent rate over the first half of
the year--reflecting continued flows of saving into alternative in-
vestment outlets. The expected M2 growth of 2-1/4 percent from
January to June would place this aggregate in the lower half of its
M2 M3 M1
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rate
From To
Chart 10
DEBT
Billions of Dollars
- Actual Level
* Projected Level 14
- 7% .*- 14000
The range for 1995 is the provisional
S range adopted at the July, 1994 meeting. .- 3800
- .- - 13400
provisional 1 to 5 percent growth range for 1995. Growth in M3,
forecast at a 2-1/2 percent rate from January to June under alterna-
tive B, would leave this aggregate above the midpoint of its tentative
gregate again would help to finance bank credit expansion, which is
projected at a 5 percent rate over the same period. Paced by federal
debt growth of 5-1/2 percent from December to June, domestic nonfinan-
cial debt is foreseen as growing at a 5-1/4 percent rate over the six
months, near the midpoint of its provisional 3 to 7 percent monitoring
range for 1995. Nonfederal debt likely would continue to grow near
the 5 percent pace of last year, with some slowdown in consumer credit
expansion offsetting a probable cessation of the runoff of state and
local debt.
(32) Under alternative C, the 1/2 percentage point higher
funds rate would induce less rapid expansion of M2 and M3 than under
alternative B as opportunity costs resumed their upward movement.
Growth rates of 1-1/2 percent and 2 percent, respectively, from
January to June are anticipated by the staff under alternative C.
Directive Language
(33) Presented below for Committee consideration is draft
wording relating to the Humphrey-Hawkins ranges for 1995 and the
operating paragraph for the intermeeting period.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and
promote sustainable growth in output. In furtherance of
these objectives, the Committee at THIS its meeting in July
reffirmed the ranges it had established RANGES in February
for growth of M2 and M3 of ____ TO ____ 1 to 5 percent and
TO ____ 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from the fourth
quarter of 1994 [DEL: 1993] to the fourth quarter of 1995 [DEL: 1994].
The Committee anticipated that [DEL: developments contributing
to unusual velocity increases could persist during the year
and that] money growth within these ranges would be consis-
tent with its broad policy objectives. The monitoring range
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was SET
(LOWERED TO) maintained at ____ TO ____ [DEL: 4 to 8] percent for the
year. [DEL: For 1995, the Committee agreed on tentative ranges
for monetary growth-, measured from the fourth quarter of
and 0 to 4 percent for M3. The Committee provisionally set
the associated monitoring range for growth of domestic
nonfinancial debt at 3 to 7 percent for 1995.] The behavior
of the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in
the light of progress toward price level stability, move-
ments in their velocities, and developments in the economy
and financial markets.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE SOMEWHAT/main-
tain/INCREASE SOMEWHAT the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions, TAKING ACCOUNT OF A POSSIBLE INCREASE IN
THE DISCOUNT RATE. In the context of the Committee's long-
run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, somewhat (SLIGHTLY)
greater reserve restraint would (MIGHT) or (SOMEWHAT)
slightly lesser reserve restraint (WOULD) might be accept-
able in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with MODERATE
modest growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
