Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Class I FOMC
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC August 18, 1995
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) With inflation pressures seen to be receding, the Federal
Open Market Committee eased monetary policy slightly on July 6, reduc-
ing the intended federal funds rate 25 basis points to 5-3/4 percent.
Federal funds have generally traded near the intended rate over the
intermeeting period.1 Market prices had apparently built in a
slight downward tilt to policy over coming months, including some odds
of a System easing on July 6 (chart). In the event, the actual move
was interpreted as indicating concern by the Federal Reserve regarding
the state of the economy, and, based on previous patterns of policy
action, as likely to be followed by additional easings. Consequently,
short- and intermediate-term market rates fell about 20 basis points
on the day: long-rates dropped 10 basis points, to their lowest levels
in 1995. The prime rate was cut 25 basis points, to 8-3/4 percent.
(2) Subsequently, however, stronger economic data--reinforced
by the Chairman's Humphrey-Hawkins testimony--disabused many market
participants of the notion that the economy would be weak enough to
prompt further substantial monetary policy ease. Judging from implied
volatility on Treasury bond futures (chart), investor uncertainty
ebbed early in the intermeeting period but has risen recently, per-
haps contributing a little to the backup in bond yields. On balance
since July 5, the Treasury yield curve has tilted up: While 3-month
rates are fractionally lower, intermediate- and long-term rates have
risen about 35 to 40 basis points. Nonetheless, bond yields currently
are 1-1/4 percentage points below their highs of last fall. Some
spreads of private over Treasury rates, which had widened a bit over
the second quarter as the expansion weakened, retraced most of those
increases during the intermeeting period. With earnings reports
stronger than expected, major equity indexes finished the period
(3) The brighter prospects for near-term economic growth in
the United States and the rise in long-term interest rates here rela-
tive to the average of long-term rates abroad contributed to a 5-1/2
percent rise in the dollar's weighted average exchange value since the
last Committee meeting. Renewed concerns about the pace of expansion
in Europe, especially in Germany, led to declines in interest rates in
these countries, and was an important factor in an increase in the
dollar against the DM and associated European currencies. The dollar
registered its largest gain--14 percent--relative to the Japanese yen.
Japanese authorities took two separate actions to depreciate the yen
and stimulate their economy. Early in the period, the Bank of Japan
lowered its call money rate. Subsequently, Japanese authorities an-
nounced a series of measures to promote capital outflows by domestic
financial institutions and on the same day undertook massive purchases
of dollars in Tokyo. After each policy action, the Desk purchased
dollars against yen in New York, in concerted operations with the Bank
of Japan. Late in the period, in a coordinated intervention with
Japan the Desk purchased $700 million against both yen
and DM, bringing its total purchases of dollars during the period to
$1.533 billion.2 These actions and interventions appeared to have a
substantial effect on yen-dollar exchange rates, perhaps because mar-
ket participants interpreted them as signalling a realization by the
Japanese authorities of the seriousness of their situation and a will-
ingness to take additional steps, and perhaps because they acted as a
catalyst for a correction to the unexplained strength in the yen this
spring. The depreciation of the yen contributed to a more than 20
percent increase in Japanese stock prices and to a sharp backup in
Japanese bond yields.
(4) Broad money growth decelerated in July, but remained
relatively strong, and data for early August suggest a persistence of
the recent rapid growth. M2 expanded at a 6 percent rate last month,
bringing its expansion from the fourth quarter of 1994 through July to
a 4-1/4 percent pace, in the upper half of its annual range. The
strength in M2 in recent months, despite sluggish growth of nominal
GDP, likely reflects the increased attractiveness of the returns on M2
assets owing to the net decline in market interest rates this year,
particularly at longer maturities. Retail money funds accounted for
most of M2's growth in July, apparently drawing strength from house-
hold deposits as well as from sources outside M2;new investments in
bond mutual funds remain anemic, and noncompetitive tenders at Trea-
sury bill and note auctions have dropped off substantially.
(5) M3's expansion remained surprisingly robust in July at an
grew at a 6-3/4 percent rate, exceeding even the 6 percent upper bound
of its new growth range for the year. Investments in M3-type money
funds again were quite strong through early July, as yields on such
funds lagged declines in short-term market rates. Furthermore, de-
positories continued to issue substantial volumes of large time de-
posits, partly to substitute for nondeposit funding sources.
(6) Business borrowing appears to have slowed somewhat, while
household borrowing has remained near the accelerated pace of earlier
this year. With the rise in bond yields, the composition of business
borrowing has shifted back toward banks and the commercial paper mar-
ket. Banks apparently continue to pursue business loans actively: in
the August Loan Officer Survey, they reported further easing of lend-
ing terms and standards. Unlike recent surveys, however, banks did
not report greater enthusiasm for making consumer and home mortgage
loans. Nonetheless, total consumer credit grew rapidly in June, and
bank consumer loans, inclusive of securitizations, remained robust in
July. Federal debt growth slowed in July, after an acceleration over
the second quarter. Total domestic nonfinancial debt is estimated to
have grown at a 5-3/4 percent pace from the fourth quarter through
June, leaving this aggregate somewhat above the midpoint of its 3-to-7
percent monitoring range for 1995.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV
to
May June July July
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial
debt 5.9 6.4 -- 5.7
Federal 5.9 8.4 -- 5.7
Nonfederal 5.8 5.7 -- 5.8
Reserve measures
Nonborrowed reserves 3  -4.9 -11,1 4.3 -4.7
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 150 272 371
Excess reserves 880 964 1088
- -
Policy Alternatives
(7) Incoming information since the July FOMC meeting has
indicated somewhat stronger final demand over the late spring and
early summer and less inventory stocking than the staff had predicted.
As a consequence, the staff has revised up its forecast of the growth
of output to 2 percent this year. The forecast for 1996 envisions
output expanding close to the growth rate of potential. These fore-
casts are based on similar financial conditions and fiscal restraint
as assumed in the June Greenbook. For the two years combined, this
projection is consistent with the central tendency of the range of
projections of FOMC members in early July. Even though the staff's
output forecast has been raised for this year, favorable price and
compensation news has resulted in a small downward revision to pro-
jected CPI inflation in 1995, to just below 3 percent and beneath the
central tendency of FOMC expectations. Inflation for 1996 is seen as
edging higher--mostly owing to a rise in energy prices--but holding
within the central tendency of Committee projections. Against this
backdrop, the staff has presented the usual three alternative policy
(8) Financial markets still see slight odds of a monetary
easing by year-end, but they do not expect any action at the August
FOMC meeting. Thus, the choice of the unchanged federal funds rate of
alternative B should have little immediate impact on market interest
rates. Over the intermeeting period, data in line with the staff's
forecast of a pickup in output growth to a moderate pace might remove
any lingering expectations of policy ease among market participants;
but with inflation also projected to be quite subdued, substantial
shifts in the anticipated course of policy are unlikely. At the cur-
rent ceiling for federal government debt, the staff does not expect
the Treasury to alter financing patterns much until late September or
to run out of cash until the first half of November. Nonetheless, as
the room under the debt ceiling shrinks, absent signs of some narrow-
ing of the differences between the President and congressional
leaders, financial markets may begin to focus more on the implications
for debt markets and the economy of a disruption in federal financing.
or possibly even a temporary default. To date, interest rates appear
to have been unaffected by the possibility of such a disruption, and
over the intermeeting period, which ends before the new fiscal year,
markets will probably remain of the view that in the end some com-
promise will be reached to avert the most dire consequences.
(9) Alternative B might be favored to the extent that the
staff forecast were seen to be credible and the outcome to balance
acceptably Committee concerns about expansion in output with those of
the containment of inflation. The stronger economic data available
over the recent intermeeting period could be read as suggesting that
policy in the latter part of 1994 and first part of 1995 might not
have been as restraining as suggested by the level of short-term real
rates relative to their long-run averages. Nominal values of the
foreign exchange value of the dollar and of bond yields are still
appreciably below their levels of last fall, even though the nominal
federal funds has been raised 1 percentage point on balance since that
time. With inflation relatively subdued, it seems highly likely that
real exchange rates and long-term interest rates have fallen notice-
ably as well over the last nine months. These declines, together with
generally supportive credit conditions, could be viewed as underpin-
ning the continued momentum in business and household spending. In
any event, an unchanged stance of policy would buy time for more in-
formation to accumulate to determine whether the economy is indeed on
track to a sustainable pace of expansion.
(10) A further easing of policy, as under alternative A,
could be supported if recent price and wage news were read as suggest-
ing that the underlying determinants of inflation were more favorable
than in the staff forecast. With inflation and inflation expectations
decreasing in these circumstances, nominal rates would have to be
reduced to keep real rates from rising. Indeed, the Committee might
want to lower real rates as well if it wished to realize a little
higher output as well as lower inflation. In addition, the Committee
might want to consider lowering the federal funds rate if it were
concerned that risks to the economic outlook were still seen to be
concentrated on the down side. Such risks might be viewed as height-
ened by the recent increases in longer-term interest rates and in the
foreign exchange value of the dollar, if the Committee thought that
markets had overreacted to stronger data, especially in light of on-
coming fiscal restraint.
(11) The drop in the federal funds rate of 1/2 percentage
point contemplated under alternative A would be much larger and sooner
than market participants currently expect. As a consequence, short-
term interest rates would fall nearly 50 basis points and banks prob-
ably would cut the prime rate 1/2 percentage point. The immediate
effect of an easing likely would be to reduce intermediate- and long-
term rates as well, especially if the Federal Reserve's perceived
optimism on inflation were to influence the market's assessment of the
outlook. Unless incoming data confirmed an improved inflation pic-
ture, however, market participants would come to question the sus-
tainability of the drop in short-term rates, and intermediate- and
long-term rates could back up. In any case, the dollar likely would
fall as System action reduced real interest rates.
(12) The choice of the higher rates of alternative C would
seem to rest on concerns about the longer-term inflation outlook. As
and, with no slack in the economy at the end of the forecast period,
would not be expected to decline appreciably in 1997. If the Commit-
tee were intent on making measurable progress toward price stability
in the next several years, a rise in the real federal funds rate from
its current level would seem to be needed based on the relationships
embodied in the staff forecast. To be sure, unexpected developments
could reduce inflation pressures, perhaps by putting slack in the
economy, but there can be no assurance of such a surprise on either
the supply or demand sides. The need for a tightening of policy -
reestablish a disinflationary trend might seem all the more pressing
if the firmer spending data of late and the brisk pace of broad money
growth, with the economy already producing around its potential, were
seen as suggesting risks on the side of more inflation than in the
staff forecast.
(13) Alternative C would come as a surprise to market par-
ticipants, and money market interest rates would rise at least 50
basis points and the dollar would strengthen further on foreign ex-
change markets. Intermediate- and long-term rates also would in-
crease, with the extent of the rise depending on whether market par-
ticipants saw the action as implying more underlying strength in
aggregate demand and greater inflationary pressure than currently
envisioned or whether this tightening were interpreted as suggesting
more resolve by the Committee to bring inflation down.
(14) Moderate growth in GDP in the staff forecast is expected
to be associated with some slowing in borrowing by nonfinancial sec-
tors in the remaining months of the year. Business requirements to
fund inventory accumulation are diminishing, and borrowing for share
retirements is likely to pause a bit before accelerating later this
year and early next year to finance the consummation of recently
announced mega-merger deals. In the household sector, debt should
continue to expand around its recent pace, further increasing debt-to-
income ratios. A pickup in mortgage financing in association with a
little stronger residential housing activity will tend to be offset by
a modest slowing in growth of consumer credit as repayments on loans
for big-ticket items catch up with the earlier surge in extensions.
Credit should be readily available to private borrowers, though we
expect an end to the trend of easing terms and conditions as lenders
reassess risk and returns in an environment of moderate real income
growth and rising debt of households and businesses. Very large
retirements of tax-exempt bonds and anemic gross issuance will further
drag down the stock of tax-exempt debt, and, in the federal sector,
debt growth in the near term is projected to slow even apart from
debt-ceiling disruptions. Consequently, as shown in the table below,
total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to expand at
a 3-3/4 percent rate over the final five months of this year, placing
this aggregate in the fourth quarter 5 percent above its year-earlier
Growth in Money and Debt
Implied
July to 1994-Q4 1995
December to 1995-Q4 Ranges
(15) Growth rates of the broad monetary aggregates are ex-
pected to continue to slow from their recent very rapid pace, but to
remain relatively strong. Portfolio shifts into M2 assets should
abate with the stability of short-term rates and now-higher long-term
rates, which make bond funds more attractive. The velocity of M2 is
expected to decline in the third quarter, but primarily because of
the bulge in M2 growth already experienced. In the fourth quarter,
velocity is projected to be flat. For the year, M2 is expected to
remain below the 5 percent upper bound of its annual range, even under
alternative A.4  The projected softening in M3 owes primarily to
lower growth in institutional money funds as their yields become
better aligned with market rates. Bank credit is expected to expand
at a moderate pace, and issuance of managed liabilities in M3 should
remain strong, perhaps encouraged to a small degree by the recent
decline in deposit insurance premiums. M3 appears likely to break the
upper bound of its new range under any of the alternative policy
settings. (A table showing the growth rates of the monetary aggre-
gates over the balance of the year under each of the alternatives is
M2 M3
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in Billions
Jul-95
Aug-95
Sep-95
Oct-95
Nov-95
Dec-95
Monthly Growth Rates
Jul-95
Aug-95
Sep-95
Oct-95
Nov-95
Dec-95
Quarterly Averages
95 Q1
95 Q2
95 Q3
95 Q4
Growth Rate
From
Dec-94
Jul-95
Jul-95
Dec-95
Jul-95
95 Q4
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. A Alt. B
Alt. C
Directive Language
(16) Presented below is draft wording for the operational
paragraph that includes the usual options for Committee consideration.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to decrease (SOMEWHAT)
slightly/ MAINTAIN/INCREASE (SOMEWHAT/SLIGHTLY) the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. In
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater
reserve restraint (WOULD) might or slightly (SOMEWHAT)
lesser reserve restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable in
the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with MORE
moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
August 21, 1995
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
lederal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility muniapal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
Aug 94
Sep 94
Oct 94
Nov 94
Dec 94
Jan 95
Feb 95
Mar 95
Apr 95
May 95
Jun 95
Jul 95
Weekly
May 3 95
May 10 95
May 17 95
May 24 95
May 31 95
Jun 7 95
Jun 14 95
Jun 21 95
Jun 28 95
Jul 5 95
Jul 12 95
Jul 19 95
Jul 26 95
Aug 2 95
Aug 9 95
Aug 16 95
Daily
Aug 11 95
Aug 17 95
Aug 18 95
Stictly Conliduntii ({I |tI
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures c,.
u" IWMI.
Se.aonallyadjulted AUGUST zl. 1 ~
Money slock measures and llquid asets I Bank cedi DI Oomestlc nonflnancial debt'
nontransactions components
total loans
Ml M2 M3 L and U S other' luldl'
In M2 In M3 only nveslments' government'
Levels (Sbillionsi:
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted
Stictly Confidential (FR)
Class II FOMC
AUGUST 21, 1995
Money market
Overnight Small mutual lunds Large
Other RPs and denomi- general denomi- Term Term Shor-trm,
Period currency Deand checkable Euro- Savings nation purpose nstitutions nation RP's Euo- Savings Treasury
C  e
a a
l
deposits deposits dollars deposis' time and time NSA' dollars bonds eur paper' c
NSA' deposits broer/ only deposits NSA scues
______d___ ealer t
Annual (04)
1992
1993
1994
Monthly
1994-JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY p
p preliminary
August 18, 1995
Weekly
May 3
August 2
9
16
Memo LEVEL (bil.
August 16
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES
1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
I Treasurycoupons
... .. .
STRIC'I'LY CONFIDENTIAL (ll
CLASS II -FOMC
Net change
outright
holdings
total 4 Net IlIs
H 5".0
/.41 '.
- ti
H i
