Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR) May 17, 1996
Class I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Since the March 26 FOMC meeting, federal funds generally
have traded close to their intended level of 5-1/4 percent. Although
banks have continued to implement retail sweep programs, seasonal
strength in transaction deposits and required reserve balances and a
modest expansion of required clearing balances have kept total
required balances from eroding further over the intermeeting period.
Desk operations were complicated by unexpectedly strong flows of
individual nonwithheld tax payments, which resulted in persistent
overshoots relative to projections in the Treasury's balance at
Federal Reserve Banks in late April.
(2) The Committee's decision at the March meeting to leave
its intended level for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 percent was
anticipated by market participants and had little effect on other
interest rates. Nonetheless, market rates subsequently climbed sub-
stantially over the intermeeting period, except at the shortest
maturities (chart). Intermediate- and long-term Treasuries rose 25
to 40 basis points, on balance. As over the previous intermeeting
period, the increases were especially sharp on several days when
economic releases pointed to brisk growth in output and employment.
A considerable portion of the rise probably represents an increase in
real interest rates, apparently reflecting market views that monetary
policy will need to be tighter than previously thought in order to
keep the economy on a path of sustainable growth. Changed expecta-
tions about policy are reflected in quotes on federal funds futures
contracts, which have risen appreciably and now suggest that partici-
pants see some possibility of tightening by the end of the year.
Surveymeasures of inflation expectations have ticked up, suggesting
that the backup in nominal yields also owed in part to market concerns
about price increases. The climb in grain and energy prices and
stronger economic growth in the context of aggregate output around the
economy's capacity seemed to heighten inflation fears, but more
recently relatively low readings on core inflation and the retreat of
oil prices appear to have damped those concerns. The rise in yields
on coupon securities steepened the Treasury yield curve, but has not
left it unusually steep by historic standards, reinforcing the impres-
sion that market participants anticipate that economic developments
will dictate only minor interest rate adjustments. Most stock price
indexes rose over the intermeeting period, as generally favorable
first-quarter earnings reports and the stronger economic outlook
evidently outweighed the effects of the backup in interest rates.
(3) The rise in U.S. interest rates contributed to an in-
crease in the dollar's exchange value of 1-3/4 percent on a weighted-
average basis since the March Committee meeting. The dollar was espe-
cially strong against the mark, and to a lesser extent against other
European currencies, reflecting indications of continued weak economic
activity in Europe. Three-month interest rates edged lower in Germany
on expectations of further monetary easing; the Bundesbank cut its
discount and Lombard rates by 1/2 percentage point on April 18, but
has not yet lowered its repo rates. German long-term bond yields were
unchanged, on balance. The dollar rose by a lesser amount against the
yen. Signs of continuing Japanese economic recovery heightened expec-
tations of a move by the Bank of Japan to tighten monetary policy,
though these concerns were largely allayed by statements from the Bank
of Japan in mid-May. On balance, short- and long-term rates in Japan
showed little net change over the period.
The Desk did not intervene.
(4) The growth of overall debt has remained moderate on aver-
age in recent months, with the total debt of domestic nonfinancial
sectors staying near the middle of its 3 to 7 percent annual range.
Net federal borrowing was light in April, held down in part by strong
tax receipts. Nonfederal credit flows appear to have maintained the
slower growth pace of around 5 percent that was established around the
middle of 1995. Household and business borrowing seems to have moder-
ated a little, while the runoff of state and local debt has turned to
a modest expansion owing to a slowdown in redemptions. In the busi-
ness sector, a slowing in equity retirements has reduced credit needs.
Bond issuance has been damped by the increase in long-term rates, with
some borrowers shifting financing into the commercial paper market.
In contrast, business loans at banks expanded sluggishly, on balance,
over March and April. In the household sector, consumer credit de-
celerated sharply in March, and bank figures for April suggest that
borrowing remained on a slower track. The number of mortgage refi-
nancing applications has fallen off appreciably, but--while few data
are yet available--net mortgage borrowing appears to have been re-
strained only slightly to date by the backup in longer-term interest
rates. According to the May senior loan officers survey, banks con-
tinued to ease terms for C&I loans over the previous three months but
tightened standards for consumer credit-card loans.
(5) The broad monetary aggregates slowed in April to annual
growth rates of about 2 percent--a sharper deceleration than projected
at the time of the March FOMC meeting--and both aggregates drew closer
to the upper ends of their ranges on a monthly average basis.1
Data for the first half of May suggest continued weakness in broad
money growth. Last month's fall-off owed partly to a contraction in
demand deposits following surprisingly rapid growth in the first quar-
ter. A failure of currency demand to pick up after the introduction
of the new $100 bill accounted for some of the shortfall of the
aggregates as well. Movements in the opportunity costs of holding
money also have contributed to the slowing of broad money growth, as
the stimulative effects of previous decreases in market interest rates
wore off and the impact of the more recent rise in intermediate- and
long-term rates began to be felt.2 The consequences for money
growth of the unexpected strength in individual nonwithheld tax pay-
ments around April 15 are difficult to sort out: Much of the weakness
in money occurred late in the month when payments to the Treasury
cleared, but in the past large tax payments have been associated with
strength in the aggregates in April owing to the buildup of balances
early in the month. The sluggishness in M2 showed through to M3,
despite a rebound in bank credit.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV
to
Feb. Mar. Apr. Apr.
Money and credit aggregates
M1
Adjusted for OCD sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial
debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Reserve measures
Total reserves
Adjusted for OCD sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for OCD sweeps
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Policy Alternatives
(6) Incoming data suggest both stronger demand and slightly
higher resource utilization rates than were anticipated by the staff
at the time of the March FOMC meeting. In the Greenbook forecast, the
recent rise in interest and exchange rates, which are expected to hold
near current levels with an unchanged federal funds rate, exert some
restraint on economic growth going forward, but the economy still
produces around or a little beyond its potential. The high level of
resource utilization, combined with the effects of rising food and
energy prices, imparts a small upward tilt to inflation, with both
core and total CPI projected to increase 3-1/4 percent in 1997. For
are above the upper ends of the central tendencies of the projections
of Board members and Presidents last February.
(7) In addition to the rise in food and energy prices,
another potential supply shock is an increase in the minimum wage,
which is discussed in a special section of the Greenbook but not in-
corporated in the basic forecast. These sorts of shocks in principle
could show up as effects on the level of prices, and not on the
ongoing rate of inflation. However, supply shocks could get built
into inflation through attempts by businesses and workers to maintain
real earnings--in the case of businesses by passing through higher
costs into prices and for workers by linking wage demands to past
inflation. In addition, observed price increases could lead to infla-
tion by being extrapolated into the future and incorporated into
inflation expectations. Both mechanisms produce a similar result,
requiring a monetary policy response to avoid a ratcheting up of the
inflation rate. Paragraph 8, describing the policy response, treats
the process as working through expectations, but its analysis would
hold for the "catch-up" mechanism as well.
(8) Under circumstances in which price shocks were tending to
boost expected inflation, policy would have to offset effects working
through two channels. First, with unchanged nominal short-term inter-
est rates, a rise in expected inflation over the near-term would lower
real short-term rates, thereby tending to raise spending and economic
activity relative to the economy's potential. Such an effect on re-
source use would begin to induce more rapid wage and price increases.
Second, expected inflation is thought to have a direct, independent
influence on wage and price setting. Thus, any rise in expected
inflation could further add to the rate of inflation on a lasting
basis. To counter these effects on ongoing inflation, were they to
emerge, the Federal Reserve would need to raise the nominal funds
rate. Such a tightening would have two components. To prevent any
decline in the real funds rate and thereby avoid any additional pres-
sures on resources, the nominal funds rate would have to be raised
relative to the path it otherwise would follow by the same amount as
the induced increase in inflation expectations. This forestalls any
change in the output gap that, for example, would produce increasing
inflation if the shock occurred with the economy already producing at
its potential. Still, even at this higher nominal funds rate, the
initial uptick in inflation expectations and inflation would persist.
To lean additionally against the inflationary impact resulting from
any initial increase in expected inflation itself, the Federal Reserve
would need to raise the real funds rate, implying a further upward
adjustment to the nominal funds rate.3 That is, to bring inflation
back down once higher expectations became embedded, some slack in
resource utilization would need to be created.
(9) If real rates needed to be raised in response to a sig-
nificant supply shock, the timing and magnitude of the policy actions
would depend on the approach followed. Realistically, no monetary
policy is going to be able to avoid at least some near-term uptick in
measured inflation in these circumstances. A gradualist approach to
bringing inflation back down might be favored if a string of small
output gaps were thought to be preferable to a short, but sharp, cor-
rection, even though the total output loss in either case might be
little different. On the other hand, more forceful policy actions, by
clearly demonstrating the central bank's intention to rein in infla-
tion, could have a "credibility" effect holding down price expecta-
tions. If such an effect occurred, it would substitute for some of
the need to sacrifice output to bring inflation back to the desired
(10) Despite these potential problems on the inflation front,
the minimum wage has not yet been raised, measures of industrial
prices and of strains on production capacity remain quiescent, and
recent information on core PPI/CPI inflation provides little evidence
of an incipient acceleration. Moreover, the rise in intermediate- and
long-term rates this year may have left these measures not far from
levels consistent with the economy producing at its potential. In
these circumstances, the Committee may prefer to adopt alternative B,
awaiting more concrete evidence that inflationary pressures are emerg-
ing before adopting a tightening action. Financial market partici-
pants are anticipating that the FOMC will leave its policy stance
unchanged at this meeting, implying that selection of alternative B
would have little market impact. Although the Greenbook is forecast-
ing a strong second quarter, many market economists have a similar
view, and hence release of economic data in conformity with the Green-
book forecast should not elicit much response in security prices or
dollar exchange rates.
(11) The case for a policy tightening at this FOMC meeting
presumably would rest on the view that the risks of higher inflation
had become substantial. Even without an assumed minimum wage in-
crease, the Committee may see the gradual upcreep in core CPI infla-
tion projected by the staff as a likely and undesirable outcome. If
the higher rate of overall inflation so far this year were feeding
through in some part to inflation expectations, a rise in the nominal
funds rate would be needed at some point to forestall an effective
easing of the policy stance. Alternative C embodies a 50 basis point
increase in the federal funds rate to 5-3/4 percent in order to
counter the incipient increase in price pressures. The Federal
Reserve is not expected by market participants to tighten for several
months, and hence, investors would be caught off guard by the FOMC's
choice of alternative C at this meeting. Short-term interest rates
would rise by 1/2 percentage point. A sense that the FOMC would be
assuming a more aggressive anti-inflationary posture than previously
anticipated, at least over the near term, might limit increases in
nominal intermediate- and long-term rates, but would lead to an
appreciable increase in real interest rates on instruments of these
maturities. The value of the dollar would probably ratchet higher on
exchange markets.
(12) The interest rates of alternative B and associated
staff forecast for the economy are thought to be consistent with a
slight moderation in the growth of money and credit over coming months
relative to their pace of expansion so far in 1996. (Projected growth
for April to September and from the fourth quarter to September are
shown in the table below.) The staff anticipates that the terms and
conditions of bank lending will remain on the accommodative side,
though perhaps continuing to firm a little for consumer credit. Only
partly as a consequence, growth of consumer credit is projected to
continue its downtrend, accompanied by sustained moderate expansion of
home mortgage debt. Business borrowing may edge off as the recent
rise in long-term yields continues to restrain bond issuance, while
subdued inventory investment keeps the lid on bank loans and commer-
cial paper. Near-term borrowing by the federal government is now
shaping up as rather weak in light of the build-up in the Treasury's
cash balance stemming from outsized individual tax payments in April.
As a result of the downward-revised forecast for federal debt growth,
the expansion of total domestic nonfinancial sector debt from April to
Growth of Money and Debt
(percent at annual rates)
April 1995-Q4
to to
September September
sweeps 4-3/4 6-1/4
Debt 4-1/2 4-3/4
Nonfederal 4-1/2 5
Federal 5 4-1/4
September is now projected at only a 4-1/2 percent pace, leaving its
level in September somewhat below the 5 percent midpoint of its annual
growth rate range.
(13) The weakish cast of the incoming monetary data, together
with the recent further increases in the returns on intermediate- and
long-term instruments that compete with monetary assets, has led to a
downward revision in the staff's projections of growth in the monetary
aggregates as well. Expansion of M2 and M3 from April to September
has been scaled back to only 3-3/4 and 4 percent, respectively, which
implies that the growth of the broad aggregates will be slower than
that of nominal GDP in both the second and third quarters. Even so,
both aggregates in September are not far below the upper bounds of
their annual ranges of 5 and 6 percent, respectively. The volume of
new sweep programs coming on line over the next few months is expected
to remain substantial. M1 is projected to fall at a rate of 3 percent
from April to September; adjusted for sweeps, M1 is projected to grow
at a rate of 4-3/4 percent.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in Billions
Mar-96
Apr-96
May-96
Jun-96
Jul-96
Aug-96
Sep-96
Monthly Growth Rates
Mar-96
Apr-96
May-96
Jun-96
Jul-96
Aug-96
Sep-96
Quarterly Averages
96 Q1
96 Q2
96 Q3
Growth Rate
From
Dec-95
Apr-96
To
Apr-96
Sep-96
Apr-96
Sep-96
Directive Language
(14) Presented below is draft wording for the operational
paragraph that includes the usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future,
the Committee seeks to DECREASE (SOMEWHAT/SLIGHTLY)/maintain/
INCREASE (SOMEWHAT/SLIGHTLY) the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. In the context of the Committee's long-run
objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth,
and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve
restraint (WOULD/MIGHT) or slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve
restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable in the intermeeting
period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming
May 20,1996
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
May 95
Jun 95
Jul 95
Aug 95
Sep 95
Oct 95
Nov 95
Dec 95
Jan 96
Feb 96
Mar 96
Apr 96
Weekly
Jan 31 96
Feb 7 96
Feb 14 96
Feb 21 96
Feb 28 96
Mar 6 96
Mar 13 96
Mar 20 96
Mar 27 96
Apr 3 96
Apr 10 96
Apr 17 96
Apr 24 96
May 1 96
May 8 96
May 15 96
Daily
May 10 96
May 16 96
May 17 96
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class 11 FOMC
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
MAY 20,a1996
Seasonally adjusted
Money stock measures and liquid as sets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancal debt'
nontransacions components total loans
Period M1 M2 M3 L and U. S. other z  total=
In M2 In M3 only investments' go0emment
Levels (Sbillions).
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
MAY 20, 1996
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Sesonaly asted
Money market
Other Smatll mutual funds Large Savings Short-term Comercial Bankers
Period urrenc Demand chckabl avin dnoination denomination RP's" Eurodollars" * ns Treasury ommercial Bankers
deposits depots ime depost Retail' Institution- time deposits bsecurities
I only
Monthly
1995-APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
APR. p
p preliminary
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
Netpurchases 3  agencies outright
Period Net 2 Redemptions Net witp Redemptions Net redemptions holdings
purchases (-) change 1 yea 1-5 5-10 over 10 () Change _ total
Weekly
January 24
May 1
8
15
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
May 15
- -- 621
39 1,138 370
--- 100 ---
00 1,884 485
--- 1,228
May 15
May 17.1996
~ - -~--
