Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Class I FOMC
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC January 26, 1996
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) At the conclusion of its meeting on December 19, the FOMC
announced a slight easing of reserve market conditions, trimming the
federal funds rate from 5-3/4 percent to 5-1/2 percent. In implement-
ing that policy over the intermeeting period, Desk operations were
complicated by large swings in reserve demands associated with the
year-end and in reserve supplies stemming from variations in the Trea-
sury cash balance and the effects of foul winter weather on float. 1
As a consequence, the federal funds rate was volatile at times,
although it averaged close to its intended level. 2
(2) Most market interest rates have fallen 15 to 35 basis
points, on balance, since the last FOMC meeting, with a portion of
that decline following on the heels of the Committee's action. As the
intermeeting period unfolded, the expectation of fiscal restraint, the
soft tone of anecdotal information and of some of the limited official
data releases, and renewed concerns about the vigor of the expansion
in several of our major trading partners apparently led many analysts
to trim their assessment of the near-term prospects for spending. In
reflection of this revised outlook, market participants seem to have
built in a greater degree of easing in Federal Reserve policy in com-
ing months, judging from futures rates (chart). In capital markets,
the largest decline in one-year forward rates for Treasury securities,
about 35 basis points, was posted at one- to five-year maturities
(chart). Market prices proved sensitive to the give and take of the
debate on the budget in Washington. At times, bond yields approached
two-year lows as investors anticipated the possibility of an agreement
that would bring the budget into balance early in the next decade--or
at least considerable near-term fiscal restraint when the economy
already might be softening. Although the Secretary of the Treasury
has warned that he will run out of room to borrow no later than
March 1, financial markets are placing almost no weight on the pos-
sibility of default. Most major equity indexes rose 2 to 3-1/2 per-
cent over the intermeeting period.
(3) Despite the decline in U.S. interest rates, the dollar's
weighted-average exchange value rose a little more than 3 percent over
the intermeeting period. Upward movements against European currencies
were associated with even larger decreases in most interest rates
there than in the United States, owing to increasing signs of weaken-
ing economic growth and related expectations of monetary easing.
Interest rates in Japan generally rose in anticipation of economic
recovery, but the dollar nonetheless appreciated against the yen on
further signs of a narrowing of U.S. and Japanese current account im-
; the Desk did not intervene.
(4) Incoming information suggests that the expansion of debt
slowed in recent months, with total debt growing at an average annual
rate of only 3-3/4 percent over the final two months of 1995.3 The
deceleration owed primarily to net federal debt, which did not in-
crease on a seasonally adjusted basis, in part because, in order to
deal with debt-ceiling constraints, the Treasury relied more on run-
ning down its cash balance than seasonal norms and because spending
was held down by restrictive continuing resolutions. Growth of debt
of nonfederal sectors in recent months remained on the slow track
established around mid-year. Nonetheless, households continued to
borrow at a brisk pace, despite rising debt-service burdens and delin-
quency rates. Capital market issuance held steady, in part as some
corporations took advantage of lower market rates to fund longer term
and replace bank debt. There were a few indications that obtaining
credit might be getting harder--or at least that the trend toward
greater availability is coming to an end: Several bank loan officers
reported recently that lending standards had been tightened for both
consumer and business borrowers. However, borrowing terms remained
attractive, with spreads narrow in the market and still being eased at
banks, although not as aggressively.
(5) Preliminary data suggest that bank credit growth has
picked up noticeably in January from the sluggish pace that marked the
closing months of 1995, even as banks lightened their holdings of
government securities and securitized some of their loans. In par-
ticular, the growth of total loans has picked up briskly this month,
pulled along by strength in the business and consumer categories.
With bank credit reviving, M3 also staged a comeback, growing at rates
of 4-1/4 and 8-1/4 percent, respectively, in December and January.4
On a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis, M3 increased at a 6 per-
cent rate, placing it at the upper bound of its 2-to-6 percent annual
(6) The expansion of M2, at a rate of 5-1/2 percent over the
last two months, picked up a bit relative both to the sluggish pace of
the fall and to staff expectations at the time of the December FOMC
meeting. Further declines in money market rates compared with slug-
gishly adjusting rates on deposits and money market funds and the
flatness of the term structure appear to have made M2 assets rela-
tively more attractive. Some of the growth in M2 came at the expense
of bond mutual funds, which continued to post light inflows, and,
perhaps, at the expense of direct investment in securities, although
information on such portfolio flows is scant.5 All told, M2 in the
fourth quarter was 4-1/4 percent above its level in the fourth quarter
of 1994, in the upper portion on its 2-to-5 percent annual range, and
its velocity, although most likely edging higher in the fourth
quarter, was flat on the year.
(7) M1 continues to run off, contracting at rates of 4-1/2
and 6-1/2 percent in December and January, respectively. 6 Programs
to sweep funds from OCDs to avoid reserve requirements have spread
further, serving to trim about 12-1/4 percentage points from average
growth rates of the aggregate in the past two months.7 Currency
growth, however, revived some, in part owing to a stirring in foreign
demands in December. Demand deposits grew at about a 10 percent rate
on average over the past two months, partly as the pickup in mortgage
activity induced some temporary flows through those accounts. For
have expanded 1-1/2 percent based on initial amounts swept.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Dec. Jan. 95:04 Jan.
Money and credit aggregates1
M1
Adjusted for OCD sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial
debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Reserve measures
Total reserves
Adjusted for OCD sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for OCD sweeps
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
Long-Run Scenarios
(8) This section considers the implications of alternative
long-run strategies for monetary policy and highlights several risks
to the staff's assessment of economic prospects. The first set of
scenarios examines two alternative strategies with different economic
outcomes that the Committee might pursue. The baseline strategy
begins with the Greenbook's projection for 1996 and 1997 and there-
after keeps inflation steady at about 3 percent. The tighter strategy
extends the higher funds rate scenario of the Greenbook, with the
objective of attaining price stability shortly after the turn of the
decade. 8
(9) Both the baseline and tighter scenarios embody the same
underlying assumptions concerning macroeconomic forces and relation-
ships. With regard to fiscal policy, both assume no further progress
in reducing the federal deficit through the seven-year simulation
period.10 Also in both simulations, the natural rate of unemploy-
ment is assumed to be 5-3/4 percent. In light of the various uncer-
tainties associated with any forecasting exercise, the results re-
ported below should be read only as suggestive of the general patterns
likely to be engendered by each of the alternatives.
(10) Under the baseline strategy, the Committee does not take
active steps to reduce inflation below its current trend of 3 percent.
As shown in the top panel of Chart 2, the nominal federal funds rate
is maintained at 5-1/2 percent; the associated real rate of 2-1/2 per-
cent puts the economy in the neighborhood of its potential. Under the
tighter scenario, the Committee actively promotes long-term price
stability by raising the federal funds rate by 100 basis points over
the course of 1996 and maintaining it at this level in 1997. This
initial restraint must be followed by reductions in the nominal funds
rate that outpace the drop in the inflation rate. The real funds rate
must be lowered to move policy to a neutral stance in order to avoid
overshooting price stability. While output returns to potential over
time, the sacrifice ratio in the model implies that reducing inflation
loss of approximately 8 percent of potential GDP in the interim.
However, the model does not include forward-looking expectations that
might allow a possible role for central bank credibility in lowering
the cost of attaining price stability. Nor does the model incorporate
a significant long-term gain in potential output growth from reducing
(11) Chart 3 indicates economic outcomes that could result if
the real equilibrium federal funds rate were shocked up or down by 50
basis points in 1996:Q1. Such a shock could arise from higher or
lower aggregate demand than projected, or lower or higher potential
output, which in turn might arise from a change in the natural rate
of unemployment.11 In the top panel, the Committee is assumed not
to adjust the nominal funds rate over the next three years in response
to this shock, but instead it keeps the funds rate along the baseline
path. The resulting imbalance between the actual and equilibrium real
rates sets off ever increasing or decreasing inflation, which in turn
serves to widen the real rate imbalance over time--exacerbating the
inflation instabilities.
(12) The divergences of inflation from the baseline become
perceptible only after the first year or so. The lower two panels
assume that, after a year, accumulating evidence that the equilibrium
real federal funds rate has changed prompts the Committee to respond.
These responses, shown in the middle panel, are calibrated to bring
inflation back to the 3 percent baseline path at the end of the simu-
lation period. In order to do so, the Committee must offset the
inadvertent stimulus or restraint, resulting from the lag in adjusting
policy, by subsequently holding the real rate above, or below, its
equilibrium value for a time. The deliberate overshooting of the
equilibrium funds rate is mirrored in an overshooting of the natural
rate of unemployment in the opposite direction. The symmetry of the
paths of inflation in these simulations stems from the specification
that the Committee had a fixed goal for inflation of 3 percent. If,
instead, the Committee were to follow an "opportunistic" strategy, it
would lean in the required direction against unexpected upward shocks
to the equilibrium rate of interest, but for downward shocks it would
not ease as much as in this simulation. This smaller amount of
easing, sufficient to return the economy to its potential but not
beyond, would lock in the decline in the inflation resulting from the
inadvertently restrictive policy during the period of the recognition
Long-Run Ranges for 1996
(13) As background for the Committee's discussion of its
money and debt ranges for 1996, the table below presents projections
for the growth of money and credit consistent with the staff Greenbook
Growth of Money and Credit
(Q4 to Q4, percent)
Staff Projections
Actual 1996
1995 (Greenbook)
M2 4.2 5-1/4
M3 6.1 5-3/4
Debt 5.3 4-1/2
M1 -1.8 -2-1/2
Adjusted for sweeps 1.4 4-3/4
Nominal GDP 4.2 4-1/2
(14) The staff projects M2 growth of 5-1/4 percent in 1996,
up from 4-1/4 percent last year. Such growth would be a bit faster
than that of nominal GDP, implying a slight drop in the velocity of M2
after little change last year (chart 4). The projected decline of
velocity reflects the effects of the recent flattening of the yield
curve, which will enhance the attractiveness of liquid monetary assets
relative to longer-term investments. 12 The standard staff econo-
metric model of M2 demand, which explains longer-run velocity move-
ments solely by short-term opportunity costs, forecasts essentially no
change in velocity for 1996, given the flat funds rate in the Green-
book forecast. The model underpredicted M2 growth by about 2 percent-
age points last year, and the staff believes that the decline in long-
term rates contributed to the forecast error; the staff M2 projection
for 1996 implicitly allows for a similar type of, albeit smaller,
model error this year.
(15) The staff forecast calls for M3 growth of 5-3/4 percent
over 1996, down from 6 percent last year, implying a somewhat smaller
decline in M3 velocity than last year. The slight slowing of M3 from
credit growth (after adjustment for security revaluations), which is
only partly offset by a modest step-up in thrift asset expansion.
Bank funding needs are held down by weaker loan demand, as households
and businesses rely more on long-term borrowing in response to the
decline in bond and mortgage rates in recent months. The projection
makes some allowance for a shift to deposit funding as a consequence
of the recent elimination of deposit insurance premiums for well-
capitalized banks, but banks may become even more willing to issue,
and price attractively, wholesale deposits that are included in M3
than assumed in the staff's projection.
(16) The staff is projecting growth of domestic nonfinancial
debt this year at 4-1/2 percent. Both the federal and nonfederal
components are seen as growing at rates close to that of nominal GDP.
The moderation in nonfederal credit demands from last year in part
reflects some backing off of consumer installment borrowing, as both
borrowers and lenders become a bit more cautious in the face of rising
debt repayment burdens. By contrast, growth of home mortgage debt is
projected to maintain the pace of the last couple of years, accom-
panied by a little further pickup in refinancing activity. In the
business sector, increases in internal funds should help to damp
credit demands as equity retirements and spending on new capital
remain at the levels of 1995.
(17) The table below compares money and debt under the Green-
book baseline forecast with the economic forecasts embodying easier
and tighter monetary policies that are discussed in Part I of the
Greenbook. Whereas the federal funds rate is assumed to remain at
the alternative strategies is gradually lowered or raised to reach a
level in the fourth quarter of this year that is 1 percentage point
below or above the baseline. The impact of these policy differences
on the growth of nominal GDP is only about 1/4 percentage point this
year, though that difference would widen in 1997. The differences in
nominal GDP show through to the monetary aggregates and debt. In
addition, M2 and, to a lesser extent, M3 would be affected in the same
direction by the alternative paths for interest rates and, hence,
opportunity costs.14
(18) The table also shows three alternative sets of ranges
for M2, M3, and debt for 1996 for Committee consideration.15 Alter-
native I represents the provisional ranges selected by the Committee
last July. Alternatives II and III raise the M2 and M3 ranges by 1
and 2 percentage points, respectively. The range for debt under all
three alternatives is held at its provisional level of 3 to 7 percent
because the staff projection under all three policies is in the middle
portion of this range.
M2
M3
Debt
Nomi
Staff Projections and Alternative Money and Debt Ranges for 1996
(Q4 to Q4, percent)
Staff Projections Alternative Ranges
Baseline Alt. I
Easier (Greenbook) Tighter (Provisional) Alt. II Alt. II
nal
P 4-3/4 4-1/2 4-1/4
(19) On average over the last two years, the velocities of M2
and M3 have been behaving more in line with historical relationship,
than they did earlier in the 1990s. This might raise questions about
whether the aggregates are conveying information about the paths of
nominal GDP and spending and whether the Committee should increase the
attention paid to them. Major and persistent deviations from expecta-
tions in the expansion of money and debt may be symptomatic of unan-
ticipated developments in the intermediation and credit process that
should be examined for their potential implications for the economy.
However, the staff believes that considerable doubts remain as to the
relationships between the aggregates and nominal GDP, given the aber-
rant behavior in the early 1990s, which in retrospect is still partly
inexplicable, and the increased availability of other financial in-
struments, notably bond and stock mutual funds. Consequently, a
longer period of time during which the behavior of velocity can be
assessed under a variety of economic and financial circumstances is
probably required before much weight can be placed on those
(20) The staff baseline forecasts for M2 and M3 are, respec-
tively, above and near the upper bounds of the provisional ranges of
alternative I. If the Committee viewed the role of the ranges as one
of communicating to the public the rates of money growth that it ex-
pected would accompany its desired outcome for the economy and prices
in 1996, adoption of alternative I would seem most consistent with a
deliberate disinflation policy (tighter alternative). In recent semi-
annual monetary policy reports to the Congress, however, the Federal
Reserve has explained that these relatively low ranges were not cen-
tered on the Committee's expectations for money growth, but rather
were indicative of money expansion under conditions of price stability
if velocity were to behave in line with its historical pattern. The
Committee has noted in these reports that actual growth could even run
above the ranges in the transition to price stability. In this con-
text, frequent alteration of the annual ranges would risk confusing
observers about the Committee's ultimate policy intent. The remaining
uncertainty about the behavioral properties of the broad measures
going forward may reinforce Committee reluctance to "fine-tune" its
annual ranges, especially if the Committee were concerned that such
adjustments might be interpreted as implying that it was placing more
weight on these indicators than it intended.
(21) Alternative II nods in the direction of acknowledging
the upside probabilities embodied in the staff M2 and M3 projections
by raising their ranges by enough clearly to encompass--albeit in the
upper portions--the staff baseline money forecast. By encompassing
expected money growth this alternative still could be seen as consis-
tent with the baseline Greenbook forecast for the economy. Under the
"easier" strategy, M2 would be just as likely as not to overshoot its
upper bound, and there would also be risks in this regard if lower
interest rates were required to achieve the nominal income in the
staff forecast. This alternative might also be in accord with an
opportunistic disinflation strategy in that M2 is expected to lie in
the upper portion of its range, implying stronger reactions to upward
than to downward demand shocks to nominal income and inflation, as
discussed in the previous section. Should the inflation rate move
down further in later years, the ranges could be restored to their
current provisional settings.
(22) Alternative III better centers projected baseline growth
of both M2 and M3 within the ranges. Choice of this alternative would
seem to rest on the view that the ranges should be mainly oriented
toward providing Congress and the public with an estimated growth
interval for each aggregate over the relevant year that essentially
balances the risks of an over- or undershoot if the economy performs
as the Committee expects. Under such an approach, the Committee would
attempt to incorporate fully in advance intermediate-run effects, such
as responsiveness to interest-rate movements or other factors, into
the specified ranges. More willingness to adjust the current year's
ranges at mid-year also could be part of this approach. This approach
would not necessarily imply that the Committee would place more weight
on the aggregates in the conduct of policy. Indeed, the Committee
could continue to deemphasize the use of the ranges as intermediate
policy targets. Alternative III would seem especially appealing in
the context of conveying information about expected money growth if
the Committee had a fairly strong presumption that further easing
actions could well prove warranted this year to forestall an unaccep-
tably weak economic performance or to adjust to lessening inflation
pressures. Or, if the Committee accepts the relationships embedded in
the staff forecast, this alternative could seem attractive if the
Committee did not contemplate downward pressure on inflation this year
through either a deliberate or opportunistic strategy.
Short-run Policy Alternatives
(23) The unchanged funds rate of alternative B is consistent
with the staff Greenbook forecast. In that forecast, with a steady
nominal funds rate, the unemployment rate remains a touch below the
staff's estimate of the natural rate and core inflation edges higher,
but only to about 3 percent in 1997. Not only might alternative B be
seen as attractive if the Committee concurred with this outlook and
found the results acceptable, but it also might have appeal as a "wait
and see" strategy because delays in data have curtailed the new infor-
mation available to the Committee since it eased policy in December.
A similar point could be made about the fiscal situation, which might
be clarified to some extent in the next few weeks given negotiations
now underway between the President and Congressional leaders.
(24) The staff outlook appears to be more buoyant than that
of market participants, who evidently view the odds of a modest policy
easing at the upcoming meeting to be about even and expect appreciable
declines in the funds rate over coming months. Thus, rates could edge
higher under alternative B.16 However, the extent of any rise in
such rates likely would be tempered in the near term by the perception
that the Committee had merely postponed easing pending the availabi-
lity of more information. Over time, an economy and monetary policy
more consistent with the staff outlook than that of the market would
put additional upward pressure on rates. The dollar would be expected
to trade around recent higher levels on foreign exchange markets.
Markets are likely to continue to pay close attention to shifting
fiscal prospects, and if potential default on Treasury debt still
looms in late February, markets could become skittish, given that the
Treasury has indicated that its scope to maneuver to avoid default
will be exhausted by the beginning of March.
(25) Justification for a quarter-point reduction in the
federal funds rate under alternative A would seem to rest on a belief
that the economy is weaker than in the staff outlook, as might be
inferred from the tone of some anecdotal reports and recent data, or
that the prospects for disinflation are brighter. In this regard, the
effects of the recently firmer dollar on spending and prices might be
seen as giving scope for some modest lowering of interest rates. An
easing in the next few months, although not necessarily at this meet-
ing, is consistent with expectations both of market participants, as
embodied in the yield curve, and, as suggested by the Blue Chip sur-
vey, of many outside forecasters whose inflation outlook on average
nonetheless does not differ significantly from the staff's.
(26) Money market interest rates would fall by less than a
quarter point under alternative A, given current expectations. Such a
decline in the federal funds rate could be achieved by adding nonbor-
rowed reserves through open market operations, reducing the borrowing
allowance by a small amount, or through a 25 basis point reduction in
the discount rate to 5 percent.17 Intermediate- and long-term
interest rates could drop significantly should market participants
view actions at two successive meetings as suggesting that the Federal
Reserve had reason to believe that economy is weak and inflation risks
are minimal. Against this background, incoming economic data suggest-
ing a more buoyant economy could cause a sharp reversal of the inter-
est rate declines.
(27) If the Committee agreed with the staff outlook for
spending and inflation and wanted to make deliberate progress toward
price stability, the choice of a quarter-point increase in the federal
funds rate under alternative C might be favored. Such a policy tight-
ening would come as a complete surprise to market participants, and
short-term interest rates would rise substantially. Intermediate- and
long-term rates would also move appreciably higher, especially in real
terms, as market participants re-evaluated the expected path for mone-
tary policy. With the direction of interest rates here and abroad
beginning to diverge, the dollar could well strengthen further on
foreign exchange markets.
(28) The table below shows money and credit growth under
alternative B for the January-to-June period. Relative to the ex-
perience of recent months, we would expect some pickup in credit
growth to accompany the staff GDP projection, partly as the federal
government returns to more normal patterns of funding and cash
balances given the assumed lifting of the debt ceiling. Growth of
total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is expected to expand at a
center of its tentative range for 1996. The expansion in M2 is ex-
pected to continue to be supported by last year's declines in oppor-
tunity costs and the relatively flat yield curve. The spread of
sweeps will lead to further reductions in M1 and the reserve aggre-
gates. By midyear M2 would be at or slightly above its 1-to-5 percent
tentative 1996 range under all three alternatives. M3 at midyear
would be just within its 2-to-6 percent range.
Growth of Money and Debt
January to June 1996
(percent at annual rates)
M2 5
M3 5-1/2
M1 -2-3/4
Adjusted for sweeps 3-3/4
Debt 6
Federal 8
Nonfederal 5-1/4
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Directive Language
(29) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft
wording relating to the Committee's ranges for the aggregates in 1996
and the operating paragraph for the intermeeting period.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and
promote sustainable growth in output. In furtherance of
these objectives, the Committee at [DEL: its] THIS meeting [DEL:in July
reaffirmed the range it had] established RANGES [DEL: on January
___ PERCENT RESPECTIVELY [DEL: of 1 to 5 percent], measured from
the fourth quarter of [DEL: 1994] 1995 to the fourth quarter of
[DEL: 1995] 1996. The [DEL: Committee also retained the] monitoring
range [DEL: of 3 to 7 percent for the year that it had set] for
growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt WAS SET AT ___ TO
___ PERCENT FOR THE YEAR. The [DEL: Committee raised the 1995
range for M3 to 2 to 6 percent as a technical adjustment to
take account of changing intermediation patterns. For
samme ranges as in 1995 for growth of the monetary
aggregates and debt, measured from the fourth quarter of
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the
light of progress toward price level stability, movements
in their velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to decrease slightly (SOME-
WHAT)/MAINTAIN/INCREASE (SLIGHTLY/SOMEWHAT) the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the context of
the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful considera-
tion to economic, financial, and monetary developments,
slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint (WOULD/MIGHT)
or slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint would
(MIGHT) be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consis-
tent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
