Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR) March 22, 1996
Class I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Following the January 30-31 meeting, the Federal Reserve
announced that it was easing money market conditions a bit further;
the discount rate was cut 1/4 percentage point to 5 percent and the
federal funds rate was lowered a like amount to 5-1/4 percent. The
effective federal funds rate has averaged close to that rate over the
intermeeting period, but has shown a bit more variation than usual
around the intended rate, perhaps partly reflecting the effects of low
levels of required operating balances stemming from the spread of
sweep programs.
(2) The easing move had been mostly anticipated, and short-
term market rates dropped slightly in its wake, while long-term rates
were about unchanged. Since then, most rates have moved higher, and
by substantial amounts, as incoming data have contradicted market
expectations that the economy would be quite soft for a time and mone-
tary policy consequently would be eased further. Rates on federal
funds futures contracts, which in late January suggested a high prob-
ability of further ease not only at the January meeting but thereafter
as well, are now essentially flat through the summer (chart).
Longer-term Treasury rates are up around 60 basis points over the
intermeeting period, returning yields to their levels of late last
summer. By far, the largest increases in forward one-year interest
rates have occurred in the intermediate range, tending to support the
view that much of the rise in rates owed to evidence of unanticipated
cyclical strength. Likely adding to the upward revision to expected
future short-term rates was the dimming prospect for long-term deficit
reduction. Given that both of these factors would tend to boost real
interest rates over time, and given little in the way of surprising
inflation news over the intermeeting period, it seems likely that the
upward movement in nominal interest rates primarily reflected a rise
in real rates. Despite the apparent increase in real interest rates,
equity prices on net are up considerably since the last meeting, after
having moved more or less in concert with bond prices for more than a
year. The recent disparate movements may reflect a shift in inves-
tors' appetites for stocks or a more optimistic outlook for earnings--
though professional stock analysts have been trimming their profit
forecasts of late.
(3) The dollar's weighted average foreign exchange value
declined over the first part of the intermeeting period, but has risen
since late February, partly in association with increases in U.S.
interest rates. On balance, the dollar is down about 1 percent since
the last meeting. From one perspective, the lack of net dollar ap-
preciation despite higher U.S. interest rates is not surprising, as
ten-year bond rates in major foreign countries other than Japan are up
with the increase in U.S. rates. From another, however, the reasons
for the rise in foreign interest rates are not entirely clear, since
they appeared to respond unusually strongly to movements in U.S inter-
est rates after the March 8 employment report. To be sure, an im-
proved economic outlook in a few countries, notably excepting Germany,
and growing doubts that the fiscal discipline associated with the
budget goals currently in the Maastricht treaty will ever be realized
may have contributed to rate increases abroad.
The Desk did not intervene.
(4) Private credit flows continue at a moderate pace, but
there are some hints that underlying demands for credit have slowed a
bit. Bank lending has fallen off in February and March, even taking
into account increased securitizations of bank loans. Business loans
decelerated in February and declined in early March despite a sharply
reduced pace of corporate bond issuance associated with the back-up in
long-term interest rates. Although nonfinancial business borrowing in
money and capital markets has been supported by financing requirements
associated with elevated merger and corporate restructuring activity,
credit needs to bridge the gap between internal funds and capital
expenditures are estimated to have become quite small as inventory
investment has declined. The weakness in bank business lending likely
does not reflect a reduced availability of credit. For example, the
Survey of Terms of Bank Lending showed that spreads on business loans
continued to narrow in early February. Consumer credit growth re-
mained fairly robust in January, but more recent bank data adjusted
for securitizations suggest that consumer borrowing has downshifted a
bit. Bank Call Report data from late 1995 show that delinquency rates
on household loans, particularly credit cards, have deteriorated
further, possibly restraining growth of consumer debt by damping both
demand and supply.
(5) Both of the broad monetary aggregates have strengthened
in recent months and have moved above their growth cones. To some
extent, the pickup in growth mirrors the decline in short-term inter-
est rates in late 1995 and early 1996. Money market mutual funds,
whose rates adjust with a lag to market rates, have been particularly
strong. M2 has been supported as well in the past three months by an
unusual surge in demand deposits, which is only partly attributable to
increases in mortgage refinancings. The brisk advance in M2 has come
in the face of strong inflows to stock and bond mutual funds, which
appear to have paused only briefly in reaction to recent market
volatility. 2 M2 is estimated to have grown faster than nominal
income in the first quarter, extending the recent string of velocity
declines. As in the previous few quarters, the growth of M2 was some-
what faster than that predicted by the standard money demand model.
(6) The surge in demand deposits has pushed M1 growth well
into positive territory in March, its first monthly advance since July
reportedly reflecting strong foreign demand associated with uncer-
tainties in Taiwan and Russia.3 The introduction of additional
sweep programs, however, caused balances in other checkable deposits
to continue to contract. Adjusted for retail sweeps, M1 has expanded
at an 8-3/4 percent rate since the fourth quarter, while the base has
risen 5 percent.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV
to
Jan. Feb. Mar. Mar.
Money and credit aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial
debt 2.0 5.4 -- 4.0
Federal -3.8 6.5 -- 1.3
Nonfederal 4.1 5.0 -- 4.9
Bank credit 8.5 3.3 -- 5.2
Reserve measures
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing 38 35 35
Excess reserves 1485 849 1045
Policy Alternatives
(7) Sorting through the estimated effects of bad weather,
government shutdowns, and strikes, the economic data released since
the January FOMC meeting suggest that the economy is now operating
about where the staff had anticipated, albeit with a little more final
demand and correspondingly less inventory stocking. While longer-term
interest rates have moved sharply higher in recent weeks, the rise has
been only a little larger and sooner than had been built into the last
staff forecast. On balance, financial conditions still seem conducive
to moderate expansion of spending, and the staff forecast anticipates
that output growth will settle around its potential rate over the next
two years with the federal funds rate maintained at 5-1/4 percent.
This pace of economic activity should keep the unemployment rate
steady, in the vicinity of 5-1/2 to 5-3/4 percent. With employment
and production a touch above their long-run potential levels, in-
creases in labor compensation and prices edge higher. The outcomes
for real GDP growth and CPI inflation envisioned by the staff for 1996
are at the high end of the central tendencies of the forecasts pro-
vided by Board members and Reserve Bank presidents at the time of the
last meeting.
(8) An unchanged policy stance, as in alternative B, would
probably be preferred if the Committee concurred with the staff's as-
sessment of the economy, viewed potential risks as about evenly
balanced, and was willing to accept the possibility of a slight inten-
sification of price pressures. Of course, this alternative might be
even more attractive if the Committee saw smaller odds of rising in-
flation, as it did in January judging from the CPI forecasts submitted
by the members. Moreover, in light of the unusual number of temporary
disruptions and distortions to economic activity in the last few
months and the difficulties in understanding the implications of the
recent movements of stock and bond prices, a pause might be favored to
allow sufficient time to establish a firmer bearing on the likely
course of spending and inflation, even if the Committee saw the risks
to the outlook as possibly tilted to one side or the other.
(9) With market participants apparently expecting no policy
action over the next few months, maintenance of current reserve condi-
tions, as under alternative B, would elicit little reaction in credit
markets. Capital market prices could remain volatile as incoming
information continues to be difficult to interpret in the wake of the
winter's economic disruptions. Although the anticipated softening of
many indicators in March, such as payroll employment and industrial
production, might boost markets for a time, data consistent with the
staff forecast would seem, on balance, to imply little net change in
longer-term yields. Market participants have largely discounted any
chance of a multi-year budget agreement before the elections, so a
renewal of meaningful negotiations on long-term deficit reduction has
the potential to raise bond and stock prices. Absent such a develop-
ment or unanticipated changes in policy abroad, the foreign exchange
value of the dollar probably would remain around its current level.
(10) Given the staff's assessment of the economy, the 1/2
percentage point easing in reserve market conditions offered under
alternative A would boost the economy marginally further beyond its
potential and tilt the inflation rate up a bit more noticeably. With
the latter outcome apparently inconsistent with the Committee's
strategy for achieving its long-run goals, adopting alternative A
would seem to require that, relative to the staff, Committee members
expect somewhat weaker spending or better inflation. For example,
policy relaxation might be seen as buying further insurance against
the risk that the recent rise in bond yields would truncate the ap-
parent strengthening in activity this year or as attaching weight to
the possibility that the NAIRU is lower.
(11) In light of the uncertainty about the current economic
situation and the widespread expectation that System policy is on
hold, it is difficult to gauge how market participants would react to
the 1/2 percentage point of policy ease envisioned under alternative
A. It is safe to say that most of the decline in the federal funds
rate would carry through to other shorter-term market rates. Market
participants might read the action, coming on the heels of 1/4 point
moves at two successive meetings, as revealing the judgment of policy
makers either that the economy could work with a thinner margin of
unused capacity without higher inflation or that aggregate demand is
weaker than most analysts are now expecting. With market participants
particularly uncertain about the economy, they might give the Commit-
tee the benefit of the doubt, at least for a while, and infer from the
policy action that the economic situation had changed. In that cir-
cumstance, intermediate- and long-term rates could fall significantly.
Alternatively, this policy easing might be seen to reflect a misread-
ing of the economic situation or evidence that the Committee was will-
ing to tolerate upside risks to inflation in the interest of stimulat-
ing growth for a time. Should this interpretation predominate, infla-
tion expectations would rise; although real interest rates probably
would fall, the prices of debt instruments could come under downward
pressure. Under all these scenarios, the foreign exchange value of
the dollar would weaken, and especially so if inflation expectations
(12) A 1/2 percentage point tightening in reserve conditions,
as under alternative C, might be favored if the Committee agreed with
the staff forecast but viewed its outcome for inflation as undesir-
able, particularly if the Committee wanted to make some progress to-
ward price stability. Indeed, given that the economy is already
operating at or beyond many estimates of its potential, the Committee
might see significant upside risks to the inflation forecast. In this
regard, the recent behavior of asset prices and some financial ag-
gregates could potentially be signalling inflationary pressures. Part
of the rise in bond yields might be associated with higher inflation
expectations, and the gains in equity markets have the potential to
provide excessive stimulus to spending. Moreover, the broad monetary
aggregates have been growing rapidly of late, suggesting ample li-
quidity in household balance sheets and readily available funds for
depositories. Relative to the staff forecast, a 1/2 percentage point
firming in reserve conditions would take a little pressure off re-
source markets, raising the odds that the inflation rate would not
tend to drift higher.
(13) The 50 basis point tightening of alternative C would
catch market participants unawares and show through to instruments at
the shortest maturities. The response further along the term struc-
ture of interest rates could also be substantial, as the action would
likely be interpreted as suggesting that the Federal Reserve saw con-
siderable inflation risks. Even so, the rise in longer-term rates
likely would reflect a significant real component and the dollar would
tend to increase on exchange markets and stock prices to weaken.
(14) As shown in the table below, over the next six months
the staff expects some rebound in the growth of nonfederal sector debt
to around the pace of earlier in the year, but a modest slowing in
broad money growth. In the staff outlook, credit conditions are an-
ticipated to remain favorable, although banks may adopt a little addi-
tional caution, particularly with regard to their consumer lending.
Consumer debt growth is expected to slow some, but should still be
fairly robust, while the expansion of home mortgage debt stays near
its recent pace. As long-term yields stabilize in the staff forecast,
bond offerings should pick up, in part to finance the ongoing wave of
merger activity. Bank business lending is likely to recover, but,
reflecting the lessened need to finance inventory accumulation, to a
moderate growth pace. On net, domestic nonfinancial sector debt
should expand at a 5 percent annual rate over the March-to-September
period, remaining comfortably within its 3-to-7 percent annual range.
Growth of Money and Debt
(percent at annual rates)
March 1995 QIV
to to
September September
M2 5 5-3/4
M3 5 6-1/4
M1 1/2 1/4
Adjusted for
sweeps 6-1/2 7-1/2
Debt 5 5
Federal 5-1/4 4-1/2
Nonfederal 5 5
* Assumes an unchanged federal funds rate.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
(15) The waning impetus imparted by past policy easings is
expected to damp growth in the broad monetary aggregates relative to
their recent rapid pace. Still, both M2 and M3 should expand faster
than nominal income for the next two quarters. The staff is antici-
pating M2 to grow at a 5 percent rate from March to September, leaving
the aggregate somewhat above its 1-to-5 percent annual range. With
bank credit remaining sluggish, M3 is expected to slow to a 5 percent
rate over the next six months and thus edge back toward the upper end
of its 2-to-6 percent annual range. The continued spread of retail
sweep programs is likely to pull down M1 further, although a pickup in
currency shipments abroad associated with the introduction of the
redesigned $100 bill next week should provide some offset in coming
months. 4
Directive Language
(16) Presented below is draft wording for the operational
paragraph that includes the usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to decrease
slightly(SOMEWHAT)/MAINTAIN/INCREASE (SLIGHTLY/SOME-
WHAT) the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions-, [DEL: taking account of a possible reduction in
the discount rate.] In the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustain-
able economic growth, and giving careful considera-
tion to economic, financial, and monetary develop-
ments, slightly (SOMEWHAT) greater reserve restraint
(WOULD/MIGHT) or slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve
restraint would (MIGHT) be acceptable in the inter-
meeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions
are expected to be consistent with moderate growth in
M2 and M3 over coming months.
March 25,1996
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Long-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
Mar 95
Apr 95
May 95
Jun 95
Jul 95
Aug 95
Sep 95
Oct 95
Nov 95
Dec 95
Jan 96
Feb 96
Weekly
Dec 6 95
Dec 13 95
Dec 20 95
Dec 27 95
Jan 3 96
Jan 10 96
Jan 17 96
Jan 24 96
Jan 31 96
Feb 7 96
Feb 14 96
Feb 21 96
Feb 28 96
Mar 6 96
Mar 13 96
Mar 20 96
Daily
Mar 15 96
Mar 21 96
Mar 22 96
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
MARCH 25, 1996
Seasonally adjusted
Money stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactions components total loans
total loans
Period M1 M2 M3 L and U. S other2  total'
In M2 In M3 only investments' government
Levels (Sbillioni 2
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
MARCH 25. 1996
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Seaonaly adjusted
Money market
Demand Other Small mutual funds Large Short-term
Period urrency des checkable Savins, denomination denomination RP's
," Eurodollar Savings re r Commercial Bankers
deposits time deposits2  Retail Institution- time deposits' bond securities ppe acceptances
p preliminary
March 22, 1996
Weekly
December 20
March 6
13
20
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
March 20
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
I Treasurycoupons
--- 4,470
--- 842
---- 1,228
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
asury and agency securities.
rchase transactions (-). and matched purchase sale transactions (+).
March 20
within
1 year 1-5 5-10 over lO total
