Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (FR)
Class I - FOMC September 20, 1996
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The Committee's decision to leave the funds rate un-
changed at the August meeting was anticipated by market participants
and thus had little effect on market interest rates. With incoming
information on balance confirming earlier indications that the
economic expansion was moderating and inflation remaining subdued, the
asymmetric tilt in the directive was not utilized and the intended
funds rate was maintained at 5-1/4 percent during the intermeeting
period. Federal funds have generally traded near the intended
rate. Indeed, despite further reductions in required operating
balances owing to new sweeps of retail deposits, volatility of the
daily effective funds rate around its intended rate remains relatively
low; some unpredictable late-in-the-day tightness in the funds rate
has occurred, however.
(2) In the weeks following the FOMC meeting, market interest
rates rose somewhat (chart), reversing their declines of early August,
as output growth was seen to have more momentum than had been antici-
pated and press reports suggested increased concern among Committee
members about the outlook for inflation. Credit markets rallied in
mid-September on favorable inflation reports and sluggish retail sales
data, but gave back part of their gains, particularly at the short
end, after a wire service reported that a number of Reserve Banks had
requested discount rate increases. On balance over the intermeeting
period, short-term interest rates have risen about 10 to 15 basis
points, while intermediate- and long-term rates are up 20 to 25 basis
points. Recent surveys of short- and long-term inflation expectations
(available through August for professional forecasters and September
for households) show essentially no evidence of a rise (chart).
Federal funds futures contracts now suggest a two-thirds chance of a
while Eurodollar futures rates seem to imply only a modest amount of
tightening through next year, once likely term premiums are taken into
account (chart). Equity markets rebounded over the period, with major
indexes up around 2 to 3 percent to record highs; small-cap stocks
rose smartly but remained below records set earlier this year.
(3) Reflecting in part the increase in U.S. interest rates,
the dollar's weighted-average exchange value rose almost 1 percent
over the intermeeting period (chart). Declines in market interest
rates abroad also contributed to a firmer dollar, as foreign ten-year
rates fell 15 basis points and three-month rates dropped 25 basis
points, on average. Official lending rates were lowered by several
central banks, including the Bundesbank and the Bank of Canada.
Canadian, German, and U.K. stock indexes recovered to or exceeded
previous highs, while those in Japan, France, and Italy remained well
below recent peaks, as investors were apparently less optimistic about
prospects for economic activity in the latter group of countries.
; the Desk again did not inter-
(4) Broad money growth picked up in August, but by somewhat
less than projected at the time of the last FOMC meeting. M2 grew at
a 3-3/4 percent rate, leaving it in the upper portion of its 1 to 5
percent annual range. Liquid deposits continued to run off, but at a
slower pace than in July.2 Retail money funds grew rapidly, as
their yields eased more gradually than market rates in early August.
Small time deposits, whose rates had increased appreciably in spring
and early summer in lagged response to upward movements in market
rates, posted a solid gain. Little substitution between these M2
components and capital market mutual funds was evident, as stock fund
flows resumed in strength and bond fund flows also picked up in
(5) Despite a decline in bank credit, M3 accelerated to a
end of its 2 to 6 percent annual range. With favorable yield spreads,
institutional money funds posted robust growth. Large time deposits
also grew rapidly, as banks continued to shift markedly away from
reliance on overseas sources of funding. Data for early September
suggest a further acceleration in both M2 and M3.
(6) Growth of the debt of nonfederal sectors has moderated a
bit in recent months. The rate of increase in consumer credit has
remained below that earlier this year; the less ebullient expansion of
such credit primarily reflects more moderate increases in spending on
consumer durables and repayments of earlier loans, but strains on
household balance sheets and less generous loan supplies also may be
restraining borrowing some. Comprehensive data on residential mort-
gage borrowing lag substantially; real estate lending by banks posted
a solid gain in August, but, rather than additional overall strength
in home mortgage borrowing, this may reflect shifts to adjustable-rate
financing, which banks tend to hold on their books. Business borrow-
ing has slackened somewhat, particularly in commercial paper and cor-
porate bond markets, as hefty profits are perhaps funding a larger
share of business investment spending. Commercial and industrial
lending at banks has strengthened in early September, and bank busi-
ness lending in the third quarter is running ahead of its pace earlier
this year, perhaps reflecting the financing of higher levels of inven-
tories. Loan supply conditions are still quite favorable for busi-
nesses, and quality spreads in securities markets remain at histori-
cally low levels. Outstanding state and local debt has resumed its
decline since mid-year, owing to continued retirement of advance-
refunded debt and a slackened pace of new issues. On the other hand,
federal borrowing has picked up a little this summer. Growth of total
nonfinancial debt for the year has edged down to around the midpoint
of its annual range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
QIV
to
June July Aug. Aug.
Money and credit aggregates
M1
Adjusted for retail sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Reserve measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Adjusted for retail sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for retail sweeps
Memo: (Millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
Policy Alternatives
(7) The staff has read the mixed economic data since the
August FOMC meeting as still consistent with growth moderating to a
pace about in line with the economy's potential, assuming that the
Committee's policy stance remains unchanged through the forecast
period. The outlook for output growth and the unemployment rate for
the rest of 1996 and 1997 is essentially the same as in the last
Greenbook and remains broadly consistent with the central tendencies
of the Committee members' forecasts for these variables made in July.
Recent core inflation data have been a shade lower than the staff
anticipated, but resource utilization remains high enough in the staff
forecast to put some upward pressure on increases in labor costs and
prices. With crude energy prices likely to be more elevated for a
time than had been assumed and a hike in the minimum wage further
boosting costs and prices, the staff's projection for consumer price
inflation remains around the upper ends of the Committee members'
central tendencies for both years. However, the underlying profile of
inflation going forward under the staff forecast may be slightly more
adverse than Committee members were expecting in July, because they
may not have fully incorporated upcoming technical adjustments in the
consumer price index at the time they were surveyed.
(8) The Committee thus might view such an inflation outcome
as unacceptable. Nonetheless, there are reasons why the Committee
might choose the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B for the
upcoming intermeeting period. Although labor markets are tight and
wages accelerating, the extent and timing of any feedthrough of this
acceleration to overall compensation and ultimately prices remain
uncertain. Real interest rates are in the neighborhood of levels that
over the past fifteen years have been associated on average with
little change in inflation, and the growth of money and credit has
been moderate, suggesting perhaps that if the stance of policy is
stimulative, it may not be greatly so. Indeed, the staff forecast has
only a gradual pickup in core inflation, which in any event will start
from a level in the third quarter that is probably lower than the
Committee had anticipated. In these circumstances, waiting to assess
better the economic situation might not incur much risk of a signifi-
cant deterioration in inflation expectations, provided the delay were
not too long, because containing inflation will still be possible
before it has risen appreciably above the general level of recent
years. Moreover, the soft cast to the recent trend of retail sales
and continued surprisingly favorable readings on broad price indexes
may lead the Committee to consider the staff forecast as too pessimis-
tic about likely inflation pressures. If so, inflation is more apt to
be kept within acceptable bounds without policy adjustment.
(9) With market participants apparently placing greater than
even odds on policy tightening at this meeting, interest rates would
likely decline and the dollar weaken on foreign exchange markets if
the unchanged policy of alternative B were adopted. Even before the
discount rate story earlier this week, markets had built in close to
would trigger rate declines that not only reversed the increases
associated with the story, but some of those registered earlier in the
intermeeting period as well. Many would likely view the Committee as
merely delaying policy action until the November meeting rather than
changing its fundamental assessment of the potential inflation threat,
and this reaction would tend to limit the decline in long-term rates.
There is a risk that policy inaction would induce some in the market
to question the Committee's commitment to holding down inflation, or
its willingness to take forward-looking action to do so, which would
tend to boost inflation expectations. Given uncertainties about the
outlook and the perceived lack of a policy consensus within the
Federal Reserve, markets are likely to remain highly sensitive to new
economic data and to indications of Committee members' inclinations.
(10) A tightening of policy at this Committee meeting,
whether by 50 basis points, as assumed in alternative C, or by only 25
basis points, would improve the chances that price pressures would be
contained and inflation outcomes would be consistent with the Commit-
tee members' expectations in July. In the alternative scenarios in
the Greenbook, an increase of one percentage point in the federal
funds rate over the next year is sufficient to tilt core inflation
down. A 25 or 50 basis point tightening at this meeting could be seen
either as a first installment in moving more deliberately toward lower
inflation, or as a more limited action aimed at holding the line.
With labor markets tight and wage gains already strengthening, the
Committee may see it as only a matter of time before total compensa-
tion puts sufficient pressure on profit margins to prompt businesses
to raise their prices faster. Especially if aggregate demand has more
momentum than in the staff forecast, waiting for very long to tighten,
given the lags in the effects of monetary policy, risks embedding some
rise in inflation and inflation expectations into the economy and
financial markets. That result would necessitate more aggressive and
potentially disruptive policy action at a later date to return infla-
tion to recent levels.
(11) Markets participants do not have a 25 basis point firm-
ing at this FOMC meeting fully built into the structure of interest
rates, and would be considerably surprised by a 50 basis point hike.
Thus, some of the former and the bulk of the latter would be matched
by a rise in short-term rates. The impact on intermediate- and long-
term rates is less certain, especially because the firming would con-
stitute a reversal in the direction of policy. Such policy reversals
in the past have often resulted in fairly large movements in inter-
mediate- and long-term rates. However, in light of signs of moderat-
ing aggregate demand and damped inflation, as well as statements in
the Committee's published minutes, much market commentary has accepted
the notion that a reversal in the direction of policy could be limited
in scope. Still, policy action of any size will probably lead market
participants to revise their view of the path of policy and build in
some expectations of additional tightenings. A 1/4 point firming is
more likely to leave them skittish as they expect further action soon,
while the larger tightening would have a greater immediate impact on
rates. The statement accompanying the announcement of the policy
change might be able to reduce the chance that the market would come
to extrapolate sizable further increases in the funds rate.
(12) Borrowing by domestic nonfinancial sectors in the staff
forecast is expected to remain moderate over the final months of the
year. Households are anticipated to use consumer credit at around the
reduced pace of recent months while growth in mortgage indebtedness
probably will decelerate in keeping with a slowdown in home buying.
Elevated debt burdens and further selective tightening of consumer
credit availability should act as a mild restraint on household bor-
rowing. Business debt growth is likely to strengthen a bit in the
near term in keeping with inventory restocking and some levelling off
of cash flow. Credit is expected to remain readily available to
businesses from banks and securities markets; firms with access to the
bond market will probably concentrate their borrowing there, espe-
cially if bond rates do not rise much from recent levels. With growth
in federal debt fairly subdued, debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors
is expected to expand at a 4-1/4 percent pace over the final four
months of 1996, implying growth of about 5 percent for the year as a
(13) In view of slower-than-expected M2 and M3 growth in
recent months, the staff has revised down projected growth for those
aggregates in 1996. M2 is now expected to increase at a 4-1/2 percent
rate this year and M3 at a 5-3/4 percent rate under alternative B,
somewhat below the upper ends of their growth ranges for the year.
Over the August-to-December period, the expansion of M2 is projected
to pick up to about a 4-3/4 percent pace, broadly in line with GDP
growth under alternative B. The pickup in M2 should show through to
M3, and growth in the latter is forecast to strengthen to a 6 percent
rate over the final four months of this year, abetted by a strengthen-
ing of the expansion of bank credit. Continued large sweeps of other
checkable deposits and demand deposits will distort measured M1. In-
deed, M1 is projected to run off at about a 5 percent annual rate over
the August-to-December period, while expansion of sweep-adjusted M1
increases to a 6-1/2 percent rate.
Growth Rates of Money and Debt
(Percent, annual rates)
Adjusted for sweeps
August to
December
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rate
From To
Directive Language
(14) Presented below is draft wording for the operational
paragraph that includes the usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to DECREASE (SOMEWHAT/SLIGHT-
LY)/maintain/INCREASE (SOMEWHAT/SLIGHTLY) the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the context
of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful con-
sideration to economic, financial, and monetary develop-
ments, somewhat (SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint would
(MIGHT) or slightly (SOMEWHAT) lesser reserve restraint
might (WOULD) be acceptable in the intermeeting period.
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming
September 23, 1996
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Term Lon-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
Sep 95
Oct 95
Nov 95
Dec 95
Jan 96
Feb 96
Mar 96
Apr 96
May 96
Jun 96
Jul 96
Aug 96
Weekly
Jun 5 96
Jun 12 96
Jun 19 96
Jun 26 96
Jul 3 96
Jul 10 96
Jul 17 96
Jul 24 96
Jul 31 96
Aug 7 96
Aug 14 96
Aug 21 96
Aug 28 96
Sep 4 96
Sep 11 96
Sep 18 96
Daily
Sep 13 96
Sep 19 96
Sep 20 96
- p - -- -- 5.52
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures class11 FOM
Seasonally adjusted SEPTFAER 23, 199
Mon ey stock measures and liquid assets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransaclions components
total loans
Period Ml M2 M3 L and U. S. other2  totalz
In M2 In M3 only investments' government 2
Levels (9billions)s
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class 11 FOMC
SEPIABER 23, 1996
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Money market
Other Small mutual funds Large Short-term
Peiod Currency Demand checkable Savings denomination denomination RP's
.  Eurodolars Savins Treasury Commerc Bankersdemand deposits' esecuries papel acceptances'deposits deposits depo time deposit Retai Institution- time deposits bo  securities acceptances
p preliminary
September 20, 1996
Weekly
June 5
September 4
11
18
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $)6
September 18
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
I Treasurycoupons
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
asury and agency securities.
rchase transactions (-), and matched purchase sale transactions (+).
September 18
within
1 year 1-5 5-10 over 10 total
