Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
JUNE 27, 1997
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) June 27, 1997
Class I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Since the Committee meeting on May 20, the federal funds rate has averaged
near its unchanged intended level of 5-1/2 percent. Most other market interest rates declined,
on balance, apparently in response to incoming data suggesting that growth of final demand
was slowing markedly in the current quarter and inflation was remaining well-contained
(Chart 1). Private short-term rates dropped 5 to 15 basis points; rates on Treasury bills,
however, fell more as bills continued to be paid down in volume in response to robust federal
tax receipts. Futures rates for federal funds and Eurodollars now suggest that the likelihood
that markets had attached to additional near-term System tightening at the time of the May
meeting has evaporated; indeed, markets seem to anticipate that policy is likely to be on hold
well into next year and perhaps beyond.
(2) Rates on intermediate- and longer-term instruments declined about 15 to 25
basis points, with forward rates dropping noticeably all along the yield curve. The view that
a downshift in inflation expectations-perhaps precipitated by a string of consistently good
inflation readings--contributed to this decline is supported by the considerable narrowing over
the intermeeting period of the spread between nominal interest rates and the rate on the
Treasury's indexed note. The narrowing in that spread also may reflect a reduction in
uncertainty about future inflation and, hence, the size of the inflation risk premium embedded
in nominal rates--a notion consistent with the sizable drop in the implied volatility of note and
bond yields in recent months. These developments were, on net, quite positive for equity
markets, which moved up sharply on balance over the intermeeting period to reach record
(3) The dollar's weighted-average exchange value appreciated about 2/3 percent,
on balance, over the intermeeting period even though U.S. long-term rates fell by more than
the average of foreign long-term rates; the latter declined 15 basis points. The dollar
appreciated more than 1-1/2 percent against the DM and most other continental European
currencies in response to a growing perception in the market that none of the major European
countries will be able to comply strictly with the Maastricht deficit criterion--implying that if
EMU goes forward, it will be with a broad group of countries. The market apparently
believes that a broad EMU, and one that might place a bit greater emphasis on reducing
unemployment given the results of the French election, will be less committed to the
monetary discipline required for price stability. The dollar declined 1 percent against the yen
amid growing market focus on recent and prospective increases in Japan's current account
surplus. Short-term interest rates in most industrial countries were little changed over the
intermeeting period. Short-term rates moved up in the United Kingdom and Canada after the
newly independent Bank of England increased its repo rate by 1/4 percentage point and the
Bank of Canada raised its bank rate by the same amount. Italian short-term rates are
expected to fall next week after the Bank of Italy announced late today that it would cut both
its discount and Lombard rates by 50 basis points effective next Monday.
; the Desk did not
(4) Broad money grew moderately this month. M2 is estimated to have increased
at a 4-1/4 percent rate in June after expanding at a subdued pace over April and May. From
the fourth quarter of last year through June, M2 grew at a 4-3/4 percent rate, placing it just a
bit below the 5 percent upper bound of its annual range. This outcome is about in line with
that envisioned by the staff at the time of the February Committee meeting, despite what is
now expected to be considerably more rapid nominal income growth than had been projected.
The velocity of M2 was apparently up about 1 percent at an annual rate in the first half of the
year--although M2's opportunity cost was little changed--perhaps because the substantial flows
into equity mutual funds included some savings that would have been in M2. Still, this is a
relatively small increase in velocity, and the relationship between M2 velocity and its
opportunity cost re-established over the last couple of years appears to remain broadly intact.
M3 is estimated to have increased at a 3-1/2 percent pace in June, down from the 5-1/4 per-
cent average rate in April and May. Rapid M3 growth over most of the first half of the
year--associated with robust expansion of bank credit, paydowns of liabilities to foreign
offices with proceeds from large time deposit issuance, and rapid growth in MMMFs--left M3
in June 3/4 percentage point above the 6 percent upper bound of its range, in line with the
staffs expectation in February.
(5) Private debt growth has picked up in recent months, reflecting greater credit
demands and continuing favorable supply conditions for the business sector. Debt of the
household sector, though still growing more rapidly than disposable income, has continued to
expand at the more moderate rate established in the final months of last year. With the
strengthening in the expansion of nonfederal debt, total debt growth has edged up in recent
months despite a marked slowing in its federal component. Domestic nonfinancial debt grew
at a 4-3/4 percent annual rate from the fourth quarter of last year through May, near the
middle of its annual range.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
April May June June3
Money and Credit Aeregates
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank Credit
Adjusted'
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed Reserves2
Total Reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary Base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Excess Reserves
Longer-Term Strategies
(6) This section provides a longer-term perspective on several strategic issues
confronting the Committee. With the Greenbook forecast of unemployment throughout 1998
a percentage point below the staffs working assumption for the NAIRU, inflation would be
expected to be on a rising trajectory into 1999. In light of this outlook, we first present
alternative strategies, derived using the staffs econometric model, that the Committee could
select for containing or reducing inflation in the medium term. Second, because the news on
both inflation and unemployment has been better than the staff anticipated, we present a
model simulation in which the NAIRU is substantially lower than the staff's present
assessment. Third, we use the staff model to gauge four specific rules for conducting
monetary policy, each of which embeds a long-run inflation objective in a monetary policy
reaction function that also pays attention to variations in output.
(7) The first and second exercises are based on Greenbook assumptions through
comes into balance by early in the next decade and that the chronic current account deficit
puts downward pressure on the dollar. In addition, except in the scenario where we adjust it
lower, we assume that the NAIRU is 5.6 percent. In the staff model, the sacrifice ratio over
five years is about 2; that is, a 1 percentage point reduction in inflation can be achieved only
by pushing the unemployment rate above the NAIRU by the equivalent of about 2 percentage
point for one year.
(8) The baseline scenario, shown by the solid lines in Chart 2, is the Greenbook
forecast through 1998, extended for subsequent years using the staff model with limited
judgmental adjustments. With inflation on an upward track in early 1999, the Committee
picks up the pace of its tightening actions, but avoids inducing an outright recession.1 The
nominal funds rate is moved up to 7 percent by mid-1999. As a result, when the unemploy-
ment rate rises to the NAIRU two years later, consumer price inflation levels off at a little
more than 3 percent. The real federal funds rate settles at about 3.3 percent. This real funds
rate is near the levels of the past two or three years, which in the staff view have been
associated with a build-up of pressures on resources. However, it is consistent with output at
its potential and steady inflation in the out years because the imposition of fiscal restraint
through 2002 and the appreciable decline in equity prices over the next few years restrain
aggregate demand.
(9) The stable inflation strategy limits the near-term increase in inflation in the
Greenbook forecast and ultimately brings it back to near its currently prevailing rate. This
scenario--which is plotted by the dotted lines and extends the "tighter" alternative in the
Greenbook--entails raising the federal funds rate to about 6-3/4 percent by the middle of 1998
and maintaining that level for a little more than a year. While the unemployment rate
remains below the NAIRU for a time, inflation is damped in the near term both by the
strengthening foreign exchange value of the dollar and by falling inflation expectations
over the short run associated with slower economic growth and tighter monetary policy.
Eventually, though, the unemployment rate will have to be kept above the NAIRU for a while
to offset the inflationary momentum imparted by the economy operating above its potential
from 1996 through 1999.
(10) The third strategy--shown by the dashed line in Chart 2--is designed to achieve
price stability within seven years or so. Price stability is defined here as an inflation rate
slightly less than 1 percent, consistent with the staffs estimate of measurement error.2 To
achieve this objective, the Committee would need to boost the nominal funds rate to 7 percent
by early 1998 and hold it there for a couple of years. Although the nominal funds rate under
this scenario never exceeds its level under the stable-inflation scenario by more than 50 basis
points, the gap between the two real rate trajectories is temporarily as wide as 100 basis
points. The unemployment rate remains noticeably above the NAIRU for most of the
simulation period.3
(11) The recent behavior of inflation raises the possibility that the NAIRU could be
considerably below the current staff estimate of 5.6 percent. Chart 3 compares the baseline
discussed above (the solid lines) with a situation in which the NAIRU has been and will
remain at 4-3/4 percent (the dotted lines). In that circumstance, the equilibrium real federal
funds rate would be lower than in the baseline because the economy could support a higher
level of production and spending on a sustained basis. Under this reading of labor-market
conditions, the recent level of the real funds rate is near its equilibrium, and holding the
nominal federal funds rate at its current level would contain inflation.
(12) The remainder of this section evaluates the performance of four explicit policy
rules or Federal Reserve reaction functions. Our method of evaluating these rules is not tied
to the Greenbook projection; instead, it involves subjecting the staff econometric model to a
series of "shocks"--that is, economic developments unexplained by the model equations. For
these "stochastic simulations," we randomly draw from the shocks the economy has
experienced over the last thirty years.
(13) All of the rules set the nominal funds rate in terms of inflation and the output
gap, but the nature and strength of the responses vary across the rules, as shown in the table.
One rule we study was proposed by John Taylor. In this rule, the prescribed nominal federal
funds rate is calculated as the sum of an estimated equilibrium real federal funds rate, plus
the most recent four-quarter rate of inflation, plus half the difference between the actual
inflation rate over the most recent four quarters and the long-run inflation target (1 percent in
our exercise), plus half the percentage difference between actual and potential output.4
i = r+ nt- + 0.5[it-I - ' ] + .5(t-Q )'
where i is the nominal federal funds rate, r* is the equilibrium real funds rate, it is the
four-quarter rate of inflation, and Q-Q* is the output gap in percentage terms.
Coefficients of the Alternative Policy Rules
Henderson Target
Taylor McKibbin Opportunism Zone
Inflation2  0.5 1.0
Inflation inside the zone -- - 0.0 0.0
Inflation outside the zone 3  - -- 2.5 2.5
(14) A second rule we examine was proposed by Henderson and McKibbin. 5 It
has the same form as the Taylor rule, but adjusts the nominal interest rate by the full amount
of the inflation gap and twice the output gap. Some previous research based on stochastic
simulations like those presented here has suggested that this rule may yield better macro-
economic performance than the Taylor rule.
(15) A third rule we consider attempts to capture the main features of the
"opportunistic" approach to monetary policy. This approach resembles the Henderson-
McKibbin rule in the strength of its response to the output gap, but in reaction to inflation
it has two distinctive features. First, the policy response to the observed rate of inflation is
calculated relative to an intermediate target for inflation rather than to the long-run target.
The intermediate target is specified as a weighted average of the long-run target and the
recently prevailing rate of inflation. As a consequence, the intermediate target moves,
shifting in the same direction as the prevailing rate of inflation, but by a lesser amount.
This specification implies that, in the course of a disinflation, the opportunistic policymaker
will become more dissatisfied with any given rate of inflation above the long-run target as
the prevailing rate comes down. For example, an inflation outcome of 3 percent may look
desirable when the prevailing rate is 4 percent, but undesirable when the prevailing rate is
inflation outcome regardless of the recently prevailing inflation rate.
(16) The second distinctive feature of the opportunistic approach is the "zone of
opportunism": When actual inflation is close to the intermediate target (within 1 percentage
point in our specification), the opportunistic policymaker responds to changes in inflation
only by moving the nominal funds rate enough to keep the real funds rate unaffected. When
inflation is outside the zone of opportunism, however, the opportunistic policymaker responds
vigorously to each additional percentage point of inflation or deflation--even more vigorously,
in our specification, than the Henderson-McKibbin policymaker.
(17) The fourth rule we consider is designed to capture the behavior of a policy-
maker who is aiming to contain inflation within a specified target zone. This "zone targeter"
can be understood as resembling a conventional Henderson-McKibbin policymaker in the
strength of the response to the output gap, but the inflation objective is a fixed target zone
rather than a single point. Alternatively, the zone targeter can be understood as resembling
an opportunistic policymaker, but with the target zone fixed over time. Like the opportunist,
the zone targeter responds to small changes in inflation within the zone by only enough to
hold the real funds rate unchanged and responds vigorously to changes in inflation that are
outside the zone. In the simulations reported below, we assume that the target zone extends
from 0 to 2 percent.6
(18) Chart 4 examines the performance of the four policy rules in achieving a
long-run inflation objective of 1 percent. 7 We constructed this chart by simulating the staff
econometric model 1,000 times under each rule. In each simulation, we started with inflation
at 2-1/2 percent and the economy producing at its potential. We then hit the model with a
sequence of random shocks and allowed the policymaker to react to the resulting situation
according to the four rules. For each rule, the chart displays the average of the resulting
trajectories (bottom panel). These averages allow us to gauge how quickly the disinflation
Chart 4
Expected Paths for Output and Inflation Under Alternative Policy Strategies
Based on Stochastic Simulations of FRB/US
Inflation
Percent
Taylor
2.4 - -......... Opportunism
S .-- Zone
2.2 - --- Henderson-McKibbin
\-- .......1.6
1.4 -
Output Gap
Percent
0.2
Zone
-0.8 Henderson-McKibbin
might be expected to unfold if the economy retains the same structure and experiences the
same type of shocks as in the past.
(19) All four rules succeed in bringing the average inflation trajectory down toward
the long-run target of 1 percent. Because under some of the rules the long-run target is
achieved on average only in the indefinite future, we assess the speed of convergence under
each rule by measuring the length of time until the average inflation trajectory crosses the
at this mark, the inflation zone targeter and the Henderson-McKibbin policymaker are next,
and the opportunistic policymaker is last.8 Not surprisingly, given the inflation results, the
Taylor policymaker, on average, imposes the deepest recession in the early going, while the
opportunist keeps output closest to potential.9 The ultimate cost in terms of cumulative out-
put loss to get to 1 percent inflation is approximately the same under all four rules. The
time to disinflate for the opportunist depends on the size and nature of the shocks hitting the
economy. If those shocks in the future more closely resemble the shocks that have occurred
during the past ten years (which have been relatively tranquil), then the time required for
the economy to reach 1-1/2 percent inflation would be extended noticeably.
(20) These simulation results illustrate only two aspects of the macroeconomic
consequences of letting policy be guided by the various formal rules--the expected time to
disinflate, and the accompanying path of output. Equally important are the implications of
the rules for the variability of output and inflation. In studying this issue of variability, we
abstract from any initial period of disinflation, and focus instead on the properties that the
model economy would exhibit once the rule in question has been in effect for a very long
time. Consistent with that focus on the steady state, in these simulations we assume that
private-sector agents fully understand the rule that the Federal Reserve is using to guide
policy. 10
(21) The top panel in Chart 5 displays the distribution of inflation under each
of the rules, while the bottom panel shows the distribution of the output gap. In these
simulations, the opportunistic rule and the Taylor rule both fare relatively poorly: The
opportunistic rule produces a distinctly more diffuse distribution of inflation (top panel),
while achieving only a slightly more concentrated distribution of the output gap (bottom
panel); the Taylor rule produces a more diffuse distribution of the output gap while gaining
nothing on the inflation front.
(22) All these rules are disciplined ways of conducting policy, and in the context
of the model structure and distribution of shocks would produce less output and inflation
variability than the U.S. economy experienced over history. In the simulations we summarize
here, the Henderson-McKibbin rule and the inflation zone targeting rule generally outperform
the Taylor rule and the opportunistic rule. The opportunistic rule produces a more diffuse
distribution of inflation because the policymaker's target zone shifts over time. Both of the
winners feature relatively vigorous responses to deviations of output from potential and
deviations of inflation from the long-run target. In practice, policymakers must solve
considerably more difficult problems than the ones addressed in these simulations: Among
other things, they confront substantial uncertainty about the actual structure of the economy,
and they face the real possibility of structural change. These and other factors might counsel
adopting less forceful policy responses.
Annual Ranges for Money and Debt
(23) The issues concerning the Committee's decision about the ranges for money
and debt for 1997 and 1998 would seem to be similar to those faced at other recent
Humphrey-Hawkins meetings. In particular, the choice boils down to deciding between
continuing to structure the ranges as benchmarks for monetary and credit growth under
conditions of price stability with historically normal behavior of velocity, or aligning them
with probable outcomes for money and debt. Because money, in particular M2, has likely
tacked on two more quarters of relatively predictable behavior this year, the Committee may
feel a bit more confident in announcing ranges that it expects to be consistent with its
economic outlook. If it chooses to do so, however, the Committee will need to decide
whether to adopt higher ranges than those used recently, given that under the staff forecast
money would be expected to grow near the upper ends of the existing ranges. While a
decision to align money ranges with expected outcomes need not, as a logical matter, imply
that the Committee was upgrading money in judging its policy stance, it may also want to
consider whether a more stable demand means that money should be accorded added weight
as one of the many indicators relevant for policymaking.
(24) Because the economy is not expected to be at price stability, the staff again is
projecting money growth associated with the Greenbook forecast to be near, or above, the
upper ends of the current money growth ranges. In the Greenbook, nominal GDP increases
output is restrained, in part, by slightly less accommodative financial conditions. The
projections of M2 in 1997 and 1998 assume a continuation of the recent experience in which
demand for that aggregate has been broadly consistent with its historical relationship with
income and opportunity costs, albeit at a higher level of velocity. Against this backdrop, M2
is expected to grow 4-1/2 percent this year and 4 percent in 1998. The small increase in V2
in 1997 largely reflects the rise in velocity in the first half of this year. In 1998, the
projected rise in V2 results from the widening of opportunity costs late in the year, when the
System is assumed to tighten. With equity prices projected to decline next year, flows into
equity mutual funds would no longer be restraining M2 and boosting its velocity beyond that
predicted by the money demand function, as seems to have occurred to a limited extent this
year. (Chart 6 shows that the staff forecast of velocity in both years is well within the recent
cluster of velocity/opportunity cost observations.)
(25) Growth in M3 has continued to outpace that of nominal GDP in the first half
of this year, albeit by a narrower margin than in the past couple of years, and the staff
expects M3 to outrun income through the end of 1998 (Chart 7). Acting to boost M3 over
the next year and a half is the expectation of continued robust expansion in bank credit,
which is projected to exceed growth in GDP and nonfinancial debt as banks continue to find
healthy profits in intermediation. Also contributing to the downward drift in M3 velocity is
the growing popularity of M3 money funds for liquidity management by businesses and
further substitution of large time deposits for other funding sources. As a consequence, M3 is
expected to increase 6-1/2 percent this year and 6 percent next.
(26) The total debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is forecast to expand this year
and next a bit more slowly than in the past couple of years--about 5 percent per year. The
modest slowdown is accounted for by the federal sector, in keeping with narrower federal
deficits. Growth in the nonfederal component stays around the fairly strong 6 percent pace of
recent years; within that total, household debt decelerates, while business borrowing expands
a little when profits and, thus, internal funds level out. Credit supply conditions should
stabilize or even tighten a notch as lenders continue to react to the difficulties of marginal
borrowers in the household sector and begin to see narrowing profit margins as portending
some erosion of the very favorable debt-carrying capacity of businesses. Nonetheless, the
forecast does not embody "headwinds" that would greatly constrain borrowing and spending.
Ranges for 1997 and 1998
(27) Shown below are two alternative sets of ranges for M2, M3, and debt for
Committee consideration for 1997 and 1998, along with the staff projections for both years.
Alternative I is the same as the ranges adopted last February for 1997.11 Alternative II
would raise the M2 and M3 ranges by one and two percentage points, respectively, to center
them better on the staffs expectations. The alternative II range for the debt aggregate is the
same as the alternative I range on the rationale that, with the staff forecast around the mid-
point of that range, there would seem to be no need for an upward adjustment.
" It is also same as the provisional ranges for 1997 selected in July 1996 and the
same as the ranges for 1996.
Growth of Money and Debt and Alternative Ranges
(percent)
Memo: Nominal GDP
(28) As in the past couple of years, the Committee may wish to retain the alter-
native I ranges, even though staff projections are around their upper ends, on the grounds that
sufficient uncertainty persists regarding M2 and M3 velocity relationships to suggest that the
best use for the ranges still is as benchmarks for noninflationary monetary growth.12 13
Although the more predictable behavior of M2 demand has continued over the first half of the
year, the Committee may view the re-established relationships as not adequately tested under
a variety of circumstances to be confident in their persistence. For example, greater variation
in interest rates and nominal income could provoke substantial shifting between M2 assets
Alt. I
Alt. II
and mutual funds, since the latter are now much more readily available than in the 1970s and
value the ranges primarily as a means of signifying long-term goals, a role that they began to
take on in the second half of the 1980s. Although the Committee used M2 growth as one of
its indicators at that time, the emphasis was more on longer-term trends than on recent
behavior relative to the range, in part because the interest elasticity of M2 meant that its
velocity varied appreciably over the shorter-run, albeit fairly predictably, with changes in the
stance of policy.
(29) Alternatively, the Committee could see the better behavior of money demand
as making velocity relationships sufficiently predictable to warrant an attempt, at least on a
provisional basis, to let the public know approximately what rates of growth of money and
debt it thought were likely to accompany its expectations for economic performance.
Supplying such an expectation might be viewed as more in the spirit of the Federal Reserve
Act, which calls for the Federal Reserve to provide "objectives and plans" for money and
credit in the specific years. While that expectation would not be a "plan" or "objective," it
might be helpful to the public. Should the Committee wish to move in this direction but on
a very tentative basis, one possible approach would be to retain the current ranges and their
rationale for 1997, but to adopt provisional 1998 ranges that were keyed to the Committee's
expected outcomes. The Committee could emphasize the provisional nature of the ranges and
the opportunity to re-examine the ranges and their rationale next February in light of
experience in the second half of 1997. If the Committee saw growth in M2 or the other
aggregates as having some value as indicators relevant for policy, the case for presenting
ranges designed to capture expected growth would be strengthened. Given the relatively close
relationship of M2 and nominal income of late, persistent strength or weakness of money
relative to expectations, unless evidently caused by a demand shift or short-term policy
action, might raise questions about whether nominal GDP was on track.
(30) If the Committee decided to align the ranges more closely with expected or
desired outcomes, it still might wish to retain the specifications of alternative I, particularly
for 1998. These relatively low ranges would be consistent with an intent to counter a
tendency for inflation to drift higher, as under the staff forecast. Indeed, the rise in interest
rates envisioned in the intermediate strategy to hold inflation constant in the previous section
of the bluebook would likely produce M2 growth rates of 4-1/4 percent in 1997 and 3 percent
in 1998, and M3 growth that dropped well within a 2 to 6 percent range in 1998. Even if the
Committee believed there were greater prospects for favorable supply-side outcomes than
does the staff--and thus better prospects for either more output growth or less inflation--
alternative I might still be favored if the Committee wished to signal its intent to implement a
relatively tight policy stance and thereby ensure that any such shock would be translated, at
least in part, into lower inflation.
(31) The staff projections for M2 and M3 growth would be encompassed by
alternative II ranges in both years. As compared with alternative I, the Committee could use
alternative II to indicate an intent to pursue a less restrictive policy, which would not be as
likely to involve raising short-term interest rates substantially to fight the inflationary
tendencies in the staff forecast. Such a policy approach also would allow more of any
favorable supply developments to be taken in greater output and less in lower inflation,
because nominal income would be expected to grow more rapidly than in the staff forecast
under these circumstances, at least for a time.
Short-run Policy Alternatives
(32) Two short-run policy alternatives are presented below for Committee consider-
ation. Under alternative B, the intended federal funds rate would be maintained at its current
percent. (A variant of the standard wording of the operational paragraph of the directive that
includes a specific reference to the federal funds rate appears on page 30.)
(33) Incoming information since the last Greenbook has led the staff to strengthen
its real growth forecast over coming quarters, implying a bit lower trajectory for the
unemployment rate, even as the prospects for containing inflation this year have brightened.
Compared with the central tendencies of the members' forecasts for 1997 announced in
February, real GDP and employment this year promise to be appreciably more robust, while
CPI inflation seems in train to come in much lower. For 1998, with the unemployment rate
holding at around a 4-1/2 percent rate during the year, the staff forecasts that inflation will
pick up and be poised to increase further in 1999; a partial reversal over the next year of
recent increases in the exchange value of the dollar removes one source of downward
pressure on inflation.
(34) The Committee may favor the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B if
it thinks that chances are that the staff has not gone far enough to incorporate a more
favorable tradeoff between resource use and inflation into the outlook. But even if the staffs
current forecast were to prove about right, the deterioration in inflation performance would
unfold gradually enough that the Committee may judge that it can afford to wait for clearer
evidence on the situation. Certainly, the hard evidence in hand does not point to an imminent
step up in inflation, despite the low rate to which unemployment has fallen. And the odds
that recent inflation performance reflects, at least to some degree, a more lasting structural
change, as opposed to a confluence of temporary factors, surely go up the longer inflation
remains subdued. No change in the stance of monetary policy at this FOMC meeting is built
into the structure of market interest rates, so financial market prices would react little to the
Committee's choice of alternative B. Over the upcoming intermeeting period, some firming in
Treasury bill rates should accompany the return to positive net issuance of bills, while early
signs of a pickup in economic growth after a pause in the second quarter could well induce
some upward pressures on bond yields. In the context of evidence of a widening trade
deficit, these interest rate increases are not expected to contribute to upward pressure on the
(35) The 1/4 percentage-point increase in the federal funds rate embodied in
alternative C might seem appropriate if the Committee sees the likelihood of intensifying
inflation pressures, as in the Greenbook, and wishes to impart some resistance to the
anticipated acceleration of prices. The idea that the current degree of pressure on productive
resources could be sustained without inducing an eventual upward spiral in wages and prices
might be viewed by the Committee as still too speculative to risk deferring further preemptive
policy action. Indeed, it could even believe, as does the staff, that many of the forces that
have acted to hold down inflation in the recent past are likely to be abating in the near future.
For example, a list of the forces that might be mostly played out by now include: (i) in-
creases in the labor force participation rate, which have kept strong aggregate demand from
generating a still lower unemployment rate; (ii) lower increases in the cost of worker benefits,
which have restrained labor costs; (iii) slow adjustment in inflation expectations to the lower
path of actual inflation, which also has conditioned wage and price setting; and (iv)
appreciation of the exchange value of the dollar, which has induced outright declines in
import prices. Judging by the relationships incorporated in the "Longer-Term Strategies"
section of this document, a 25 basis point rise in the funds rate represents only a small down
payment on the increase that would be needed to contain inflation permanently at about a
down to such a rate, it might consider a 50 basis point firming at this FOMC meeting. Even
if the tradeoff between resource use and inflation through the end of next year proves to be
still more favorable than is now incorporated in the staff forecast or in those model exercises,
the consequences of choosing a more restrained policy stance at this meeting may not be seen
as adverse. The Committee might well view it as a favorable outcome if the economic
expansion were to proceed at a slightly slower-than-projected pace but with a declining path
for inflation that better conformed to the Federal Reserve's long-run goal of stable prices.
(36) The 25 basis point firming in alternative C would catch market participants off
guard, inducing an immediate selloff in securities markets and an appreciation of the dollar in
exchange markets, with short-term interest rates jumping by virtually the same amount as the
intended funds rate. Market participants would likely interpret the tightening as another
preemptive action that would underscore their sense of the Federal Reserve's anti-inflationary
resolve. To the extent that, as seems likely, market participants continued to perceive that
any potential inflationary threat was rather muted, they would probably extrapolate further
firming moves only to a limited extent, thereby restraining the reaction in financial market
prices. A 50 basis point firming would, of course, represent an even greater surprise to
market participants and would induce a still sharper backup in interest rates and drop in
equity prices.
(37) The staffs projections of money and debt growth this year, assuming main-
tenance of the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B, were described in the previous
section. In brief, for the year as a whole the staff projects growth of M2 and M3 of 4-1/2
and 6-1/2 percent, respectively, just below their pace from 1996:Q4 to June, and of domestic
nonfinancial debt of 5 percent, just above its pace from 1996:Q4 to May. Maintenance of the
slightly higher short-term interest rates of alternative C would lower these growth rates only
slightly over this year.
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. B Alt. C
Alt. B Alt. C
Levels in Billions
Apr-97
May-97
Jun-97
Jul-97
Aug-97
Sep-97
Oct-97
Nov-97
Dec-97
Monthly Growth Rates
Apr-97
May-97
Jun-97
Jul-97
Aug-97
Sep-97
Oct-97
Nov-97
Dec-97
Quarterly Averages
97 Q1
97 Q2
97 Q3
97 Q4
Growth Rate
From
Dec-96
Jun-97
Jun-97
Jun-97
Sep-97
Dec-97
Jun-97
Sep-97
Dec-97
Jun-97 97 Q4
Directive Language
(38) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording relating to the
Committee's ranges for the aggregates in 1997 and 1998 along with the standard and
alternative language for the operational paragraph for the intermeeting period.
The paragraph that follows includes the usual options and updating changes. In
addition, staff suggests deleting the term "monitoring" in the reference to the growth of total
domestic nonfinancial debt. The deletion would seem to avoid any inference that the
monetary aggregates receive a degree of emphasis that substantially distinguishes their role
from that of non-financial debt in the formulation of monetary policy.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in
output. In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee REAFFIRMED at
THIS [DEL:its] meeting [DEL: in February] THE RANGES IT HAD established IN
FEBRUARY [DEL: ranges] for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 2 to 6
percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1996 to the fourth
quarter of 1997. [IN FURTHERANCE OF THESE OBJECTIVES, THE
COMMITTEE AT THIS MEETING RAISED/LOWERED THE RANGES IT
HAD ESTABLISHED IN FEBRUARY FOR GROWTH OF M2 AND M3
TO RANGES OF ___ TO ___ PERCENT AND ___ TO ____ PERCENT
RESPECTIVELY, MEASURED FROM THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1996
TO THE FOURTH QUARTER OF 1997.] The [DEL: monitoring] range for growth
of total domestic nonfinancial debt was MAINTAINED [DEL: set] at 3 to 7 percent
(RAISED/LOWERED TO ___ TO ___ PERCENT) for the year. FOR 1998,
THE COMMITTEE AGREED ON TENTATIVE RANGES FOR MONE-
TARY GROWTH, MEASURED FROM THE FOURTH QUARTER OF
FOR M2 AND ____ TO ____ PERCENT FOR M3. THE COMMITTEE
PROVISIONALLY SET THE ASSOCIATED RANGE FOR GROWTH OF
TOTAL DOMESTIC NONFINANCIAL DEBT AT ___TO ___ PERCENT
FOR 1998. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be
evaluated in the light of progress toward price level stability, movements in
their velocities, and developments in the economy and financial markets.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
Shown below is (1) standard draft wording for the operational paragraph that
includes the usual options for Committee consideration and (2) possible alternative
wording for Committee consideration that makes explicit reference to the federal
funds rate and recasts part of the sentence on possible intermeeting adjustments to
Standard Version
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to DECREASE (SLIGHTLY/SOMEWHAT)/maintain/
INCREASE (SLIGHTLY/SOMEWHAT) the existing degree of pressure on
reserve positions. In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful con-
sideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, somewhat
(SLIGHTLY) greater reserve restraint would (MIGHT) or (SOMEWHAT)
slightly lesser reserve restraint (WOULD) might be acceptable in the
intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with MODERATE GROWTH [DEL: some moderation in the expansion of]
M2 and M3 over coming months.
ALTERNATE WORDING
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to maintain current/tighten/ease (somewhat/slightly)
conditions in reserve markets consistent with the federal funds rate remaining
at/increasing to/decreasing to an average of around ___ percent. In the con-
text of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, decisions regarding the desirability of adjusting the
federal funds rate during the intermeeting period should give
(1) equal weight to developments indicating a need to tighten or ease
the stance of policy,
(2) greater weight to developments indicating a need to tighten/ ease
the stance of policy.
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
moderate growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
