Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
Strictly Confidential (FR) Class I FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
By the staff Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) March 21, 1997
Class I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Since the February FOMC meeting, federal funds have traded near the intended
rate of 5-1/4 percent, though unexpectedly low demands for excess reserves at times have
pulled the rate below this level. Other interest rates drifted down on balance over the first
part of the intermeeting period (chart), as incoming data showed inflation damped and seemed
to confirm widely held expectations that the economy would slow in the first quarter. Rates
backed up subsequently, however, partly in response to the Chairman's Congressional
testimonies, which were read as suggesting both somewhat greater concern about the potential
for building inflationary pressures than the market had perceived and a greater willingness by
the Federal Reserve to tighten in order to head them off. In recent weeks, evidence that
spending and output growth remained strong and that any slowing of the economic expansion
in the first quarter was likely to be much less marked than had been anticipated added to
upward pressure on interest rates, as perhaps did the perception that prospects for an
agreement to balance the budget were diminishing.
(2) On net, short-term rates rose 20 to 30 basis points over the intermeeting period
and, judging from federal funds futures quotes, markets recently have come to assign high
odds on a quarter-point tightening in March. Intermediate- and longer-term Treasury rates
rose 25 to 40 basis points. The Treasury's inflation-indexed bond increased about half as
much; however, limited trading activity in this bond counsels against a fine reading of
changes in the spread of the nominal over real rates, which incorporates compensation for
both expected inflation and inflation uncertainty. Survey data on inflation expectations have
shown little change of late. Most indexes of equity prices declined slightly over the period,
but weakness in technology and small capitalization stocks sent the NASDAQ down sharply.
(3) With growth prospects in the U.S. boosted relative to those abroad, reflected in
greater increases in interest rates in the U.S. than abroad, the dollar's weighted-average
exchange value rose 2-1/2 percent over the intermeeting period. The dollar appreciated only
slightly against the yen, which was supported by a growing realization that Japan's trade and
current account surpluses are burgeoning, that these surpluses are not sustainable, and that the
yen most likely will eventually appreciate in response.
(4) Broad money growth remained fairly strong in February, though data for early
March suggest some moderation. M2 expanded at a 5 percent rate last month, the same as in
January, no doubt supported in both months by robust income growth.1 Based on the staff's
GDP forecast, M2 velocity is expected to rise only a little in the first quarter. With
opportunity costs about unchanged, this behavior of velocity would extend the relatively
stable relationship between these two measures that has prevailed for the last 2-1/2 years. M3
growth continued to outpace that of M2, reflecting sizable issuance of large time deposits,
particularly by foreign banks, which have been using them to fund rapid asset expansion as
well as to pay down borrowing from their foreign offices. M3 also continued to be boosted
by further strong growth of money funds, which have continued to gain popularity as a
business cash management vehicle in recent years.
(5) Growth of nonfinancial sector debt appears to have slowed a bit in the early
months of the year, owing to some running down of cash balances of the federal and state
government sectors. Private debt, by contrast, looks to be expanding at a little above its
fourth-quarter pace. A greater flow of credit to the nonfinancial business sector reflects
merger and acquisition activity and capital outlays. As bond yields backed up, the
composition of business borrowing shifted a little in the direction of short-term sources of
funds. Reflecting the strength of business balance sheets, credit supply conditions remain
quite favorable. Junk bond spreads have narrowed; spreads on other open market instruments
have held steady at very low levels; spreads of large bank loan rates over base rates ticked up
in the first quarter, but they remain in the low portion of the historical range. Problems in
the "sub-prime" auto loan market, which have included instances of defaulted commercial
paper and bankruptcy, have had little effect on either the commercial paper market generally
or the availability of credit to the household sector overall. However, losses on credit cards
continued to mount, and a major credit card lender recently reported an earnings loss owing
to unexpected deterioration in loan quality. It remains to be seen whether this experience will
prompt a more cautious approach over a wider spectrum of borrowers and lenders. The
quality of other consumer debt also continued to erode through the end of last year, but by
much less, and delinquencies on home mortgages moved up from very low levels. Household
sector debt growth appears to have strengthened somewhat so far this year, with faster growth
evident in both its consumer credit and mortgage components.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Dec. Jan. Feb. Feb.
Money and Credit Aggregates
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank Credit
Adjusted1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed Reserves2
Total Reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary Base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Excess reserves
(FIN 39 and FASB 115).
Policy Alternatives
(6) The current pace of economic activity appears considerably more robust than
had been expected in the January Greenbook. Persistent strength in domestic demand has
prompted the staff to raise appreciably its projections of nominal and real GDP growth for
forecasts in the latest Humphrey-Hawkins report, but are now about a half percentage point
above the upper ends of the central tendency ranges. With growth in real GDP projected by
the staff to exceed its estimate of the growth in potential by nearly a percentage point this
year, employment and economic activity would over time move further above levels thought
to be associated with stable inflation. The increased inflation pressures are unlikely to show
through right away; indeed, the staff still forecasts CPI inflation to be below the FOMC
members' central tendency in 1997, held down by the rise in the dollar and favorable
developments in food and energy markets. However, inflation picks up noticeably in 1998
and presumably beyond.
(7) Nonetheless, a number of considerations regarding the outlook might induce the
Committee to forgo tightening at the March meeting, as under alternative B. The fact that
resource utilization rates have been close to current levels for several quarters, with no sign
that the underlying trend of price inflation is moving higher, might suggest that the economy
may not in fact have overshot its long-run potential. In light of this possibility, the
Committee may want to wait to see more definite indications that price pressures are likely to
intensify before tightening--for example, additional increases in resource utilization or in wage
inflation. Moreover, even if a tightening is needed, the Committee may perceive no urgency,
especially in light of the projected decline in total CPI inflation this year, which, in turn,
would help restrain inflation expectations. Were the Committee to wait to see if the
unemployment rate declines, or if temporary factors damping compensation growth like health
care savings or worker insecurity diminish, sufficient lead time may still be available to
prevent tight labor markets from being translated into a materially higher rate of general price
inflation. Even should the upturn in wage inflation already observed be sustained or become
steeper, it still could be largely absorbed for a time in reduced profit margins or matched by
faster productivity growth, rather than passed through quickly to prices. Finally, the
enthusiasm of international investors for the dollar may prove more lasting than anticipated by
the staff, restraining inflation pressures in 1998 and beyond relative to the staff forecast.
(8) With market participants apparently placing high odds on a 25 basis point
tightening in the federal funds rate at the March meeting, interest rates probably would fall
somewhat if the unchanged policy of alternative B were adopted. Nonetheless, many
observers would likely continue to view tightening as inevitable, unless economic growth
slows to an unexpected degree, and these expectations would limit the decline in long-term
rates and any softening in the dollar. Indeed, if data in the weeks ahead come in as the staff
projects -- strong real GDP growth and the unemployment rate declining -- both short- and
long-term interest rates would back up, with long-term rates possibly more than reversing any
initial rally.
(9) The Committee might choose to increase the federal funds rate, perhaps by the
pressures. Recent strength in aggregate demand suggests that interest rates are not high
enough to restrain economic growth over the near term to the likely rate of increase in
potential, so resource use probably will be moving more decidedly above sustainable levels.
The alternative simulations in the Greenbook imply that substantial tightening is needed over
the balance of the year to forestall a lasting increase in the rate of inflation. Because of lags
in the effects of policy, delaying the tightening process for long in these circumstances would
increase the amount that the real funds rate eventually would have to be raised to reverse the
impetus imparted to the inflation process, amplifying the associated swing in real GDP. Even
if the Committee is not as pessimistic as the staff on the inflation outlook, some firming may
still be warranted to improve the balance of risks facing the economy. Robust final demand
and lean inventories would suggest that the likelihood of significant economic weakness is
small at present and that the economy should retain significant forward momentum even after
a tightening. With demand strong, only unusual, persistent increases in productivity or in
labor force participation would avert added cost and price pressures at some point in the
future if the current funds rate is maintained. Given these current risks, a tightening action
might seem especially appropriate if the Committee sought to improve the prospects for
progress over the next few years toward its long-run price stability objective.
(10) In light of recent data on economic activity and the mention of the possibility
of preemptive action in the Chairman's testimonies, a slight tightening would surprise market
participants very little. Nevertheless, a 50 basis point move at this meeting is larger than
market analysts expect, judging partly by what is built into the yield curve; it would likely
prompt a substantial decline in bond and equity prices and a further strengthening of the
dollar in foreign exchange markets. The extent of the response in financial markets would, of
course, depend on whether the policy move were seen as the first of a series or as a one-time
adjustment. On the one hand, a 50 basis point change might be read as indicating that the
Federal Reserve was more concerned about inflation prospects than most had thought, adding
to the upward pressure on rates. On the other, markets might assume that, with a move of
this size, policy would be on hold for a while, reducing uncertainties about whether further
actions were imminent. Indeed, recent FOMC minutes and Committee members' speeches
and testimonies have generally emphasized the Committee's perception that any
disequilibrium is small, and markets could see the 50 basis point adjustment as putting policy
at a setting that would re-equilibrate risks for some time.
(11) If the Committee felt that a tightening were needed but believed that a modest
firming might be sufficient to contain inflation, it could choose to raise the federal funds rate
smaller initial move might seem desirable if it were viewed as less likely to trigger an
outsized reaction in financial markets. Since high odds on a 25 basis point tightening are
already embodied in market yields, both long- and short-term rates might rise relatively little
on the announcement of such an action. However, market responses over time would likely
be muted only if market participants took the modest firming to augur less cumulative
tightening than an immediate 50 basis point move. Based on the pattern of prior Committee
actions, markets could soon begin to build in at least one more 25 basis point firming, a
tendency that would be amplified if incoming data are as strong as in the staff forecast.
(12) Under alternative B and the staff forecast, debt is expected to continue to grow
around its recent pace in the months ahead, while money growth tends to moderate as the
expansion of nominal GDP slows. The debt of nonfinancial sectors is expected to grow at a
borrowing picks up somewhat, as capital spending remains strong, while flows of internal
funds level out. For households, although credit is likely to become somewhat harder to
obtain for marginal borrowers, overall consumer debt should remain on its recent moderate
growth path.
(13) M2 growth from February to June under alternative B is projected to slow to a
will likely be near the upper edge of its 1-to-5 percent annual range. Expansion of M3
should ease relative to its unusually rapid pace of earlier this year, as the torrid growth in
money funds slows to a more sustainable rate and depositories resume a more typical balance
of financing between deposits and non-deposit funding sources. From February to June, M3
is projected to increase at a 6 percent rate, leaving it well above the upper end of its annual
Growth Rates of Money and Debt
(percent, annual rates)
February 1996:Q4
to to
June June
M2 4-1/2 5
M3 6 7-1/4
M1 -6 -3-1/2
Adjusted for sweeps 4-1/2 5-1/2
Debt 5 4-3/4
Alternative Levels and Growth Rates for Key Monetary Aggregates
M2 M3 M1
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rate
From To
Directive Language
(14) Presented below is draft wording for the operational paragraph that includes the
usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee
seeks to DECREASE (SLIGHTLY/SOMEWHAT)/maintain/INCREASE
(SLIGHTLY/ SOMEWHAT) the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price
stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, somewhat (SLIGHTLY)
greater reserve restraint would (MIGHT) or (SOMEWHAT) slightly lesser
reserve restraint (WOULD) might be acceptable in the intermeeting period.
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with some
moderation in the expansion of M2 and M3 over coming months.
March 24,1997
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Short-Term Lon-Term
CDs money corporate conventional home mortgages
federal Treasury bills secondary comm. market bank U.S. government constant A-utility municipal secondary primary
funds secondary market market paper mutual prime maturity yields recently Bond market market
Monthly
Mar 96
Apr 96
ay 96
Jun 96
Jul 96
Aug 96
Sep 96
Oct 96
Nov 96
Dec 96
Jan 97
Feb 97
Weekly
Dec 4 96
Dec 11 96
Dec 18 96
Dec 25 96
Jan 1 97
Jan 8 97
Jan 15 97
Jan 22 97
Jan 29 97
Feb 5 97
Feb 12 97
Feb 19 97
Feb 26 97
Mar 5 97
Mar 12 97
Mar 19 97
Daily
Mar 14 97
Mar 20 97
Mar 21 97
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money and Credit Aggregate Measures
S y MARCH 24, 1997
Seasonally adjusted
Mo ney stock measures and liquid as ets Bank credit Domestic nonfinancial debt'
nontransactions components total loanstotal loans
Period M1 M2 M3 L and U. S. other' total=
In M2 In M3 only Investments' government'
Levels (Sbillions)
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Strictly Confidentlal (FR)-,
Class II FOMC
MARCH 24, 1997
Components of Money Stock and Related Measures
Money market
Demand Other Savings Small mutualfunds Large Short-term Commercial Bankers
Period urrency deposit checkable denomination denomination RP's' Eurodollars$ Savings Treasury ommerc Bankersdeponia p checkabletances =deposit deposits posits ime deposits Retail Institution- time deposits' d securities' accepa
Annual (Q4)
1994
1995
1996
Monthly
1996-FEB.
APR.
MAY
JUNE
JULY
AUG.
SEP.
OCT.
NOV.
DEC.
p preliminary
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
Period Net 2 Redemptions Net it Redemptions Net rdemptions holdings
_________purchases (-) change year 1-5 510 over 10 Change total 4 NetRPs
Weekly
December 18
March 5
12
19
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
March 19
March 21, 1997
March 19
