Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
May 15, 1998
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) May 15, 1998
Class I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Keeping the federal funds rate close to its intended level of 5-1/2 percent, which
was reaffirmed at the FOMC meeting on March 31, proved challenging at times over the
intermeeting period. The Desk added reserves on a permanent basis early in the period and
arranged some large temporary injections to offset April tax inflows. More recently, after the
Treasury balance retreated to a more normal level, the Desk has been draining reserves. In
the event, depositories seemed inclined to hold fewer excess reserves than had been expected,
and the federal funds rate traded shy of its intended level through the latter part of April and
into May before returning to the 5-1/2 percent area of late.1
(2) Most other market interest rates have registered small net declines since the
March meeting (chart). News stories in late April reporting that the Committee had switched
to an asymmetric directive toward tightening were a focus of market attention for a time, in
part because they appeared consistent with the more hawkish tone taken by several Federal
Reserve officials in speeches and interviews. These reports triggered a spike in market yields,
engendered skittishness about the prospects for rates going forward, and set back stock prices
some. The effects proved fleeting once investors learned that wage and price inflation in the
first quarter remained well contained. In that context, they seemed to play down other data
suggesting that the economy retained considerable momentum and that the margin of unused
resources was slim. Most recently, heightened turmoil in Asian economies augmented the
demand for dollar assets, raising the foreign exchange value of the dollar and trimming
interest rates. Judging from futures rates, market participants are currently putting little
weight on the possibility of policy tightening over coming months. With reported inflation a
touch lower and survey measures of inflation expectations continuing to decline, real short
rates appear to have extended their gradual upcreep. Real rates at longer maturities seem to
have firmed, too: While the illiquidity of the indexed debt market makes inference about
underlying real rates problematic, the yields on inflation-indexed debt rose somewhat further,
on net, over the intermeeting period. The advance in the real federal funds rate may be one
factor behind increases of 1/4 percentage point or more in rates on inflation-indexed debt
since last fall. Indeed, the downward tilt to the term structure of indexed yields--which has
become more pronounced in recent months--could be read as indicating that market
participants believe that real short rates will eventually reverse some of that increase. Higher
real rates and soft earnings reports, however, did not prove to be much of a check on equity
prices on balance, as major indexes gained from 1-1/2 to 3-3/4 percent.
(3) Since the March FOMC meeting, the trade-weighted exchange value of the
dollar relative to major currencies is little changed on balance. The dollar has depreciated
about 3-1/2 percent relative to the mark and other continental European currencies, while
appreciating from 1-1/2 to 3 percent against the yen, the Canadian dollar, and sterling. Over the
intermeeting period, signs of strong German economic growth and significant progress in
settling outstanding issues necessary for next year's launch of the euro contributed to the
mark's rise. German interest rates are up a little over the intermeeting period. The
depreciation of the yen against the dollar has occurred against the backdrop of continued
indications of weak economic activity in Japan, very accommodative monetary conditions,
and considerable declines in short- and long-term yields. Following the release of the details
of Japan's latest fiscal stimulus package on April 9, Japanese authorities sold dollars for yen
on a massive scale. The effects of the intervention, amounting to more than $20 billion over
two days, were short-lived; the dollar immediately depreciated 3 percent but recouped these
losses within ten days.
Desk did not intervene in the foreign exchange market for U.S. accounts.
(4) Other Asian financial markets have come under renewed pressure after two
months of relative calm. Although Indonesian and IMF officials reached an agreement that
accelerated reform measures and allowed for a resumption of IMF payments in early April,
subsequent social unrest has triggered a 20 percent fall in the rupiah against the dollar over
the intermeeting period. Labor unrest in Korea has also emerged as unemployment continues
to rise and a number of chaebols have announced restructuring plans that are expected to
generate significant layoffs. With the exception of the rupiah, currencies in the region have
been relatively stable since the last FOMC meeting, though achieving that stability has taken
substantial increases in market interest rates in some cases. Equity prices in emerging Asian
economies have fallen as much as 25 percent over the intermeeting period. Renewed
difficulties in Asia have not prompted substantial declines in the prices on financial markets
of emerging economies elsewhere, although spreads on Latin American and Eastern European
debt have moved a bit higher and their equity markets are generally lower.
(5) Growth of the monetary aggregates has been whipsawed by special factors of
late. M2 expanded at a 9-1/2 percent clip in April, but is falling early this month. Households
evidently built up their deposits in late March and early April to meet unusually heavy
nonwithheld tax liabilities. As those tax payments have cleared in recent weeks, M2 has run
off. Heavy mortgage prepayments, as households took advantage of lower longer-term yields
to refinance, provided an additional spur to M2 in April, as they had in March, but, with
mortgage refinancings leveling out, their effect on money growth is estimated to be waning in
May. Averaging the performance of M2 in April with the projection for May, which should
leave virtually no net imprint of tax effects, suggests that its growth has downshifted
substantially this quarter relative to its rapid first-quarter pace, about in line with staff
expectations. M3 also appears to be moderating in April and May as a whole relative to
earlier in the year; not only has M2 growth slowed, but spectacular growth in institution-only
money funds has been offset somewhat by a runoff in large time deposits. Commercial banks
evidently have needed to raise a smaller volume of funds in the market of late, given the
heavy influx of nonwithheld tax receipts into Treasury deposits, as well as the apparent
slowing in bank credit expansion, on average, over the past two months.
(6) While businesses have continued to tap the bond market in volume of late,
some of the proceeds have been used to pay down bank loans and commercial paper, so that
their total borrowing appears to have receded from its rapid first-quarter pace. In contrast,
household borrowing likely has remained fairly robust, as mortgage debt expansion appears to
have maintained the strong pace of the past half year, no doubt reflecting the considerable
vigor of the housing market. In recent weeks, quality spreads on marketable business debt
instruments have widened slightly, albeit from very low levels, as issuance has been brisk.
Commercial banks, however, have reported in the most recent senior loan officer survey that
business lending spreads, particularly for larger firms, have been narrowed further. With state
and local governments continuing to issue debt aggressively, in part to fund new capital
projects, the debt of nonfederal sectors has grown at about an 8 percent rate in recent months.
However, robust tax inflows have allowed the Treasury to pay down federal debt, even on a
seasonally adjusted basis, holding total debt growth to around 6 percent over March and
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Feb. Mar. Apr. Apr.
Money and Credit Aggregates
M1
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Adjusted1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
Excess reserves
Policy Alternatives
(7) In light of incoming data indicating robust domestic demand, the Greenbook
projection for real GDP growth over the first half of this year has been strengthened
appreciably. Output growth, as before, is projected to slow after the middle of this year, to a
little less than the pace of its potential, assuming an unchanged nominal funds rate. With the
drag from net exports expected to have peaked in the first quarter, the slowdown in GDP
growth reflects the restraint associated with a drop in inventory investment and, partly as a
result of associated multiplier effects, a cooling of domestic final demand. The latter reflects
the scaling back of purchases of consumer durables and business capital owing partly to the
earlier buildup in their stocks relative to income and production, the waning effects of prior
interest rate declines, and the projected softening in equity prices. However, the path of the
unemployment rate, while rising, has been revised down a tad over the forecast period. Even
so, the outlook for inflation is little changed; we continue to predict that the measured
increase in the core CPI will stay reasonably stable, averaging near a 2-1/4 percent rate through
the end of next year. Further technical corrections will help to hold down published inflation,
but a number of economic forces are also at work: Non-oil import prices are projected to
continue to decline, though at a diminishing rate, capacity utilization is seen as easing
noticeably, the rate of increase in unit labor costs is projected to slip back next year to below
a 2 percent pace, and inflation expectations should continue to edge lower.
(8) If the Committee views the Greenbook forecast as both likely and acceptable, it
might be inclined to maintain its current 5-1/2 percent intended federal funds rate, as under
alternative B. Although that forecast has an underlying upward tilt to inflation in 1999 as
labor markets remain quite tight, that tilt is gradual and starts from a lower inflation rate in
tendencies of members' CPI projections in February.2 Even if the Committee were troubled
by the underlying uptrend of inflation in the staff forecast, it might still be willing to adopt
the unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B. The vulnerable state of many financial
markets in Asia, which could react adversely to an increase in U.S. interest rates, might weigh
against action at this time. When the Committee's directive tilt was disclosed prematurely in
late April, interest rates in those markets rose along with dollar interest rates, indeed by
somewhat more than those here. In addition, the Committee may feel that a small uptick in
underlying inflation, should it unfold as in the staff forecast, would generate only minimal
costs in potential resource distortions and could be readily countered in the future. If so, the
Committee may be willing to accept the significant probability of such an uptick through
economy will prove able to sustain the high operating rate built into the staff forecast without
a rise in underlying inflation.
(9) In that regard, maintaining the current stance of policy might simply be based
on the high degree of uncertainty about the inflation outlook. The persistent underpredictions
of real output growth and employment and overpredictions of inflation that have confronted
policymakers and forecasters alike have been symptomatic of several factors on the supply
side of the economy. Some of these factors are likely to be temporary but others may reflect
ongoing structural shifts in the economy that permanently raise the path of potential output.
Forecasters have not been very successful in either anticipating these forces or sorting out the
extent to which their effects will be transitory, suggesting, perhaps, that less weight should be
placed on such forecasts at present in the making of policy. Even though unemployment has
fallen to a historically low rate, the point at which inflation will actually start to rise remains
sufficiently uncertain that the appropriate policy posture may be to keep standing pat and
allowing the economy's momentum to continue until clearer evidence of mounting
inflationary pressures begins to surface. At that point, policy might need to respond quickly
and vigorously, but the process of accelerating prices is likely to unfold gradually enough that
such a reaction has a good chance of being successful in keeping inflation subdued. Until
that point, however, the economy can continue to reap the benefits of greater employment and
production than previously thought sustainable without inflationary side effects.
(10) Market participants seem to have incorporated virtually no odds of policy
action at the May FOMC meeting, so a decision to keep the intended federal funds rate
unchanged should elicit little immediate reaction in financial markets. Moreover, market
participants appear to be anticipating economic events over the intermeeting period along the
lines of the Greenbook forecast, so market interest rates should vary around current quotes.
The exchange value of the dollar against major currencies also is not expected to break out of
its recent trading range.
(11) The Committee instead may prefer to raise its intended federal funds rate by 25
basis points at the May meeting, as under alternative C. The Committee was concerned
about the inflation outlook at its last meeting, and in some respects that outlook may have
worsened. In particular, the unemployment rate may be seen as having now fallen so low
that, even if it were to edge up a little, as it does with the slowing of real growth in the staff
forecast, the risks of burgeoning inflationary pressures have become unacceptably high.
Although the first-quarter ECI increase was less than expected, total compensation, its wage
component, and average hourly earnings have all been on an accelerating trend for some time.
With the unemployment rate likely to remain far below any plausible estimate of its
sustainable level, nominal compensation gains may well continue to mount, in contrast to the
staff forecast. If so, expansion of labor compensation would increasingly exceed even
optimistic views of a step-up in productivity growth. Moreover, the slowdown in output
growth in the staff forecast is by no means a foregone conclusion, absent a tighter monetary
policy stance. The effects of Asian woes on net exports may not of themselves be a
sufficient offset to buoyant domestic final demand at current levels of short-term interest
rates. Although real interest rates are high relative to historical norms, medium- and long-
term real rates still may not be elevated enough at present to exert adequate restraint on
spending for consumer durables, housing, and business fixed investment in light of optimistic
"animal spirits" and rising equity prices. Even if the Committee were not dissatisfied with
the likely intermediate-term economic outlook, it might see the possibility that an equity price
bubble was building as representing a sufficient threat in the more distant future to the health
of the economy and the financial system to warrant consideration of tightening policy. The
appendix provides additional perspective on the potential role of equity prices in monetary
policy decisions.
(12) In any event, part of the transmission of policy restraint to spending may work
through a correction in equity markets. Whether an increase in the funds rate of only 1/4 point
would be enough to leave a lasting imprint on stock prices is not clear. To the extent that the
unexpected monetary tightening were interpreted by market participants as suggesting
heightened inflation concerns of the Committee, and, hence, as only the first of a number of
upward steps, it could induce a significant backup in bond yields. In that case, stock prices
might register substantial declines, reflecting both a less favorable outlook for corporate
earnings and a higher discount rate applied to those earnings. Alternatively, were the
tightening seen as an isolated "mid-course correction" in response to a modest shift in
inflation risks, the reaction in bond and equity markets would be muted. Absent a substantial
downdraft in the prices of U.S. financial assets, the value of the dollar would tend to firm on
exchange markets. Although a tightening of U.S. monetary policy at this time might have
negative impacts on financial conditions in Asian, and perhaps other, emerging market
economies, the Committee would need to weigh those effects against the possibility that delay
would necessitate more substantial actions later.
(13) Under the stable money market conditions of alternative B, the staffs projected
of this year should be associated with a noticeable slowdown in the expansion of the debt and
monetary aggregates. Household borrowing should slow along with spending on consumer
durables and houses, and business demand for credit should subside as inventory investment
downshifts substantially. Still, the debt of both sectors is expected to exceed the expansion of
income, with the upturn in debt-servicing burdens held down by recent and continuing
refinancing of outstanding higher-cost obligations. While slower economic growth and
narrower profit margins may make lenders a little more cautious, a significant restriction in
credit availability does not appear likely, given the healthy financial condition of both
borrowers and lenders. In the federal sector, outstanding debt should run off, even on a
seasonally adjusted basis, reflecting the government's widening budget surplus. From April to
September, the growth of domestic nonfinancial debt is foreseen as slowing to a 4-1/2 percent
annual rate, bringing its average advance from the fourth quarter to 5-1/2 percent, somewhat
above the midpoint of its annual range.
(14) Under alternative B, M2 growth is expected to slow significantly to a 3 percent
average rate over the April-to-September period, with a little more than 1 percentage point of
the slowdown from the first four months of 1998 representing the projected unwinding of the
previous artificial boost related to special tax and mortgage-refinancing factors. Even so, over
the second and third quarters, M2 growth averaging 5 percent on a quarterly average basis is
projected to exceed the 4 percent average rate of nominal GDP expansion, implying a further
implied M2 growth would be at a 5-3/4 percent rate. Looking a little further out, the staff now
envisions growth of this aggregate for the year at a 5-1/2 percent rate, putting it above the 1 to
and stable velocity behavior; this projection embodies a 1 percent decline in velocity in 1998.
(15) Projected M3 growth under alternative B would dip to a 5-1/2 percent rate from
April through September, reflecting some expected reduction in the growth of depository
funding needs associated with the anticipated marked slowing in depository credit expansion
over that interval. The rapid rate of securities acquisitions of late 1997 and earlier this year,
which appeared to be related to some large banks' efforts to increase leverage, is expected to
slow. The pace of lending, too, is likely to remain below that of the first four months of the
year as credit demands moderate. From the fourth quarter through September, M3 is seen as
advancing at an 8-1/2 percent annual rate, and for the year as a whole at 8-1/4 percent, well above
the upper bound of its 2 to 6 percent annual range.
Directive Language
(16) Presented below is draft wording for the operational paragraph that includes the
usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks
conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/DECREASING the
federal funds rate at/TO an average of around ___ [DEL: 5-1/2] percent. In the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, a some-
what/SLIGHTLY higher federal funds rate would/MIGHT or a SOMEWHAT/slightly lower
federal funds rate WOULD/might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with considerable moderation in the growth in
M2 and M3 over coming months.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Money and Credit Aggregates
M2 M3 Debt
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C All Alternatives
Appendix: Equity Prices and Monetary Policy
(17) The capital appreciation on major equity markets of late has pushed prices
further beyond the predictions of conventional models of equity-price fundamentals. Rising
share values, even as the outlook for earnings has become less ebullient, have increased the
odds that an asset-price bubble is inflating. This possibility has drawn considerable attention
to the question of how the Committee should factor equity market developments into its
policy deliberations. In the standard formulation of monetary policy, equity prices are
important for what they imply about future spending and inflation, not for their own sake.
Indeed, they have the same status as any of the other critical determinants of spending,
production, and inflation--such as the foreign exchange value of the dollar, the federal budget
position, and foreign economic activity. In that regard, high and rising equity prices--
particularly if they were accompanied by a general increase in the value of other long-lived
assets--might signal excessive liquidity, accommodative financial conditions, and a penchant
for speculation on price increases, presaging the buildup of strains on resources. Presumably,
though, such effects are embodied in the Committee's outlook for output and inflation and
would warrant a policy response only to the extent that they threatened the achievement of its
macroeconomic goals.
(18) The case for altering the course of policy in response to equity price
movements beyond what would be called for on the basis of their contribution to current and
future pressures on resources would seem to rest on one or both of two considerations. For
one, the Committee might be concerned that the inflating of an asset bubble implied a
significant misallocation of resources that would prevent the economy from producing most
efficiently. In an environment of ready capital gains, households might be consuming and
building up debt on the basis of ephemeral additions to wealth, and firms might be adding to
capacity because the inflated market values of their existing capital were high relative to
replacement costs. These purchases of durable goods, to the extent that they were viewed
with regret once equity prices fell back into their proper alignment, would also have the
potential to amplify cyclical swings in economic activity.
(19) As another possibility, although the Committee might be satisfied that the most
likely path for equity prices was consistent with its macroeconomic objectives, it might also
feel that there was a significant risk of substantially faster asset inflation that would sow the
seeds of problems when it corrected. In particular, absent effective efforts to prick the
bubble, once begun, an asset inflation might continue on its own momentum, and the relative
price misalignment become increasingly severe. The resulting threat of a large price decline
when the bubble bursts may be troubling because of concerns about systemic risk to the
financial system, knock-on effects on spending and confidence, and the risk of subsequent
undershooting of equity prices.
(20) By tightening monetary policy beyond that expected to be required to achieve
desired macroeconomic outcomes, the Committee would be tolerating some straying in the
intermediate term from the fundamental goals of maximum employment and stability of the
prices of goods and services in order to lessen the risks of systemic problems or severe
macroeconomic dislocations. Such action requires both that the Committee believes that it
has a more accurate view of fundamentals than the market and that it doubts that market
forces will discover and correct the imbalance in a timely fashion. Given the complex
interaction of equity price determination and short-term interest rates, the Committee would
need to be mindful of the high degree of uncertainty surrounding the extent of monetary
policy action ultimately required to burst the bubble without causing significant undershooting
of equity prices. Moreover, the Committee would need to make the judgement that standard
regulatory and supervisory practices, discount window lending, and post-crash provision of
liquidity and easing of monetary policy might be insufficient to prevent systemic problems or
severe macroeconomic disturbances should the bubble be allowed to inflate for now only to
burst at a later date.
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
May 18, 1998
Monthly
May 97
Jun 97
Jul 97
Aug 97
Sep 97
Oct 97
Nov 97
Dec 97
Jan 98
Feb 98
Mar 98
Apr 98
Weekly
Mar 13 98
Mar 20 98
Mar 27 98
Apr 3 98
Apr 10 98
Apr 17 98
Apr 24 98
May 1 98
May 8 98
May 15 98
Daily
Apr 29 98
Apr 30 98
May 1 98
May 4 98
May 5 98
May 6 98
May 7 98
May 8 98
May 11 98
May 12 98
May 13 98
May 14 98
May 15 98
Short-Term Long-Term
corporate conventional home
Treasurybills se da comm bank U.S. govemmenl constant indexed yelds ule mortgagesfederal secondary market Se pa prime maturity yields recen BOd primary marketfunds market prime recen mrketytloan recere Buyer
3-month 6-monh Iyear 3-month 1-monlh 3-year 10-year 30-year 5-year 10-year offler fixed-rate ARM
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class l1 FOMC
Money and Debt Aggregates Ca FO
Seasonally adjusted May 18, 1998Seasonally adJuated
Mone stock measures and liquid assets Domes tl nonflnanciai debt
nontransacttonscomponents U.S.
Period Ml M2 nM2 In MS only MS government other' total'
In M2 In M3 only government'
Annual arowth rates t%)
Annually (04 to 04)
Levels LSbillionsal
Monthly
1997-Dec. 1076.0 4041.3 2965,3 1342.4 5383.7 3797.3 11354.3 15151.6
1998-Jan. 1073.6 4066.3 2992.7 1365.9 5432.1 3797.4 11432.5 15230.0
Feb. 1076.4 4098. 3022.1 1373.7 5472.2 3794.9 11523.0 15317.9
Mar. 1081.0 4126.6 3045.6 1409.7 5536.3 3800.5 11605.1 15405.6
Apr, p 1079.4 4159.6 3080.2 1423.7 5583.3
Weekly
1998-Apr. 6 1083.5 4150.2 3066.7 1430.8 5581.0
May 4p 1081.7 4161.6 3080.0 1432.7 5594.3
________________________________--------I--------___I---------__----L----I---------I---------L'---------I -------
.1 Debt data are on a monthly average basis, derived by averaging end-of-month levels of adjacent months, and have been adjusted to remove discontinuities.
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (PR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Weekly
January 21
May 6
13
Memo: LEVEL (bi. $ 6
May 13
- 1,117
1,233 1,894
- 3,783
1,369 2,993
- 6,224
- 8,245
.2,478 -21,985
-10 4,251
-. 9,275
3,713 5,512
- -3,213
1,369 -1.551
4,812 -14,879
1,880 7,454
May 15, 1998
