Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
SEPTEMBER 25, 1998
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) September 25, 1998
Class I -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Financial markets were extremely volatile around the world over the intermeeting
period, and signs of distress mounted. In general, investors grew more pessimistic about asset
values globally and also demonstrated a reduced tolerance for assuming risk. The sell-off of
risky assets and increase in volatility was sharpest in the early part of the period, but price
movements were quite choppy throughout the interval. In many cases, prices leveled out for a
time or even rebounded some, partly in response to the growing sense that the Federal Reserve
would be easing policy. In recent days, declines have resumed in some markets following
revelations of the magnitude of positions and extent of losses of a major hedge fund, Long-Term
Capital Management. The steady drumbeat of disappointing news out of Japan and Russia,
concerns that financial strains in Latin America might intensify, and worries about the portfolios
of some large financial institutions apparently reinforced the already evident tendency for
investors to mark down their outlook for profits in the United States and to tilt their portfolios
toward safe and liquid assets. Major U.S. equity price indexes dropped 3-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent
over the intermeeting period and are off 12 to 14 percent from their July peaks (chart).' Share
prices for money center banks and investment houses were especially hard hit amid news about
the extent of their trading losses and speculation about the magnitude of their exposure to
emerging markets and distressed counterparties. Prices of Treasury securities were buoyed by
the strong safe-haven demands as well as by market sentiment that financial difficulties abroad
would tend to slow U.S. economic growth and prompt easing moves by the Federal Reserve. On
balance, longer-term Treasury yields fell 40 to 95 basis points over the intermeeting period,
bringing their net declines from their recent peaks in late July to 65 to 110 basis points. 2 The
demand for on-the-run Treasuries, the most liquid of all investments, was especially intense and
their spreads to comparable off-the-run issues widened. The entire Treasury yield curve now lies
below the intended federal funds rate for the first time since 1989. Judging from this
configuration, as well as from yields on federal funds and Eurodollar futures contracts, market
participants now seem certain of at least a 25 basis point rate cut by the Federal Reserve at this
meeting and place high odds on a full percentage point of cumulative easing by the middle of
next year.
(2) Signs of investors' increased uncertainty about the prospects for the U.S. economy
and greater reluctance to bear risk were abundant. Implied volatility derived from options--
including those on the S&P 500, Eurodollar futures, and Treasury bond futures--has remained
elevated since the end of August. Spreads on swaps and mortgage securities fluctuated over a
wide range and increased considerably on balance. Corporate bond markets also appeared
unsettled at times. Declines in yields on investment-grade bonds over the intermeeting period,
while appreciable, did not match the fall in yields on comparable-maturity Treasuries, and
investment-grade issuers pulled back offerings as they waited for more favorable market
conditions. In contrast, yields on junk bonds moved up sharply over the intermeeting period.
Junk bond mutual funds have experienced heavy outflows on balance, and new issuance of
below-investment-grade securities has essentially dried up. In this setting, firms have been
relying heavily on shorter-term sources of financing, including bank loans and commercial paper.
However, banks appear to have become more wary of late, too. Market contacts report that
interest rates have risen in the syndicated loan market, particularly for lower-rated and leveraged
deals, and volume has dropped off. Also, a special Survey of Senior Loan Officers indicates that
a significant number of banks have tightened terms and standards for loans to larger businesses in
the last month.
(3) The announcement by the Russian government on August 17 of a unilateral
suspension of payments on ruble-denominated debt, as well as an effective devaluation of the
ruble, initiated a protracted period of heightened turmoil in foreign financial markets. Early in
the period, stripped Brady spreads for Latin American countries rose 700 to 1300 basis points,
and yields on Asian sovereign dollar-denominated bonds rose 180 to 660 basis points. For all
countries except Malaysia, more than half of these increases were reversed later in the period.
Brazilian financial markets came under especially heavy pressure as participants focused on that
country's large current account deficit and lack of progress in addressing underlying fiscal
problems. Speculative pressures abated somewhat, though, after Brazilian authorities boosted
domestic interest rates sharply and indicated that they were prepared to implement significant
policy changes and approach the IMF for a program after the presidential election. The Mexican
peso, pressured by declines in oil prices early in the period as well as by the more general
concerns about emerging markets, depreciated 10 percent against the dollar over the period in
spite of a 13 percentage point increase in one-month domestic interest rates. In East Asia,
domestic interest rates generally fell, while dollar exchange rates were about unchanged to
slightly higher. In some cases, concerns about speculative activity induced unorthodox policies.
In late August, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority purchased a substantial amount of equities on
the Hong Kong stock market, apparently because they were concerned that short-sales of equities
were contributing to pressure against the Hong Kong dollar. In early September, Malaysia
imposed comprehensive exchange controls and pegged the ringgit to the dollar. Investor
concerns about the potential for outright defaults, as in Russia, or the imposition of strict capital
controls, as in Malaysia, probably contributed to a sell-off of Latin American assets.
(4) In most foreign industrial countries, interest rates on government debt declined
substantially over the intermeeting period, but not as much as in the United States. This
divergence in part reflected the particularly strong demands for the liquidity of U.S. Treasury
securities. In addition, the anticipated path for short-term interest rates in the United States was
lowered by more than in other industrial countries, in part because the United States was seen as
relatively more vulnerable to growing problems in Latin America and thus as more likely to ease
monetary policy. These revisions to monetary policy expectations, combined with some renewed
concerns about the burgeoning U.S. current account deficit, contributed to a significant
depreciation of the dollar against the currencies of industrial nations over the intermeeting
period. The trade-weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar dropped 4-3/4 percent against
major currencies. The decline of the dollar against the yen seemed especially puzzling at times,
but it may have reflected both some tendency for investors to seek the greater perceived safety of
assets in home markets and the influence of the zero bound on nominal interest rates in
constraining further declines in nominal and real rates in Japan. With incoming data suggesting
further deterioration in the Japanese economy, the Bank of Japan announced that it would guide
the overnight call rate down to around 1/4 percent from the previous target "somewhat below"
the official discount rate of 1/2 percent. This move, which surprised investors, contributed to a
points. The lack of progress on legislation to reform the banking system contributed to the
negative outlook for Japan.
. The Desk did not intervene during the period for the
accounts of the System or the Treasury.
(5) The broad money aggregates expanded rapidly over the intermeeting period,
propelled largely by unexpectedly strong growth in retail and institution-only money market
mutual funds. As in some past episodes of market turbulence, money funds appear to have been
favored by investors looking to wait out the current bout of market volatility by parking balances
in relatively safe, liquid assets. In addition, many investors no doubt have found the yields on
money funds attractive given the current very flat yield curve and the decline in Treasury bill
rates. M2 and M3 are now estimated to have grown at 14-1/2 and 15-3/4 percent rates
respectively in September, placing both aggregates still further above the upper bounds of their
annual ranges. While market turbulence has certainly disrupted the composition of credit flows
of late, reasonably complete data through August show no signs of any slowing in the growth of
total domestic nonfinancial debt. Bank credit growth was quite rapid in August, with strength
evident in both securities and loans; lending continued to expand robustly in September,
especially to businesses. Based on preliminary and partial data, the staff estimates that overall
business borrowing actually picked up in September despite the tumult in financial markets and a
somewhat more restrictive lending stance by banks.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
July Aug. Sept. Sept.2
Money and Credit Aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt 6.2 6.0 n.a. 6.2
- Federal -0.9 -0.8 n.a. -0.9
Nonfederal 8.4 8.2 n.a. 8.5
Reserve Measures
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Excess reserves 1365 1516 1542
Policy Alternatives
(6) As a consequence of the financial market developments over the intermeeting
period, the staff now expects weaker foreign economies, a lower path for the U.S. stock market,
and more restrictive credit market conditions over the next few years than forecast at the time of
the August FOMC meeting. Absent offsetting policy actions, these depressing influences on
aggregate demand would result in very slow growth in U.S. output over the next few years and
further disinflation from the already-modest pace of price increases. Thus, in the Greenbook the
staff has assumed that the FOMC will initiate a series of easing moves that cumulate to 3/4
percentage point over the next six months. Still, output growth slows in the forecast to about
Both total and core CPI inflation are projected to be about 2 percent in 1999 and 2000, held down
to an important extent by restrained inflation expectations as well as by technical changes in the
indexes that take effect in 1999. Thus, even with the easing, the staff outlook for economic
growth is noticeably weaker than the central tendency of the FOMC members' forecasts for 1999
reported in July, while that for CPI inflation next year is toward the lower end of the central
tendency range.3
(7) To begin addressing the weaker outlook for the U.S. economy, the Committee
may wish to reduce the funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting, as in alternative A. Now that
the stock market has fallen and credit terms have tightened, the real federal funds rate probably
can be reduced from its unusually high level without adding to inflation pressures. Indeed, with
inflation expectations possibly falling further in recent months--as suggested by a much larger
decline in the spread of nominal over indexed Treasury yields than can be accounted for by the
relative liquidity of these instruments-the real federal funds rate may even have edged higher.
Even if the Committee's outlook for spending is stronger than that of the staff, if it has been
revised down substantially, a policy ease might still be called for. Moreover, financial markets
are fragile and, in the absence of signs of economic recovery and progress on key policy reforms
in Japan and other countries, the possibilities for disappointing outcomes abroad precipitating
further contagion and restraint on spending in the United States may be seen as unacceptably
high. A 25 basis point cut in the funds rate at this point could be viewed as providing a modicum
of insurance against the risk of such very adverse outcomes. In addition to boosting domestic
demand, a lower federal funds rate could be of some limited help in relieving pressures on
emerging market countries, especially those tied to the dollar or finding themselves in need of
defending the exchange value of their currencies through tight monetary policies. Indeed, in
recent days as an easing by the Federal Reserve has come to be seen as more likely, emerging
market countries have witnessed some narrowing in spreads on their dollar-denominated debt
and some improvement in their stock markets. If foreign outcomes proved not so disappointing
or the domestic economy surprisingly resilient, the policy move could be reversed before long
without raising questions about the Federal Reserve's anti-inflation resolve. Even if the
Committee suspected that more easing might eventually be needed, it might want to move by
only 25 basis points at this time because of the residual inflation risks inherent in the unusually
low unemployment rate along with the strength to date in the economic expansion.
(8) Treasury bill rates might edge higher with a 25 basis point cut in the funds rate
because markets seem to have built in some odds that the move at this meeting might be even
larger. Despite some disappointment in the size of the move, intermediate- and longer-term rates
might not increase much, if at all, since the presumption would be that the Federal Reserve likely
would follow this rate cut with another before long. Indeed, private securities markets could
rally a bit and risk spreads narrow with confirmation of the FOMC's willingness to act.
Nonetheless, should third-quarter earnings announcements, mostly to be released in October, line
up with the staff forecast, equity prices would likely resume their downward adjustment. The 25
basis point move should have little effect on the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
(9) If the Committee believed that, as in the staff forecast, a larger policy move were
needed to have an adequate effect in forestalling oncoming weakness in economic activity or if it
wanted to take more forceful action to address the risks facing financial markets here and abroad,
it might choose to reduce the funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting (alternative A').
Depending on the wording of the announcement associated with such a move, the market might
see the FOMC as being on hold for a longer duration, eliminating for a little while market
uncertainty about whether additional easings were in the offing. Moves of 50 basis points have
been somewhat unusual in recent years, and, in volatile financial markets with largely
unanchored expectations, reactions are difficult to gauge. Most likely, equity markets would
rally and risk premiums on private debt would fall, as the FOMC was seen as taking a more
active stance in cushioning the effects of tighter financing conditions and weaker foreign demand
on economic activity. But there is some chance that market participants could interpret the larger
move as indicating that the Federal Reserve viewed the current economic situation as especially
serious, perhaps owing to fragility in the financial sector. If so, the rebound in equities could be
tempered while Treasury bond prices could be strengthened further. In any event, the value of
the dollar against major currencies would likely drop somewhat under this alternative.4 The
prime rate would likely be reduced by 1/2 percentage point.
(10) Although the staff projection embodies a substantial weakening in aggregate
demand, data to date suggest that the economy is growing near its potential rate. With labor
markets still quite tight and forecasts in recent years often underpredicting economic activity, the
Committee may wish to have more evidence in hand that growth of aggregate demand is slowing
considerably before easing policy. If so, the Committee would find the unchanged stance of
policy under alternative B appropriate. The recent tightening of credit supply conditions and
drop in equity prices toward a more realistic alignment with earnings prospects may be viewed as
necessary and overdue corrections that will help to prevent speculative and inflationary
imbalances from developing. An easing at this time might risk inhibiting those adjustments and
be viewed as an attempt to support overly optimistic investor and lender behavior. Indeed, if
corporate bond and equity prices rallied substantially, such a move could potentially court
another sharp correction at a later date.
(11) With markets betting heavily on an easing at this FOMC meeting, holding rates
unchanged as in alternative B would leave investors confused about Federal Reserve intentions
and likely engender added volatility. Short-term Treasury and private rates would back up
sharply, and longer-term rates also would rise, though perhaps not by much if, as seems likely,
market participants believed that the easing had merely been postponed. Increases in Treasury
yields might be less than in private rates, if adverse reactions in financial markets strengthened
flight-to-safety motives. A part of the recent improvement in foreign financial markets, which
has been built on growing expectations of an easing in U.S. monetary policy, could be reversed,
particularly in some especially vulnerable countries. The foreign exchange value of the dollar
would likely rise, although this effect could be mitigated somewhat if the adverse effects on Latin
American markets were particularly severe.
(12) With some slowing in growth of nominal spending, expansion in the debt of
nonfinancial sectors is expected to moderate over the months ahead. Business borrowing is
likely to be restrained somewhat by less accommodative markets for securities and some further
tightening in standards and terms on bank loans beyond that indicated in the most recent loan
officer survey. While credit availability to households is expected to be affected less, household
borrowing should slow along with the projected deceleration of spending on housing and
durables. The staff forecast projects continued paydowns of federal debt. Overall nonfinancial
debt is expected to grow 5-3/4 percent this year, in the upper half of its 3-to-7 percent range, and
at about a 4-1/2 percent rate over the September-to-March period, down from the 6 percent pace
of the last few months but continuing to outpace nominal GDP.
(13) In the staff forecast, M2 growth would be supported by declines in opportunity
costs associated with the policy easings. 5 Within the aggregate, growth should be strong in liquid
deposits, whose rates adjust relatively sluggishly to declines in market rates, while small time
deposits should run off, as offering rates on these deposits tend to adjust faster. Currency
demand should remain strong, supported by ongoing turbulence abroad. Money market mutual
funds should be buoyed by the declines in market rates and continue to benefit somewhat from
the reduced attractiveness of stock mutual funds, but to a lesser degree than over the past couple
months; the projected declines in stock prices are not as steep as those that already have
occurred, and some of the money fund inflows at the onset of the bear market were likely only
parked temporarily while in transit to alternative longer-term investments. On balance, M2 is
projected to grow at a 6-1/2 percent rate over the next six months, implying further substantial
declines in velocity. With economic growth softening and bank lending moderating, M3 is
projected to decelerate to a 7-1/2 percent pace over September to March. The broad monetary
aggregates will almost surely far exceed their growth ranges in 1998; M2 is projected to grow 8
percent this year and M3 to grow 10 percent.6 However, a good part of the recent and projected
strength in the aggregates apparently reflects shifts in money demand rather than strong spending
growth; M2 has been boosted by heightened demands for liquidity and shifts away from stock
market investments, while the elevated growth of M3 has in part reflected a substitution of bank
funding sources for market financing by lower-rated business firms.
Directive Language
(14) Presented below are three different wording choices for the operational paragraph.
All include the usual policy alternatives for Committee consideration. The first incorporates the
traditional wording of the directive, and the other two, Options 1 and 2, are taken from the
September 24, 1998, memo to the Committee. The Committee may, of course, decide to use
some other variant after its discussion of proposed wording changes at the meeting on Tuesday.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
Traditional Wording
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks
conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/DECREASING the
federal funds rate at/to an average of around ____ [DEL: 5-1/2] percent. In the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, a slightly/SOMEWHAT
higher federal funds rate WOULD/MIGHT or a slightly/SOMEWHAT lower federal funds rate
would/MIGHT be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions
are expected to be consistent with some moderation in the growth in M2 and M3 over coming
Option 1
In the immediate future, to promote the Committee's long-run objectives of price
stability and sustainable economic growth, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with maintaining/raising/lowering the federal funds rate at/to an average of around
___ percent.
call for a slight increase or decrease in the federal funds rate during the intermeeting
period. [or]
that developments are more likely to warrant a decrease/increase than an increase/decrease in the
federal funds rate in coming months. Any potential changes in the federal funds rate objective
during the intermeeting period should be considered in that context.
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with some
moderation in the growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
Option 2
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks
conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining/increasing/decreasing the federal funds
rate at/to an average of around percent. In the context of the Committee's long-run
objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration
to economic, financial, and monetary developments,
federal funds rate than a slightly higher/lower funds rate in the intermeeting period. [or]
a slightly higher federal funds rate in the intermeeting period.
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with some
moderation in the growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Money and Credit Aggregates
Alt. A' Alt. A Alt. B Alt, A' Alt. A Alt. B
All Alternatives
Monthly Growth Rates
Aug-98
Sep-98
Oct-98
Nov-98
Dec-98
Jan-99
Feb-99
Mar-99
Quarterly Averages
1998 Q1
1998 Q2
1998 Q3
1998 Q4
1999 Q1
Growth Rate
From To
Sep-98 Dec-98
Sep-98 Mar-99
Monthly
Sep 97
Oct 97
Nov 97
Dec 97
Jan 98
Feb 98
Mar 98
Apr 98
May 98
Jun 98
Jul 98
Aug 98
Weekly
Jul 24 98
Jul 31 98
Aug 7 98
Aug 14 98
Aug 21 98
Aug 28 98
Sep 4 98
Sep 11 98
Sep 18 98
Sep 25 98
Daily
Sep 9 98
Sep 10 98
Sep 11 98
Sep 14 98
Sep 15 98
Sep 16 98
Sep 17 98
Sep 18 98
Sep 21 98
Sep 22 98
Sep 23 98
Sep 24 98
Sep 25 98
Short-Term Long-Term
Cos crporat mu conventional home
fdal seondaury billset s om. U.S. government constant indexed yields t muni c mortgages
funes market paper maturity yields ecn Buyer mraeonfunds markettl vyef primary market
p - preliminary data
September 28,1998SELECTED INTEREST RATES
Strictly Conlidenfial (FR)
Class II FOMC
Money and Debt Aggregates
September 28, 1998
Seasonally adjusted
Morey stock measures and liculd assets .. armestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactionscomponents U. S
Period M1 M2In M2 In M3 only M3 government' other' total'
Levely (Sbillionri)
Monthly
Weekly
1998-Aug. 3 1083.1 4225.8 3142.8 1452.4 5678.2
So* .
7
p 1064.7 4277,6 3212.9 1483.1 5760.7
p preliminary
pe preliminary eslimate
September 25, 1998
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES
1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
Net purchases 3 agencies outright
Period Net Redemptions Ne wth Redemptions Net rdemtions holdings
purchases (-1 change ye 1-5 5-10 over 10 () Change total 4 Net RPs
Weekly
June 10
Memo: LEVEL (bi. $)
September 23
.11,149
6,771
