Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
MARCH 27, 1998
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) March 27, 1998
Class I - FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Interest rates exhibited little reaction to the Committee's expected decision at
its February meeting to leave the intended level of the federal funds rate unchanged.
Intermediate-term interest rates have risen about 30 basis points since then, on balance, while
rates further out the yield curve have increased much less (chart 1). Lingering expectations
of policy ease were largely eliminated by the Chairman's Humphrey-Hawkins testimony,
which gave a more balanced assessment of the risks to the economy and inflation than the
markets had anticipated. While subsequent data on economic activity were generally firmer
than the market had expected and rates rose somewhat further on balance, market reactions
were mostly muted. Long-term yields seemed to be held down by declines in oil prices and
also perhaps by lower term premiums, as implied volatility of bond prices registered a sharp
decline over most of the intermeeting period, possibly owing to less uncertainty about the
interest rate outlook. An improving picture for the federal budget deficit, reflected in market
discussions of potential future shortages of Treasury securities, likely provided a further,
albeit modest, counterweight to evidence of robust private spending. In recent days, however,
the weight of accumulating evidence of strong private demand seemed to have affected
market sentiment more visibly, raising implied volatility and boosting intermediate- and long-
term interest rates as many as 10 basis points. Judging from the behavior of rates on indexed
rates. Despite the rise in interest rates and some deterioration in market analysts' outlook for
near-term profits, equity prices rose considerably over the intermeeting period; currently, both
equity prices and price-earnings ratios are near record levels.
(2) The dollar traded in a relatively narrow range against the currencies of other
industrial countries, rising against the yen, depreciating against the Canadian dollar and the
British pound, and remaining basically unchanged against other major currencies. In Japan,
disappointment about prospects for fiscal stimulus and concerns about Asian crises worked to
damp long-term interest rates, which, however, retraced a part of their declines on Thursday
and Friday in reaction to a proposal by Japan's ruling party of a large but still incompletely
specified fiscal package. In other industrial countries, interest rates were down, in part on
softer oil prices and other good news on inflation. Short-term rates declined significantly in
Italy, Spain, and Portugal, as expectations coalesced around the view that short-term rates in
the countries likely to initiate Europe's monetary union at the beginning of next year would
converge at or just a bit above the current German level. The Bundesbanks monetary policy
remained on hold during the period. Financial market conditions in the troubled emerging
Asian economies improved somewhat during the period, and their currencies generally firmed
against the dollar. Progress in reforming economic policies and financial and commercial
practices was evident in most of these countries; an exception was Indonesia, where
uncertainty continued over President Suharto's commitment to such reforms.
, and the Desk did not intervene.
(3) The broad monetary aggregates have expanded more rapidly than had been
expected at the time of the February FOMC meeting. M2 accelerated to a 9 1/4 percent rate in
February and is estimated to have maintained that pace in March, putting its growth rate since
the fourth quarter of last year at 8-1/4 percent (chart 2). On a quarterly average basis, M2 is
estimated to have increased at an 8 percent rate in the first quarter, suggesting a decline in
velocity at around a 3-1/2 percent rate, based on current staff estimates of nominal GDP (chart
only on short-term market interest rates), which remained flat. The velocity drop would be
considerably more rapid than those registered in the second half of 1997, which themselves
reversed what appeared to be a slight upward trend in velocity that had persisted beyond the
period of substantial velocity shifts in the early 1990s.
(4) A part of the strength of M2 this year appears to reflect the heavy pace of
mortgage refinancing, because monies used to prepay existing mortgages often must
temporarily be held in liquid deposits. In addition, some part of the most recent growth in
M2 is perhaps tax-related, reflecting both balances received as refunds and balances being
accumulated to pay nonwithheld tax liabilities generated, in part, by substantial capital gains
last year. But such special factors explain only a small portion of the recent strength in M2,
and even less of the surprise, since they had been largely anticipated by the staff in January.
Some of the greater demand for M2 assets may reflect the reduced attractiveness of longer-
term fixed-income investments owing to the decline in intermediate- and long-term rates since
last spring; with the yield curve flat, savers are sacrificing relatively little current return to
obtain the liquidity of money market deposit accounts and money markets mutual funds.
Within M2, nearly all the growth has been in its liquid deposit and MMMF components, with
small time deposits growing slowly in the second half of 1997 and diminishing slightly in
Ratio Scale
Percentage Points
Jul. Aug. Sept Oct Nov. Dec. Jan Feb. Mar.
1997 1998
*Two-quarter moving average.
V2 (ratio scafe)
Opportunity Cost (ratio scale)
M2 Growth and Nominal GDP Growth(Q4 to Q4)
Percent
--- 2 16
....... Nominral GDP
M2 Growth
months of 1997 supported the hypothesis that some flows into liquid M2 were being diverted
from securities markets as well. But an easing of the runoff in noncompetitive tenders in
this explanation for the acceleration in M2 this year.
(5) To be sure, nominal GDP growth in the first quarter could be significantly
more rapid than estimated in the Greenbook, given labor market indicators and a more
optimistic view of productivity. But the current rapid pace of M2 growth instead may
constitute further evidence that its velocity retains a considerable unpredictable element,
especially on a quarterly basis. Thus, the implication for spending of strength in M2 is far
from clear. When looked at on an annual basis, growth in M2 led that of nominal GDP much
more tightly in the 1960s and 1970s than it has since the mid-1980s (chart 2). In the last
three years, M2 has appeared to track contemporaneous GDP more closely than it has future
GDP, reflecting the largely unchanged opportunity costs and relatively damped movements in
velocity (chart 2).
(6) A surge in large time deposits at banks sustained M3 growth over the last two
months at an average rate of 11-1/4 percent. Banks' heavy deposit issuance has been spurred by
continued strong loan demand, one aspect of the persisting and widespread strength in debt
growth in the early months of this year. To finance an estimated widening gap between
retained earnings and expenditures, as well as a hectic pace of mergers and acquisitions,
businesses have been tapping the bond and commercial paper markets in volume, in addition
to borrowing heavily from banks. Household borrowing remains fairly robust Mortgage
debt expansion appears to be maintaining the strong pace of late last year, reflecting the
considerable vigor of the housing market and heavy refinancing activity, which has spawned a
pickup in debt consolidation and contributed to a further slowing in consumer debt. Quality
spreads on debt instruments and anecdotal evidence suggest that credit appears to remain
readily available both to businesses and to most households. Robust tax inflows have kept
seasonally adjusted federal debt unchanged. Total debt has been growing at about a 6 percent
rate in recent months, up about one percentage point from last year.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
Jan. Feb. Mar. Mar.
Money and Credit Aggregates
M1
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Adjusted1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves2
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
Excess reserves
Policy Alternatives
(7) The economy is facing a number of countervailing influences on inflation.
Pressures on labor markets are intense and are anticipated to abate little in the staff forecast at
the current funds rate. Over the next few quarters, domestic demand in the staff forecast will
continue to be bolstered by generally accommodative financial conditions, but a drag from the
external sector-stemming from the downturn in Asia and the effects of the substantial
appreciation of the exchange value of the dollar in the last few years--should work to offset
this strength, holding the expansion of output to a bit less than the growth rate of its potential.
While the external drag is expected to diminish over time, another important influence on
spending-the stock market--will cease to provide stimulus in 1999, as eroding profit margins
begin to take their toll on share prices. Even though labor resources will continue to be
stretched thin through the forecast period, nominal wage increases are expected to be
restrained by subdued inflation expectations, stemming in part from the effects on near-term
inflation of recent declines in oil prices and the ongoing downward trend of import prices.
Measured inflation is expected to be damped by technical revisions to the CPI, but it is
projected to accelerate somewhat when adjustment is made for those effects. Responding to
stronger-than-expected incoming data on domestic demand and to ebullient equity prices, the
staff projections of real growth and resource use are somewhat higher than in the January
Greenbook. As a consequence, inflation should be a little faster through the end of the
forecast period than in the previous Greenbook and would be poised to pick up further in
(8) The unchanged federal funds rate of alternative B might be favored if the
Committee saw the staff forecast as a likely outcome and one that appropriately balanced the
goals of restraining inflation and sustaining expansion over the next few years, or, at a
minimum, if it viewed the risks of substantially different and less desirable outcomes on
either side of the staff forecast as about equal at the current federal funds rate. Even if the
Committee suspected that the odds were tilted a bit either toward a stronger economy and
greater price pressures or toward a weaker economy and more disinflation than desired,
awaiting additional evidence to indicate better the direction of the economy might not be too
costly in current circumstances. For example, if underlying pressures in labor markets
intensify, the effects of lower import prices should damp inflation and inflation expectations
for a time, permitting the Committee to tighten before significantly higher inflation becomes
embedded in wage and price decisions. Conversely, in the event of greater drag from Asia
than anticipated in the staff forecast, the underlying strength of domestic demand appears to
be strong enough to sustain economic expansion for a while until an easier policy is adopted
and has time to take hold.
(9) Because financial markets are placing very low odds on a change in policy in
the near term, the choice of alternative B would likely have little immediate impact on
domestic financial markets or the exchange value of the dollar. However, were incoming data
on the economy to confirm that growth is moderating appreciably while inflation remains
subdued, as in the staff forecast, market participants might again build in greater odds on a
policy easing, perhaps on the view that the high real funds rate does indicate a restrictive
policy stance. If so, intermediate- and long-term rates, along with the dollar, could edge
lower. In the stock market, prices could come under some downward pressure even if interest
rates drift down, as generally bad news on earnings come to be seen not as a one-time hit
from the higher dollar or a temporary drop in demand from Asia, but rather as the precursor
of narrowing profit margins in a less robust economy. The softer earnings picture could also
prompt a little more caution on the part of creditors and some widening of quality spreads.
The implementation of policy may be complicated for a time after the mid-April tax date by
high, though uncertain, Treasury deposits at the Federal Reserve, which might require
outsized reserve injections and extraordinary amounts of collateral to be pledged to the
Federal Reserve by primary dealers. But any added volatility in the funds rate would be
temporary and should have little, if any, effect on interest rates further out the yield curve.
(10) If the Committee saw substantial risks of a significantly weaker economy than
in the staff forecast, it might want to move promptly to ease policy, perhaps by lowering the
federal funds rate 1/4 percentage point, as in alternative A. Such a risk to aggregate demand
might arise not only from greater Asian effects than currently anticipated, but also from
weaker domestic demand. Some of the recent robust expansion in the latter may be
temporary, owing importantly to the net decline in oil prices since last fall and to the drop in
intermediate- and long-term interest rates prompted by expectations of impending weakness
from Asia. The rate declines and robust economy, in turn, have bolstered business and
consumer confidence and the stock market. As restraint from the external sector is felt more
fully, especially if it appears to be more severe or prolonged than the public now expects, the
unwinding of buoyant psychology and the drop in equity prices could cause a more
pronounced damping of domestic demand than the staff anticipates. The Committee may see
the current relatively low inflation rate as justifying a more forceful and prompter reaction to
this possibility than might have been appropriate at higher inflation rates, especially in light
of the tendency to overpredict inflation over the past few years. Inflation has declined by
more than the Committee or the staff had expected, raising the prospect that, should those
disinflationary forces persist and be overlaid by an unexpected shortfall in aggregate demand,
inflation could fall farther than the Committee would find desirable.
(11) The 25 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate under alternative A
would translate to nearly comparable reductions in other short-term rates. In the market for
intermediate- and long-term securities, rates could decline appreciably if the easing were
viewed as confirmation that the Federal Reserve saw a pronounced slowdown resulting from
the Asian crises, making further reductions more likely. The dollar could fall on foreign
exchange markets, and lower interest rates would help the stock market hold close to its
recent record level.
(12) Alternative C would tend to be favored to the extent that the Committee saw
the risks as more heavily weighted toward a pickup in inflation. Data becoming available
since the last meeting have suggested considerable economic strength and a tighter labor
market. The attractive conditions in financing markets, the exceptionally high level of stock
valuations, and rapid growth in money and debt may be viewed as corroborating the strong
financial thrust in the economy, which would support domestic demand going forward. These
factors have led the staff to revise up its own inflation forecast. While Committee members
may have anticipated some of this strength in demand over the intermeeting period, enough
may have been a surprise so as to elevate or validate concerns about the prospects for a
pickup in inflation. With the unemployment rate already likely below its sustainable level,
this additional demand could lead to a steeper upward track for underlying inflation that
would require more substantial and disruptive restraint the longer it is delayed.
(13) Short-term rates would rise by the full amount of the 25 basis point tightening
of policy under alternative C, which is unanticipated in the market. Intermediate- and longer-
term real interest rates would also rise substantially as markets reassessed their view of the
Federal Reserve's forecast and, perhaps, intentions, and the dollar could come under upward
pressure. Stock prices could well decline, especially if investors saw the tightening as
worsening the outlook for corporate earnings as well as raising the rate of discount applied to
future earnings, and such a decrease would be one element of the necessary restraint on
aggregate demand. The generally healthy state of financial institutions in the United States
would seem to suggest that the domestic financial system would be resilient to any fall in
asset values that were to accompany such a policy tightening. Most likely, financial markets
in troubled emerging economies would not be greatly affected if the action were seen as
limited and not portending a more generalized upward movement in rates in industrial
(14) Under the conditions of alternative B, the moderating pace of spending in the
staff forecast should be accompanied by considerably slower growth in debt and money. The
bulk of the slowdown in nonfederal debt growth will likely be accounted for by the business
sector; the financing gap is not projected to increase any further in coming quarters, and
borrowing in recent months has been well above staff assessments of needs to cover mergers
and acquisitions and the shortfall of internal funds from capital outlays. While some new
caution by lenders is likely to surface as economic growth slows and profits soften, this shift
in attitudes is expected to have only a marginal restraining influence on business credit
growth. In the household sector, growth of debt is projected to continue to be well
maintained--outpacing that of disposable personal income-led by brisk mortgage borrowing
as housing markets remain strong and as refinancing is associated with some further equity
extraction. By September, debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to have grown at
a 5-1/2 percent rate from its fourth quarter 1997 base, above the midpoint of its 3 to 7 percent
annual range.
(15) The moderation in the growth of the broad monetary aggregates under
alternative B owes in part to a slowdown in GDP and bank credit as business lending and
acquisitions of securities slacken and banks become less aggressive in seeking funding.
Nonetheless, M3 is projected to grow at a 6-1/4 percent annual rate over the March-to-
September period as depository credit growth still stays fairly brisk. As a consequence, M3
would stand 9-1/2 percent above its fourth-quarter base in June and 8-1/2 percent above that base
in September. Growth in M2 is projected to slow to a 3-1/2 percent annual rate over the
March-to-September period. We are projecting that, in the absence of changes in opportunity
costs, M2 growth in an underlying sense will return to a pace close to that of GDP in the
period ahead. Nevertheless, V2 is expected to decrease in the second quarter because of the
effects on liquid balances of the current heavy pace of mortgage refinancing, as well as the
high levels of tax refunds and anticipated April tax payments; in the third quarter, however,
V2 is likely to rise somewhat, as those refinancing and tax effects on deposit levels are
removed. The deceleration in M2 brings growth from the fourth quarter of 1997 to June to a
by September.
Directive Language
(16) Presented below is draft wording for the operational paragraph that includes the
usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks
conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining/INCREASINGDECREASING the
federal funds rate at/TO an average of around ____ [DEL: 5-1/2] percent. In the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, a
SOMEWHAT/ slightly higher federal funds rate or a SOMEWHAT/slightly lower federal
funds rate WOULD/might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with [DEL: some] CONSIDERABLE moderation in the
growth in M2 and M3 over coming months.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Money and Credit Aggregates
M2 M3 Debt
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C All Alternatives
Actual and Projected Debt
Billions of Dollars
- .." - 16200
- 16000
-- 15800
*
- .15400
Monthly
Mar 97
Apr 97
May 97
Jun 97
Jul 97
Aug 97
Sep 97
Oct 97
Nov 97
Dec 97
Jan 98
Feb 98
Weekly
Jan 23 98
Jan 30 98
Feb 6 98
Feb 13 98
Feb 20 98
Feb 27 98
Mar 6 98
Mar 13 98
Mar 20 98
Mar 27 98
Daily
Mar 11 98
Mar 12 98
Mar 13 98
Mar 16 98
Mar 17 98
Mar 18 98
Mar 19 98
Mar 20 98
Mar 23 98
Mar 24 98
Mar 25 98
Mar 26 98
Mar 27 98
March 30, 1998SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-Termn Long-Term
Treasury bills econdasy cOmm. bank U.S. government consant Corporate conventional home
d secondary marcondket m arket paper pime malu riy yields indexed yields A-utility municipal orgageslederal secondary market pape Matrkety pyieldBo
fs loan re Buyer
3-month 8-mtonth f-year 3-monlh i-month 3-year 10-year 30-year 5-year t10year et fixed-rate ARM
p - preliminary data
Strictly Conridential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money and Debt Aggregates
March 30, 1998Seasonally djlusted
Money alock measures and liqui assats Domestic nonflrancia debt
nontransactionscomponents U.S.
Period M1 M2 MS other' totU.S'Period M1 M2 In M2 In M3 only government' other' total
Annual arowth al rateia(l
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
Levels $billlions)t
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
Not _ purcases 3 agencies outrightPeriod Net 2 Redemptions Net Netpurchases Redemptions Net redemptions holdings 5
Weekly
December 24
Memo- LEVEL (bl. $) 6
March 25
- 2,861
- 1,924
- 1,117
1,233 1,894
- 1,117
_____________________ C ___________________________________ A ±
--- 19,515
-750 5,084
- 9,506
-. 9,275
S1 year 1-5 5-10 over 10 total
March 27, 19gg
