Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
AUGUST 14, 1998
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) August 14, 1998
Class I -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The stable policy adopted at the July Committee meeting came as no surprise to
market participants. In the event, the federal funds rate averaged just a little above its intended
level of 5-1/2 percent over the intermeeting period.1 Investors appeared mostly to shrug off
incoming data on the U.S. economy indicating more underlying strength in domestic demand and
economic activity than foreseen, focusing instead on overseas developments. In July, as the
prospects for meaningful policy initiatives in Japan initially appeared to improve with a change
in government and the yen/dollar rate stabilized, yields on Treasury notes and bonds rose
somewhat (chart). In August, however, optimism about Japanese policy faded; a weakening yen
against the dollar and its implications for a number of emerging market economies, especially
those in Asia with currencies tied to the dollar, along with deepening troubles in Russia, induced
a widespread shift toward safe-haven currencies and securities. Treasury yields moved lower
both on this flight to quality and on the assessment of market participants that a higher dollar and
weaker aggregate demand abroad would damp U.S. output and inflation in the medium term.
Concerns about the profit outlook, especially in light of continuing turmoil in Asia, weighed on
private securities markets in the United States. Equity prices, as gauged by the Wilshire 5000,
were down about 7-1/2 percent over the intermeeting period, and risk spreads on junk bonds rose
appreciably further. These developments apparently strengthened the conviction that monetary
policy would be on hold for longer than previously anticipated and encouraged a minority view
that the next move could well be toward ease. On balance over the intermeeting period, Treasury
yields fell as much as 1/4 percentage point, with declines greatest in the intermediate-term
maturity range.
(2) Against the backdrop of waning confidence that Japanese authorities will deal
effectively with financial institution problems and provide adequate fiscal stimulus, the dollar
appreciated over the intermeeting period 5-3/4 percent against the yen, and the Japanese stock
market fell 5 percent overall, with bank stock prices down 18 percent. The weakness in the yen
renewed speculation that China may choose to devalue the renminbi, which added to downward
pressures on the Hong Kong dollar. Higher interest rates in Hong Kong, data showing
unemployment at a fifteen-year high, and poor earnings reports sent the Hang Seng stock price
index down more than 15 percent. In most other Asian economies, stock markets were off
significantly. Asset prices in Russia continued to fall in often disorderly markets. The ruble
traded near, and at times below, the lower edge of its official band, and banks encountered
funding problems as concerns mounted about the Russian budget and prospects for debt
repayment, in part stemming from further softness in oil prices. Russian equity prices plunged
more than 25 percent, and spreads on Russian Brady bonds over U.S. Treasuries soared more
than 61/2 percentage points. Credit-risk spreads for Brady bonds of other emerging market
countries increased from 40 to 400 basis points over the period. Declining oil prices and slack
demand for other commodities put pressure on other currencies as well, including the Mexican
peso and Canadian dollar. Most interest rates rose in Canada, as market participants increasingly
expected the currency's weakness to trigger monetary policy tightening, but the deepening crisis
in Asia and Russia induced decreases in market interest rates in other Western industrial
countries. Data releases showing a slowdown in U.K. economic growth contributed to an
unwinding of expectations for an imminent rate hike by the Bank of England and a rise in the
dollar against the pound. The dollar was little changed on balance against continental European
The Desk did not intervene
during the period for the accounts of the System or the Treasury.
(3) After averaging nearly 6 percent over March to June, M2 growth moderated to a 5
percent rate in July. This slowing was expected and moved M2 growth down closer to the
projected third-quarter increase in nominal income. Recent stock market weakness seems to
have been associated with some shift in household investment preferences, as evidenced by the
cessation of flows into equity mutual funds and increased flows into M2 money funds in late July
and early August. M3 was about flat in July, even though bank credit grew at a 5 percent pace;
however, large time deposits ran off sharply, owing largely to substitution of overseas sources of
funding for deposits, particularly at the U.S. branches and agencies of European banks.
Institutional money funds also declined in July as investors evidently shifted into market
instruments around quarter end to take advantage of a temporary spike in short-term interest rates
that was only partially reflected in more slowly adjusting money fund yields. From the fourth
quarter of last year through July, M2 and M3 grew at rates of 7 percent and 81/2 percent,
(4) Borrowing by households and businesses has edged down of late, but remains
brisk, boosted by the heavy pace of equity retirements and robust private spending. With long-
term interest rates low, borrowing has been concentrated in bond and fixed-rate mortgage
markets. Although investors in securities markets seem to have become a bit more cautious, the
August survey of senior loan officers suggested that standards at commercial banks were little
changed over the past three months and terms on business loans were eased slightly further on
net.2 The federal government has continued to pay down debt on a seasonally adjusted basis.
Growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt has slowed to the 5 percent area in recent months,
leaving its growth from the fourth quarter of last year through June at a 6 percent rate.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual rates of growth)
May June July July2
Money and Credit Aggregates
M1
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Bank Credit
Adjusted1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed Reserves
Total Reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary Base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing
Excess Reserves
Policy Alternatives
(5) Compared with the forecast prepared for the July Greenbook, the staff projection
now calls for slightly less core inflation, reflecting in part a higher foreign exchange value of the
dollar as well as somewhat less pressure in labor markets. Assuming an unchanged stance of
monetary policy, the Greenbook forecasts that real GDP will expand over the second half of this
year a little more slowly than the rate of growth of its potential. Next year, output growth
moderates to 1-3/4 percent, below the 2 percent lower end of the FOMC members' central
tendency range reported in July. The underlying pace of domestic final demand growth is
expected to ebb appreciably, owing partly to the drop in equity prices as well as to the
multiplier/accelerator effects of earlier downshifts in inventory investment and net exports. The
unemployment rate should edge up to a little more than 5 percent by the end of next year.
Although joblessness would remain below its estimated natural rate, the effects of tight labor
markets on inflation should be about offset by lower inflation expectations and the continuing
pass-through of dollar appreciation; abstracting from technical changes, core CPI inflation is
expected to hold steady in 1999. The staff projects that the overall CPI will rise about 2 percent
during 1999, a tad below its forecast for the June/July meeting and around the lower end of the
Committee members' central tendency range.
(6) If the Committee found the staff forecast, with inflation and unemployment both
staying relatively low, to be both a reasonable expectation and a desirable outcome, it
presumably would maintain the current 51/2 percent federal funds rate, as under alternative B.
The Committee could still favor alternative B even if it saw higher inflation eventually, but was
rather uncertain about its expectation of the eventual pickup in inflation, given the surprisingly
favorable price performance of recent years. The odds on a significant price acceleration within a
year or so may be seen as low; in such circumstances, delay would not materially jeopardize the
Committee's goal of containing inflation and would buy some time to accumulate information on
the evolving dynamics of inflation and hence the need for tightening. Moreover, the Committee
may want to weigh any concerns about higher inflation against the increasingly precarious
conditions in global financial markets. The greater fragility of these markets evident over the
intermeeting period may suggest that the potential for adverse effects of a tightening of U.S.
monetary policy on other economies has risen further.
(7) With inflation low, aggregate demand apparently decelerating, and the outlook for
Asia quite uncertain, market participants anticipate no policy action at this meeting, and market
interest rates are likely to be little affected by selection of alternative B. Under the Greenbook
forecast, information about prospective corporate earnings is likely to disappoint investors,
keeping equity prices from rebounding and possibly precipitating a further decline. Absent such
a decline, which could weaken the exchange value of the dollar as investments in the United
States looked less desirable, the dollar should edge higher in coming months, most notably
against the yen: The Japanese economy is likely to remain weak and skeptical market
participants probably will require substantial, concrete actions to deal with the financial system
and the economy before confidence can begin to recover. Should troubles in foreign markets
intensify and spread further, the dollar would tend to strengthen more noticeably, equity prices
would encounter additional downward pressures amid heightened worries about profits, and
interest rates in the United States would continue to decline across the yield curve, reflecting
both a more pronounced flight to quality and developing expectations of monetary policy easing.
(8) Although the staff forecast envisions a relatively benign domestic macroeconomic
outcome under current money market conditions, the Committee might be concerned either that
in the staff forecast progress toward price stability was stalling or that in its own view inflation
was more likely to escalate noticeably. In either case, it may prefer to apply additional monetary
restraint at this meeting, as in the 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate of
alternative C. A prediction of worsening inflation pressures might be based in part on
unambiguously tight labor market conditions and the uptrend already evident in wages and
compensation. The odds on much softening of labor markets might be seen as low in light of the
surprising momentum of domestic demand, which has been sustaining growth of employment
and income. And while the Committee recently decided not to tighten, in part because of
unsettled conditions abroad, a continued absence of action would not be desirable if the
Committee were reasonably confident that the domestic economic situation was pointing to
higher inflation rates before very long. In such a situation, delay would only increase the degree
of tightening that would ultimately be necessary. Delayed but greater tightening could be even
more disruptive to financial markets, since economies abroad may not be sufficiently improved
and markets sufficiently settled to absorb the heavier blow.
(9) Markets would be somewhat unsettled by the 25 basis point firming action of
alternative C at this meeting, which would come as a surprise. Short-term market interest rates
probably would back up by at least the rise in the federal funds rate. Investors would project
lower earnings and use higher discount factors, and equity prices almost certainly would fall
significantly further. Boosted nonetheless by higher interest rates, the foreign exchange value of
the dollar likely would firm as well, with particularly large increases against the yen, and Asian
countries with currencies tied to the dollar would confront considerable pressures to adjust their
pegs. Longer-term dollar interest rates would probably jump initially in response to the rise in
short-term rates, but might reverse course before long if market participants began to question the
likely duration of the tightening move in view of the added strength in the dollar and lower
equity prices; still, real long-term rates are likely to remain at higher levels for a while. Credit-
risk spreads on domestic private debt, as well as on the obligations of a number of foreign
governments and firms, likely would widen noticeably.
(10) In view of recent developments in global financial markets, the Committee might
be inclined to consider a 25 basis point easing of monetary policy, as in alternative A.
Aggregate demand in the United States apparently has already decelerated appreciably, and
Committee members may believe that the staff forecast does not give enough weight to ongoing
deflationary forces coming from developments abroad. Moreover, the staff forecast may be
viewed as underplaying the restrictive effects of recent changes in U.S. financial markets, despite
declines in some nominal yields: The dollar has strengthened on net against a broad basket of
currencies; U.S. equity prices have fallen significantly; and declines in inflation expectations may
have largely accounted for the decline in nominal interest rates, leaving real rates little changed.
Even in the context of the staff view of the economic outlook, with domestic inflation currently
at low levels, the Committee may be willing to risk a slightly less satisfactory outcome in terms
of U.S. inflation performance to help foster a recovery in foreign economies, which would be in
the long-run interest of the United States. Lower interest rates would help ensure that domestic
demand in the United States remains reasonably vigorous. And lower rates, along with
somewhat less strength in the dollar, would benefit a number of foreign economies, even those
with currencies not tied to the dollar; for those in the latter group, credit-risk spreads would tend
to decline as concerns about foreign debt repayment abated a bit, and the tendency for their
currencies to appreciate would give them room to adopt a somewhat less restrictive monetary
(11) Under the unchanged money market conditions assumed in the staff forecast,
money and debt growth is expected to decelerate in coming quarters. Expansion of money and
debt, however, continues to outpace that of nominal GDP this year as well as next. Increases in
household sector debt should be restrained by slowing growth in nominal income and the less
rapid advance in expenditures on consumer durables and housing. In the business sector, lower
rates of growth of fixed investment and a slower pace of inventory accumulation will reduce
needs for credit, but this tendency is partly offset in the staff forecast by a leveling out of internal
funds as profits weaken and by the need to finance equity retirements associated with strong
merger and acquisition activity. As income growth slows and profits decline, lenders should
become a bit more cautious, but the projection does not include a substantial pulling back in
credit availability. Federal debt will continue to contract modestly, reflecting continued unified
budget surpluses. On balance, domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to expand at about
a 5 percent annual rate over the remainder of the year, leaving this aggregate on a track to expand
at about a 5-3/4 percent rate over 1998 as a whole, somewhat above the midpoint of its 3 to 7
percent annual range.
(12) M2 and M3 are forecast to expand at 5 and 7-3/4 percent annual rates, respectively,
from July to December under alternative B. The moderation in money reflects the expectation of
slightly slower growth in nominal GDP over the second half of the year. In addition, the staff
expects a less-rapid decline in M2 velocity in the second half, in part because the expansion of
mortgage refinancing activity, which had boosted M2 growth over the first half of the year,
comes to a halt. Bank credit is projected to rise less rapidly in the second half of the year than in
the first, reflecting a slowing pace of securities acquisitions as well as some moderation in loan
growth, damping banks' needs for funding through M3-type instruments. Despite the slowing in
M2 and M3 growth during the second half, both aggregates are expected to overshoot their
annual ranges for the year as a whole.3
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Money and Credit Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
All Alternatives
Monthly Growth Rates
Jul-98
Aug-98
Sep-98
Oct-98
Nov-98
Dec-98
Quarterly Averages
1998 Q1
1998 Q2
1998 Q3
1998 Q4
Growth Rat
From
Jul-98
To
Dec-98
Jul-98
Dec-98
Sep-98
Directive Language
(13) Presented below is draft wording for the operational paragraph that includes the
usual options for Committee consideration.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks
conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/DECREASING the
federal funds rate at/TO an average of around ___ [DEL: 5-1/2] percent. In the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving
careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, a
somewhat/SLIGHTLY higher federal funds rate would/MIGHT or a SOMEWHAT/slightly
lower federal funds rate WOULD/might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with moderate growth in M2 and
M3 over coming months.
August 17, 1998SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Monthly
Aug 97
Sep 97
Oct 97
Nov 97
Dec 97
Jan 98
Feb 98
Mar 98
Apr 98
May 98
Jun 98
Jul 98
Weekly
Jun 12 98
Jun 19 98
Jun 26 98
Jul 3 98
Jul 10 98
Jul 17 98
Jul 24 98
Jul 31 98
Aug 7 98
Aug 14 98
Daily
Jul 29 98
Jul 30 98
Jul 31 98
Aug 3 98
Aug 4 98
Aug 5 98
Aug 6 98
Aug 7 98
Aug 10 98
Aug 11 98
Aug 12 98
Aug 13 98
Aug 14 98
Short-Term Long-Term
Treasury bills CDs m U.S. gormt constant n y corporate micia onventional home
federal secondarymarke nda comm. aturity yields indexed yields -utiity municipal mortgagesfunds secondary maet maret paper maturity yields ond primary marketrecently Buyer
the average contract rate on new commitments for fixed-rate mortgages (FRMs) with 80 percent loan-to-value ratios at major institutional lenders. Column 16 is the average initial contract rate on new commitments for 1-
year, adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) at major institutional lenders offering both FRMs and ARMs with the same number of discount points.
p - preliminary data
Money and Debt Aggregates
Seasonally adjusted
Strictly Confidential (FA)-
Class II FOMC
August 17,1998
Money stock measures and liquid assets _ Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactions components
Period M1 M2 I o 3onyM3 U.S.P e r io d  M 1  M 2  In M2 In M3 only M government' other' total'
Annual growth rates( Mt
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
Quarterly(average)
1997-Q3
Q4
1998-Q1
Monthly
1997-July
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Levels (Sbillions)i
Monthly
Weekly
1998-July
Aug. 3p
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Debt data are on a monthly average basis, derived by averaging end-of-month levels of adjacent months, and have been adjusted to remove discontinuities.
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Treasury bills Treasurycoupons Federal Net change
Net purchases 3 agencies outright
Period Net 2 Redemptions Net with Redemptions Net redmtions holdings
purchases (-) change 1 year 15 5-10 over 10 () Change _total 4 Net RPs
Weekly
April 29
May 6
August 5
12
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
August 12
L __________
August 12
August 14, 1998
