Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) November 12,1999
Class I -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Financial market conditions have become a little more accommodative on
balance since the October FOMC meeting, with stock prices rising appreciably and interest
and dollar exchange rates showing small mixed changes. While the Committee's decision at
that meeting to leave the federal funds rate unchanged was widely anticipated by market
participants, the adoption of a bias toward tightening came as something of a surprise, and
market interest rates rose in response to the announcement. Yields continued to climb over
the first half of the intermeeting period as data releases, especially the September PPI and
retail sales reports, elevated concerns about unsustainable growth and inflation and
heightened expectations of further monetary policy tightening (chart 1). Yields have since
retreated, however, largely in response to data pointing to low wage and price inflation. On
net, yields on Treasury coupon securities are from 7 basis points lower to 8 basis points
(2) Conditions in private credit markets appear to have eased slightly over the
intermeeting period. Yields on long-term private securities have edged lower, swap spreads
have narrowed, and rates on most short-term private securities have fallen. More favorable
economic performance at home and abroad appears to have fostered investor confidence
and perhaps a greater willingness to bear risk. An important part of this more relaxed
attitude probably reflects reduced concerns about funding and liquidity pressures over the
century date change. The Desk's implementation of a number of measures to enhance its
ability to supply reserves and to act as a backstop source of funding to major participants in
the financing markets over the century date change no doubt played an important role. The
Desk put into place arrangements to execute repurchase agreements on a triparty basis, and,
using those arrangements, it began accepting agency mortgage-backed securities as collateral;
it also started to conduct repurchase agreements with maturities of up to 90 days that
extended into the new year; and it auctioned options on repurchase agreements for the weeks
around year-end.2 In addition, the relatively high volume of commercial paper issued with
The Federal Reserve's other initiative for providing liquidity, the Special Liquidity
Facility (SLF), has seen limited usage to date--probably because the federal funds rate was
close to its target over most of the intermeeting period. SLF borrowing averaged $9 million
over the intermeeting period, although one depository institution borrowed $210 million on
November 3, when the funds rate reached a high of 10 percent, reportedly to sell the
proceeds in the funds market. Most other drawdowns were for testing purposes, although
two credit unions borrowed to meet funding needs. The Federal Reserve also expanded the
range of collateral eligible to be pledged for discount window loans to include bank
obligations, collateralized loan obligations, collateralized bond obligations, commercial
mortgage-backed securities, mutual fund shares, and, shortly, sovereign debt denominated in
foreign currencies. In recent months, banks have greatly increased the volume of collateral
maturities after the middle of January indicates that borrowers have gotten a good start on
meeting their funding needs (chart 2). Direct measures of Y2K effects in financing markets,
such as butterfly interest-rate spreads on one-month bank deposits spanning the year-end,
have narrowed in recent weeks. Nonetheless, those spreads remain unusually elevated.
Moreover, spreads in bond and swap markets have not rolled back all their runup since last
spring, and financial markets in general are still somewhat less liquid than the norm prior to
the Russian default in August 1998.
(3) Equity prices have been lifted by stronger-than-expected earnings reports and
perceptions of improved prospects for continued strong output growth with subdued
inflation. Nonetheless, most broad equity indexes are still a bit below the peaks that were
posted in spring and midsummer. An exception, however, is the Nasdaq, which reached a
record high over the intermeeting period. Prices of financial stocks have received a further
boost from the passage of financial reform legislation. On balance, major equity price
indexes have risen 3 to 15 percent since the October FOMC meeting.
(4) In foreign exchange markets, the exchange value of the dollar against a broad
index of foreign currencies was little changed on net over the intermeeting period, as a
against the currencies of other important trading partners. For industrial countries, the net
change in bilateral exchange rates mirrored variations in long-term interest rate differentials,
pre-positioned with Reserve Banks to support discount window borrowing, and the ready
availability of this credit is likely also helping to calm year-end concerns.
Chart 2
Maturities of Outstanding Commercial Paper,
As of November 12 Billions of Dollars
Selected Stock Indexes
Index(7/1/98) = 100
- 1999
............ 1998
Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar
1999 Date of Maturity 2 00 0
Jun Aug Oct Dec Feb Apr Jun Aug Oct
1998 1999
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Exchange Rates Ir
Daily----y Broad Index
.. . Major Currencies Index
Other Important Trading
Partners
idex (7/1/98 = 100)
Oct. 5
Jun Aug Oct Dec Feb Apr Jun Aug Oct
1998 1999
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
Ratio scale
Average Stripped Brady Bond Spread*
Basis points
Jun Aug Oct Dec Feb Apr Jun Aug Oct
1998 1999
*J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index, an average of stripped Brady
bond yield spreads over Treasuries for ten emerging market countries.
Ratio scale
Percentage points
M2 Velocity
(left scale)
(left scale)
M2 Opportunity Cost
(right scale) *
I I I I I I I I I I I I I
* Two quarter moving average
I I
but movements on some days were sharp and difficult to relate to fundamentals. Both the
European Central Bank and the Bank of England firmed policy late in the intermeeting
period, raising official rates 50 and 25 basis points, respectively. Market participants
apparently interpreted these actions-which had been largely anticipated--and, in the case of
the ECB, the accompanying statement, as lowering the cumulative tightening that might be
necessary and as reducing uncertainty by rendering it less likely that additional policy action
would be forthcoming for a while. Against this backdrop, ten-year nominal yields fell 30
basis points in Germany and 70 basis points in the United Kingdom over the intermeeting
period. These interest rate declines supported equity values but tended to weaken the euro
and pound relative to the dollar. In Japan, evidence of sustained economic growth and
expectations of substantial fiscal stimulus pushed up bond yields about 15 basis points,
share prices 5 percent, and the exchange value of the yen against the dollar over 1 percent.
Although rumors surfaced of impending action from time to time, Japanese authorities did
not intervene in the foreign exchange market.
. The Desk did not
(5) The depreciation of the dollar against the currencies of other important
trading partners over the intermeeting period owed in part to greater assurance of economic
expansion in many of those emerging economies and, perhaps, to an increased willingness
of global investors to bear risk. In addition, relatively orderly elections in Indonesia and
Argentina and a primary in Mexico underscored a sense of renewed stability in many of
these countries. Interest rate spreads on emerging market bonds narrowed considerably,
and numerous reports indicate that credit markets have been receptive to new issues and
debt exchanges by emerging market economies. Investor receptivity was evident in equity
markets too: Excluding earthquake-stricken Taiwan, share prices rose 5 to 20 percent.
(6) In October, M2 growth advanced at a 5 percent pace, the same rate as in the
third quarter but a bit slower than anticipated in the last bluebook. The public's holdings of
currency continued to expand about in line with the rapid rates of earlier this year, but the
data do not suggest any pronounced hoarding in advance of the century date change.3 M2
velocity in the third quarter rose at an annualized pace of 1 percent, the first increase in two
years (chart 2). The advance likely reflected, at least in part, the rise in the opportunity cost
of holding M2 that occurred in the spring and summer as market interest rates rose.4 M3
growth in October, at a 10-1/4 percent annual rate, was quite robust, owing to strength in
large time deposits and institutional money funds. Bank credit grew only moderately, but
banks shifted funding toward sources inside M3.
(7) Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors expanded at a pace roughly in line with
the approximately 6 percent growth of nominal GDP since midyear, leaving this aggregate in
the upper part of its annual range. In October, net borrowing by businesses showed signs of
slowing. Although risk spreads in securities markets have narrowed this fall, the November
survey of senior loan officers suggests additional tightening in terms and standards on
business loans. The survey also indicated that households have curbed their appetite for
debt, perhaps reflecting the backup in interest rates over recent months. Meanwhile, the
federal government's favorable budget position has led to a continued paydown of federal
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Aug. Sep. Oct. Oct.2
Money and Credit Aggregates
M1
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Bank credit
Adjusted1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
Excess reserves
Policy Alternatives
(8) The staff has again assumed 50 basis points of firming in the federal funds
rate over the course of next year, which is anticipated to be accompanied by a gradual
uptrend in bond rates and flat equity prices. These financial conditions, following the rise in
interest rates and the leveling out of stock prices during 1999, are projected to contribute to
a modest slowing in real GDP growth to a 3-1/2 percent rate over the next two years. This
growth rate is a little below the staffs estimate of that of the economy's potential over this
period, which has been revised up based on the new NIPA definitions and a reassessment
of underlying productivity growth. Hence, the unemployment rate is seen as ticking up
from its low October level, to the same 4-1/4 percent level in the fourth quarter of 2001
that was projected in the last Greenbook. Continued taut labor market conditions, along
with the feed-through to inflation expectations of higher total consumer price inflation in
outpaces an expected further updrift in the growth of structural labor productivity. The
resulting heightened upward pressures on prices are augmented in the projection by a faster
rise in non-oil import prices associated with a forecasted depreciation in the exchange value
of the dollar. Consequently, core CPI inflation is anticipated to step up 3/4 percentage
point to about 2-3/4 percent by 2001, while total CPI inflation remains flat at just under
(9) Even if the Committee, like the staff, sees forces at work tending to raise core
inflation over time, it may be sufficiently uncertain about that outcome that it still would
wish to leave the intended funds rate unchanged at this meeting at 5-1/4 percent, as under
alternative B, and to retain the tilt toward firming to convey a sense of the risks. Most
incoming data on prices and labor costs, including GDP prices, the ECI, average hourly
earnings, and unit labor costs, have once again proven to be surprisingly benign despite
increasingly taut labor markets. This string of favorable readings underscores questions
about the reliability of the traditional relationships that lie behind predictions that inflation
will pick up should resource utilization remain around its current level. Indeed, the revised
output data could be read as leaving open the possibility that productivity is continuing to
accelerate, perhaps substantially. While the associated increase in the marginal return on
capital projects would require higher real short-term interest rates at some point, the
economy could be able to produce beyond its long-run potential for a while longer without
an intensification of inflation so long as gains in real wages do not outstrip rising labor
productivity. In this circumstance, further policy tightening would be unnecessary for some
time. In light of the possibility that supply-side relationships continue to be unusually
favorable, the Committee might see considerable benefit from waiting for more solid
evidence that an inflationary upswing was in train. Even if productivity gains do not
materialize, the possible cost of delaying a firming in policy until early next year may not be
considered especially large since longer-term inflation expectations appear to be well
(10) Markets have priced in about even odds of a tightening at this meeting, and
an announcement conveying a Committee decision to maintain both the current federal
funds rate target and an asymmetry toward tightening would prompt a modest rally.
Despite the asymmetry, market participants would likely assume that policy would be on
hold until at least the February meeting, owing to the Committee's evident disinclination to
act during intermeeting periods and the presumption that it would not want to risk
disturbing financial markets around the turn of the year. Initially, bond yields would likely
edge lower, and the exchange value of the dollar could fall. However, longer-term interest
rates would likely edge higher later in the intermeeting period should economic activity
unfold as robustly as in the staff forecast. The equity market would rally on the news of
policy inaction, but the staff anticipates that stock prices would move sideways on net over
the next few months. There is a wide range of uncertainty in predicting financial market
conditions as the century date change approaches; market liquidity may continue to improve
and spreads narrow some more, but most financial markets are likely to be unusually illiquid
as participants pare back their activity until the new year.
(11) The Committee instead may favor a 25 basis point increase in its intended
federal funds rate, as under alternative C. Although the staff has adopted the view that
structural productivity is growing along a higher and steeper trajectory over the forecast
period than previously thought, it still predicts an increase in core inflation over the next
two years that the Committee may find both likely and unacceptable. The Committee may
view the current tautness in labor markets as pointing so strongly toward a pickup in
inflation that the need to firm policy would be unlikely to be called into question by new
information arriving over the next few months. Even if the Committee questioned whether
current labor market conditions were so problematic, it may still see a substantial risk that
resource utilization is in the process of tightening further, which in turn would induce rising
inflation. The growth of aggregate demand has continued to outstrip that of aggregate
supply, and only limited data are in hand to indicate that demand will be slowing enough to
bring the two into balance. Indeed, one risk to that balancing is that policy inaction would
provide additional fuel to investor optimism, pushing equity prices higher and providing a
spur to spending. Another risk may emanate from the external sector: Recent news on
foreign economies has been upbeat and has contributed to better conditions in their capital
markets, which may provide more impetus to spending than projected by the staff. The
inflationary impulse from the external sector would be intensified if improving foreign
growth prospects and mounting U.S. net foreign indebtedness were to diminish the appetite
of global investors for dollar assets, placing substantial downward pressure on the dollar,
which would directly feed through to prices as well as demand for U.S. output. To offset
these external forces, firmer financial conditions in the United States would be necessary to
damp domestic demand so as to prevent an intensification of pressures on resources.
(12) The choice of the 1/4 percentage point rise in the funds rate under alternative
C may incline the Committee to return to a symmetric directive. An unbiased directive
could convey a sense that policy makers thought they might have put sufficient cumulative
restraint in place to check inflation or, at least, to buy some time to assess whether
additional firming was needed. Alternatively, the Committee may decide to retain an
asymmetric directive in order to transmit its impression that, despite the higher 5-1/2
percent funds rate, the risks over a longer time period would still be tilted in the direction of
heightened inflation pressures. If the Committee wanted to be sure that market
uncertainties about near-term policy action did not unduly contribute to strains in the runup
to year end, the announcement could convey a disinclination to act in December.
(13) While financial markets are somewhat illiquid, confidence about Y2K
preparedness and procedures to contain systemic problems has been growing, suggesting
that the 1/4 percentage point firming at this meeting under alternative C--although a bit of a
surprise--would be unlikely to create undue strains. The response of key financial prices
would depend importantly on the type of tilt and the wording of the announcement. An
asymmetric directive and words emphasizing continuing inflation risks over a longer time
period would impart to market participants the impression that further tightening moves
could well be in store beginning fairly early next year. In that case, an appreciable backup in
bond yields, sell-off of stocks, and strengthening of the exchange value of the dollar could
be anticipated. In contrast, a symmetric directive and an announcement suggesting that the
Committee could well stay its hand for some time could lead market participants to mark
down their expectations for cumulative monetary policy tightening and reduce their
uncertainty about near-term actions. In such a case, bond and stock prices could dip only
(14) Under either alternative, the staff projects that domestic nonfinancial debt will
grow about 6-1/4 percent over the four quarters of this year, outpacing the expected
nominal GDP growth of 5-1/4 percent but staying within its 3 to 7 percent annual range.
Such an outcome would imply expansion of total debt at a 4-3/4 percent rate over the last
three months of the year. This slowing is accounted for by a paydown of debt in the federal
sector on a seasonally adjusted basis, and lower borrowing in the business and municipal
sectors, where Y2K concerns are anticipated to reduce participation by both issuers and
investors. After the turn of the year, debt growth should turn up slightly, owing primarily to
a rebound in business borrowing. Even so, at an anticipated 5 percent pace over the first
quarter, debt growth would still be on a slower track than the one laid down so far this year.
Although financial conditions should ease a little early next year after the passage of the
century date change, lenders and investors are expected to be a bit more cautious on balance
in extending credit over the forecast period as economic expansion moderates and profit
margins erode.
(15) Under alternative B, the staff expects that M2 will grow 6 percent this year
and M3 7-1/4 percent, compared with the 5 and 6 percent upper bounds of their respective
annual ranges. Built into these projections is a pickup in growth over the last two months
of the year to a 8-1/4 percent pace for M2 and an 11-1/4 percent pace for M3. The staff
estimates that approximately 2 and 3 percentage points of these respective growth rates will
be attributable to the impact of Y2K concerns in temporarily boosting demands for
monetary assets that are regarded as safe and liquid. These effects are reversed by the end
of February. Smoothing through Y2K effects, the staff forecasts M2 and M3 to expand
from October to March at rates of 6-1/2 and 7-1/4 percent, respectively.
Directive Language
(16) Presented below for the members' consideration is the operational paragraph
for the intermeeting period
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
To promote the Committee's long-run objectives of price stability and
sustainable economic growth, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in
reserve markets consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/DECREASING the federal
funds rate AT/to an average of around ____ [DEL: 5-1/4] percent. In view of the evidence
currently available, the Committee believes that prospective developments are [EQUALLY
LIKELY TO WARRANT AN INCREASE OR A DECREASE] more likely to warrant an
increase/A DECREASE than a decrease/AN INCREASE in the federal funds rate
operating objective during the intermeeting period.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C All Alternatives
Monthly Growth Rates
1999 Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Quarterly Averages
1999 Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Growth Rate
From
Oct-99
Dec-99
Oct-99
Dec-99
Mar-2000
Mar-2000
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent) November 15, 1999
Short-term Long-term
CDs Conventional home
STreasury bills se ary Comm. U.S. goverment constant Indexed yields M dy's B ond p rimar market
Federal secondary market market paper maturity yields Baa Buyer ra arBuyer
Monthly
Nov 98
Dec 98
Jan 99
Feb 99
Mar 99
Apr 99
May 99
Jun 99
Jul 99
Aug 99
Sep 99
Oct 99
Weekly
Sep 10 99
Sep 17 99
Sep 24 99
Oct 1 99
Oct 8 99
Oct 15 99
Oct 22 99
Oct 29 99
Nov 5 99
Nov 12 99
Daily
Oct 27 99
Oct 28 99
Oct 29 99
Nov 1 99
Nov 2 99
Nov 3 99
Nov 4 99
Nov 5 99
Nov 8 99
Nov 9 99
Nov 10 99
Nov 11 99
Nov 12 99
- 8.12 --
4.08 --
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Money and Debt Aggregates c
lass  FOMC
Seasonally adjusted November 15,1999
S oney stock measures Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactions components
Period M1 M2 M3 U. other' total'
In M2 In M3 only government'
Levels (Sbillions):
Monthly
p preliminary
November 12, 1999
Weekly
August 4
November 3
10
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
November 10
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
--- 2,000 -2,000
3,550 --- 3,550
- 4,619
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
November 10
