Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) October 1, 1999
Class I -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The 1/4 percentage point firming in the stance of policy at the August
meeting, along with the retention of a symmetric directive, was widely anticipated in
financial markets and had little impact on near-term expectations.' The reference in the
announcement to markedly diminished inflation risks, however, led market participants to
revise down slightly their anticipations of additional policy actions next year. In the weeks
that followed, the effects on market participants' policy expectations of surprisingly strong
indicators of spending at home and abroad and of rising commodity prices were only partly
offset by favorable readings on broad price indexes and declines in equity prices.2 On net
over the intermeeting period, money market futures rates through next year showed mixed
changes. Judging by the configuration of these rates, market participants appear to be
placing relatively low odds on a firming of monetary policy over the balance of 1999 and
seem to have at least a 1/2 percentage point tightening built in next year (chart). Rates on
Treasury notes and bonds rose 5 to 20 basis points over the intermeeting period.
(2) Although most recent information on corporate profits has been positive,
investors appear to have become more cautious in assessing the outlook for business
finances. Over the intermeeting period, yield spreads on investment-grade corporate bonds
on average remained at their elevated late-August levels, even though recent issuance was
less than anticipated, and spreads on higher-yield debt widened significantly further. At
banks, spreads on business loans have remained at the higher levels reached in the spring, or
by some measures even widened further. In addition, most broad measures of equity prices
fell substantially over the intermeeting period. Concerns that shares might be overvalued
seemed to be heightened by doubts about whether the willingness of global investors to
accumulate dollar assets, including U.S. equities, would keep pace with the mounting current
account deficit, especially in light of the improving economic prospects abroad.
(3) However, some yield spreads that had widened in July and August have
narrowed over the period, retracing a portion of their runup since early June (chart). Swap
spreads and spreads on a number of other instruments, including asset-backed securities and
agencies, moved down when an anticipated heavy volume of debt issuance did not
materialize and when investors and dealers apparently became more willing to take
positions, increasing market liquidity. Reportedly, borrowers still plan to minimize security
issuance around year-end, but are now less bent on wrapping up financing many weeks or
months in advance. The more relaxed approach may owe to diminished uncertainty about
future interest rate movements in the wake of both the August 24 policy announcement and
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's announcement on September 8 that the FOMC
had approved several actions intended to promote the smooth functioning of money
markets around year-end.3 Butterfly interest-rate spreads on one-month bank deposits
spanning the year-end narrowed immediately following the Reserve Bank's announcement
but subsequently reversed those declines, and are now higher than they were at the time of
the August meeting. The step-up in rates on three-month Eurodollar deposits as their
maturities extended into the new year implies, if the year-end pressures are assumed to be
concentrated in just the three-day rollover weekend, that borrowers in this market are now
paying about an 18 percentage point premium over a 5-1/4 percent federal funds rate
around the century date change.
(4) Since the August 24 FOMC meeting, the foreign exchange value of the dollar
has declined 1 percent on balance against a broad index of currencies, depreciating 2-3/4
percent against the major currencies, but appreciating 1 percent against those of other
important trading partners. Incoming data on spending and production in industrial
economies generally ran to the strong side of market expectations. The growing conviction
that economic recovery has gained a foothold in Japan put upward pressure on the yen,
Another System initiative to deal with potential Y2K problems, the Special Liquidity
Facility, which the Board approved and announced on July 20, came into effect on
October 1.
which Japanese authorities tried to stem with two rounds of intervention in September. The
actions, aggregating to $9.4 billion, seemed to have little lasting effect on the tide of a rising
value of the yen. Concerns about the longer-term consequences of a strong yen on the
economy eventually came to weigh on Japanese equity prices and intensified pressures on
the Bank of Japan to take unusual easing measures, such as not sterilizing foreign exchange
intervention or adopting a quantitative goal for reserve growth. To date, the Bank of Japan
has not changed operations, but long-term rates fell in Japan as market participants seemed
to push expectations of eventual policy tightening further into the future. Nonetheless, the
dollar's value fell 6 percent against the yen. In Europe, signs of stronger growth in spending
prompted talk of policy tightening by the European Central Bank and was associated with
increases in bond yields of around 40 basis points over the intermeeting period. On net, the
dollar depreciated 1-1/2 percent against the euro. Catching market participants unawares,
the Bank of England tightened policy, hiking its repurchase rate 1/4 percentage point, to 5-
prices; over the intermeeting period, longer-term U.K. interest rates rose about 60 basis
points, share prices lost 9 percent, and the pound appreciated 3 percent against the dollar.
There was no intervention by U.S. monetary authorities over the intermeeting period
(5) M2 expanded at a 5-1/2 percent rate in August and appears to be growing at
about that same pace in September, faster in both months than anticipated at the time of the
August FOMC. The additional expansion likely reflects stronger-than-expected income
growth and, as suggested by smaller inflows into equity mutual funds, a less attractive equity
market. Currency growth remained around the rapid pace seen earlier in the year, perhaps
reflecting in part continuing robust gains in consumer spending but also possibly some
hoarding in anticipation of Y2K.4 M3 in August grew at only a 5 percent rate despite a
surge in bank credit growth that month, but is estimated to have advanced at a 6-1/4
percent pace in September. Banks had shifted their funding toward nonmonetary liabilities
in August, but in September returned to strong large time deposit issuance.
(6) The growth of nonfinancial debt continued to run at around a 6 percent rate
in recent months. In the corporate sector, debt growth remained robust, although down
from earlier in the year. Less attractive conditions in capital markets, especially for lower-
rated issuers, encouraged borrowers to shift toward banks. The high level of interest rates
compared with earlier in the year has halted advance refunding by tax-exempt issuers and
cash-out residential mortgage refinancing by households. Households continued to borrow
heavily, however, to finance strong home purchases and sizable increases in consumer
durables. Federal debt appears to have contracted again in the third quarter; the Treasury is
only just beginning the added borrowing it will need to carry through on its announced
intentions to build its cash balance to an unusually high level at the end of the year for Y2K
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Jul. Aug. Sep. Sep. 2
Money and Credit Aggregates
M1
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Adjusted1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
Excess reserves
Policy Alternatives
(6) Stronger-than-expected incoming data on spending, together with a weaker
path for the exchange value of the dollar than projected in the August Greenbook, have
induced the staff to raise its projection of economic activity going forward. The
unemployment rate is expected to decline to 4 percent by next year, a little lower than in the
last Greenbook. In light of tighter labor markets and heightened inflation pressures, the
staff now assumes that the FOMC will raise the federal funds rate 1/2 percentage point to
forecast. Against this policy background, long-term interest rates are expected to hold
around their current levels before drifting higher beginning late next year, while stock prices
move sideways throughout. In the Greenbook baseline projection, these financial
conditions combine to damp the expansion of domestic final demand enough to slow
economic growth to a little below that of its potential in 2000 and 2001. Even with the
unemployment rate drifting up slightly by the end of 2001, the still taut labor market,
together with rising non-oil import prices, generates a noticeable pickup in core CPI
inflation, to 2-3/4 percent next year and 3 percent in 2001.
(7) While the Committee is likely to view an inflation outcome like that in the
staff forecast as unacceptable, it still may choose to keep the stance of policy unchanged, as
in alternative B. The staff outlook for inflation may strike the Committee as plausible but
surrounded by an unusually large element of uncertainty, which may be reduced by the
accumulation of additional evidence with the passage of time. On the demand side of the
economy, the changes in financial conditions this year have been substantial and have not
yet had much time to work themselves through to spending. On the supply side, the risks
may be considered to be tilted toward lower inflation than in the staff forecast: Four-
quarter increases in core inflation, productivity, and unit labor costs have remained
favorable to date, highlighting the possibility that a further strengthening of the secular
growth in labor productivity may continue to repress inflationary pressures for some time
longer. In addition, the Committee may judge that faster productivity growth actually has
represented a more significant influence damping inflation relative to various one-time
factors, such as falling oil or non-oil import prices, than the staff has estimated. If so, the
reversal of those factors that is now in train might put less upward pressure on broad price
movements than in the staff forecast. Moreover, recent declines in stock prices and rising
risk spreads on some corporate bonds seem to have reflected a heightened investor
edginess; in these circumstances, the Committee may be more inclined to keep policy on
hold so as not to add to market unease through an unexpected policy tightening.
(8) An unchanged intended federal funds rate, as under alternative B, along with
retention of a symmetric directive, would foster the sense that the Committee probably will
not act over the remainder of this year, especially given Y2K-related uncertainties.5 With
market prices now incorporating some odds on a tightening in the fourth quarter, this
Committee decision could spark a modest rally in financial markets. The choice of
alternative B with a tilt toward tightening, which would be announced immediately, would
tend to increase the perceived chances of a near-term firming, causing interest rates to back
up slightly and markets to become more sensitive to incoming data and to statements by
policymakers. In any event, banks and other lenders are likely to remain cautious suppliers
of funds to private borrowers as the year-end approaches, especially short-term credit whose
repayment could be viewed as potentially impaired for a little while by disruptions in
markets or the particular problems of individual counterparties. Year-end premiums in
money markets typically jump early in the fourth quarter, but in some years they have
declined subsequently as borrowers satisfied their needs. Spread movements, of course, are
subject to greater uncertainty with the century date change. This year borrowers seem to be
securing financing somewhat earlier than the norm, which may help to relieve some
pressures, though not by enough to prevent spreads from remaining quite elevated.
(9) The Committee instead could favor a 1/4 percentage point firming in the
intended federal funds rate to 5-1/2 percent, as in alternative C. A rationale for this policy
tightening would be that the inflation uptrend embodied in the staff forecast is both likely
and unacceptable and warrants a faster and more aggressive policy response than is assumed
in that forecast. Indeed, the persistent strength of domestic final demand in the face of
elevated long-term rates and flat stock prices since the spring, the currently low inventory-
sales ratios, and the strengthening of activity abroad might be seen as pointing to risks that
are skewed toward an unemployment rate appreciably below 4 percent in the near future
and a greater intensification of inflation pressures. Although the markets are not fully
prepared for such an action and an outsized price reaction cannot be ruled out, the
Committee might be willing to accept even a sharp reduction in bond and stock prices as an
aspect of the process of containing inflation. The Committee might see action at this
meeting as especially desirable if it views potential financial disruptions as increasingly
militating against tightening policy between now and early next year and if it also sees that
interval as a period of time when firmer policy is going to be needed to prevent inflation
pressures from cumulating.
(10) The 1/4 percentage point hike in the target federal funds rate at this FOMC
meeting would be enough of a surprise to financial markets to induce an appreciable
reaction. The ratcheting up of short-term interest rates would approach the magnitude of
the policy move. An immediate selloff in bond and stock markets can be anticipated as
market participants revise up their expected federal funds rates next year and beyond,
reflecting a strengthening of their assessments of the Federal Reserve's anti-inflation resolve,
as well as of impending inflation pressures in light of the Federal Reserve's evident concern.
The resultant increases in interest rates could strengthen the exchange value of the dollar,
although any worsening of the markets' outlook for U.S. inflation and declines in our stock
prices would mute that effect. The largely unexpected policy tightening might widen credit
and liquidity spreads in financial markets. The extent of all these market reactions would of
course depend on the Committee's choice of the direction of the tilt and of the content of
the immediate announcement of the change of policy stance.
(11) The expansion of the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors through the end
of this year is expected to run at around a 5 percent rate, somewhat below the growth of
nominal spending. Nonetheless, for the year, growth of this aggregate would be 6-1/4
percent, in the upper half of its 3 to 7 percent annual range. Among nonfederal sectors,
only business borrowing is likely to be much affected in the months around year-end by
Y2K-related distortions. In reaction to somewhat illiquid market conditions and efforts to
complete financing plans early, issuance of corporate bonds and commercial paper and the
overall pace of business borrowing should slow over the fourth quarter. Early next year, the
rebound in business borrowing should be held down by a projected runoffin precautionary
inventories. Household borrowing likely will remain robust over the next two quarters
owing to still-strong housing activity and solid advances in spending on consumer durable
goods. However, debt repayment by the federal government will accelerate in the first
quarter as the enlarged cash balance drops back, limiting the overall expansion of the debt
of nonfinancial sectors to only around 4-1/2 percent over the first three months of the year.
(12) The staff anticipates that both broad monetary aggregates will grow 6-1/2
percent this year, which would place M2 and M3 above the upper bounds of their annual
ranges of 5 percent and 6 percent, respectively. This growth would imply a fall in velocity
of about 1-1/4 percent. Both aggregates are likely to accelerate to a 9 percent rate of growth
from September to December, with nearly a third of this growth reflecting projected Y2K
effects. These effects occur as the public shifts some of its wealth from outside the broad
aggregates into highly liquid forms, including currency, deposits, and money funds, and as
banks finance a bulge in lending. After the turn of the year, the advance of the broad
aggregates is predicted to be depressed for a few months as these temporary effects are
Directive Language
(13) Presented below for the members' consideration is the operational paragraph
for the intermeeting period.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
To promote the Committee's long-run objectives of price stability and
sustainable economic growth, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in
reserve markets consistent with MAINTAINING/increasing/DECREASING the federal
funds rate to an average of around ____ [DEL: 5-1/4] percent. In view of the evidence currently
available, the Committee believes that prospective developments are equally likely to warrant
an increase or a decrease [MORE LIKELY TO WARRANT AN INCREASE/A
DECREASE THAN A DECREASE /AN INCREASE] in the federal funds rate operating
objective during the intermeeting period.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
M2 M3 Debt
Alt. B Alt. C Alt. B Alt. C All Alternatives
Growth Rate
From To
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent) October 4, 1999
Monthly
Oct 98
Nov 98
Dec 98
Jan 99
Feb 99
Mar 99
Apr 99
May 99
Jun 99
Jul 99
Aug 99
Sep 99
Weekly
Jul 30 99
Aug 6 99
Aug 13 99
Aug 20 99
Aug 27 99
Sep 3 99
Sep 10 99
Sep 17 99
Sep 24 99
Oct 1 99
Daily
Sep 15 99
Sep 16 99
Sep 17 99
Sep 20 99
Sep 21 99
Sep 22 99
Sep 23 99
Sep 24 99
Sep 27 99
Sep 28 99
Sep 29 99
Sep 30 99
Oct 1 99
,ort-term Long-term
bs ryDs Muni Conventional home
et se y Comm. U.S. government constant Indexed yields Moody's Municipal mortgagesl s darket paper maturity yields Baa Bonuyed primary market
h 1-year 3Buyer d-eth i 1-year 3-month 1-month 3-year I 5-year I 10-year i 30-year 5-year 10-year Fixed-rate ARM
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money and Debt Aggregatesass F
Seasonally adjusted October 4. 1999
Seasonally adjusted
o___ _nev stock measures Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactions components .
Period M1 M2 M3 other' total'In M2 In M3 only
M  government o
t he r  to t a
Levels (Sbillionsli
Monthly
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
October 1, 1999
Weekly
June 16
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
September 29
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
--- 2,000 -2,000
3,550 --- 3,550
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
L ____ ______
--- -11,437
-. 10,603
--- -10,163
-. 5,213
asury and agency securities.
rchase transactions (-), and matched purchase sale transactions (+).
September 29
within
1 year 1-5 5-10 over 10 total
