Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) December 17, 1999
Class I -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The announcement that the FOMC increased its target federal funds rate to
backup in interest rates. 1 However, the concern expressed in the announcement about the
inflationary implications of unsustainably rapid economic growth may have heightened
reactions to subsequent economic news pointing to persistent strength in aggregate demand.
While favorable information on costs and prices helped to damp the overall rise in yields,
economic releases were apparently read on balance as boosting the odds of additional
tightening actions in the coming year. Futures market quotes now suggest that market
participants attach a high probability to a quarter-point tightening at next February's meeting
and additional subsequent firmings of about another half point by next fall. On net,
Treasury coupon yields rose about 35 basis points over the intermeeting period. Yields on
investment-grade corporate bonds moved up a bit less, and those on junk bonds were about
unchanged, and risk spreads on junk bonds remain 1 percentage point wider than they were
in the first half of 1998. Most broad stock market indexes finished the period up about 2 to
(2) Participants seemed to become somewhat less worried over the intermeeting
period that the century date change will lead to much greater and longer lasting illiquidity in
financial markets than associated with a typical year-end. Contrary to earlier expectations,
markets generally remained quite receptive to new financing through the first week or so of
December: Issuance of commercial paper and corporate bonds was brisk, and initial public
offerings of equity surged. It has only been in the last few days that volume in corporate
bond markets has shown signs of tailing off seasonally; in the commercial paper market,
however, liquidity has eroded noticeably and spreads are widening. In the Treasury market,
bid-asked spreads were little changed over the intermeeting period, and the decline in trading
volumes was normal for this time of year. Premiums embedded in funding contracts with
maturities crossing over the year-end generally were little changed over the intermeeting
period and are well below the peaks recorded in October of this year, though they remain
elevated relative to past year-ends. Such elevated premiums mostly seem to reflect
borrowers' intense desire to lock in funding over the turn combined with lenders' reluctance
to expand their balance sheets; the December federal funds futures contract suggests, if
anything, that investors may be expecting funds to trade somewhat below target at year-end.
The cumulative increase in the volume of options on repurchase agreements auctioned by
the Desk seemed ultimately to sate dealer and customer demands. Propositions at the three
auctions since the November FOMC meeting dropped off considerably, on balance, and
despite the lower quantities of options awarded at these auctions, the premiums generally
edged lower.2 In other actions aimed at mitigating year-end pressures, the Desk this week
arranged two forward RP transactions totaling $6 billion that settle on December 30 and
December 31 and mature on January 3 and January 4; it has also arranged a considerable
volume of longer-term RPs stretching into the new year. To date, Desk operations have put
in place $60.4 billion of System RPs over the year-end.
(3) The rise in long-term interest rates in the United States over the intermeeting
period about matched that in most industrial countries with the exception of Japan, but the
foreign exchange value of the dollar still appreciated about 3/4 percent against a basket of
major currencies. The strength in the dollar, though, was not uniform: The dollar
appreciated 2-1/4 percent against the euro and depreciated 1-1/2 percent against the yen.
The weakness of the euro, which moved close to parity with the dollar, is somewhat puzzling
in that incoming data generally supported the notion that economic expansion in Europe was
well in train. Market participants did evince concerns about the attractiveness of the business
environment in Europe after the German and French governments intervened to block a few
corporate restructurings; nonetheless, European equity prices rose strongly over the
intermeeting period. In emerging market economies, yield spreads narrowed, on balance, to
the lowest levels seen since the market turmoil of the autumn of 1998, and equity prices for
the most part registered sizable gains.
. U.S. monetary
authorities did not intervene during the period.
(4) The growth of M2 in November, at 5-1/2 percent, remained moderate, with
higher opportunity costs evidently tending to offset some of the impetus to money demand
from stronger spending in the second half of the year. Among the components of M2,
currency growth, which has been brisk for some time, strengthened further last month.
Some portion of the recent runup in currency could mark a pickup in Y2K-related demands,
but strong holiday spending also may have played a role. In contrast to M2, M3 growth
surged last month with the institution-only money fund and large time deposit components
of M3 running especially strongly. The pickup in the expansion of institution-only money
funds is consistent with reports that firms may be consolidating liquid assets in professionally
managed funds in advance of the year-end. Rapid growth in large time deposits at domestic
banks seems to have been driven by the need to fund sizable increases in bank credit and
vault cash. Moreover, the Treasury ran down its deposits in November, probably leading
some domestic banks to ratchet up their issuance of large time deposits. U.S. branches and
agencies of foreign banks apparently relied increasingly on large time deposits to fund their
head offices and build up liquid assets in advance of the century date change and to finance
loan growth. Recent informal contacts with several foreign branches suggested that their
head offices have found U.S. markets to be a relatively attractive source of funds and have
chosen to issue large time deposits in the United States as one of their preferred vehicles for
securing over-the-turn funding for the global organization. Growth of M2 and M3 from the
fourth quarter of 1998 to the fourth quarter of this year, at 6 percent and 7-1/2 percent,
respectively, exceeded the annual ranges of 1 to 5 percent and 2 to 6 percent, respectively,
for these aggregates.3
(5) The expansion of the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors has slowed a little
in recent months, mostly reflecting a steeper paydown in federal debt. Only a slight decline
in federal debt is expected in this month as the Treasury seeks to build an elevated cash
balance at year-end. Business borrowing has remained brisk, both in capital markets and at
banks. Data on household borrowing, while limited for recent months, point to continued
solid expansion in the fourth quarter. From the fourth quarter of 1998 to the fourth quarter
of 1999, total domestic nonfinancial debt is estimated to have grown 6-1/2 percent, about
the same as last year and toward the upper end of the 3 to 7 percent range, implying that
debt velocity fell about 1 percent over the same period.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Sep. Oct. Nov. Nov.2
Money and Credit Aggregates
M1
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Adjusted1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal plus SLF borrowing
Excess reserves
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Policy Alternatives
(6) Reflecting robust incoming data on spending and further gains in stock prices
over the intermeeting period, the staff has again revised up its assessment of aggregate
demand over the next two years. In view of this strength, the staff sees the need for a
steeper trajectory of monetary policy tightening than in the previous Greenbook to produce
the financial conditions necessary to limit further tightening in labor markets. The funds
rate target is assumed to rise to 6-1/4 percent by late next year, contributing to some further
increase in longer-term interest rates. The upward movement in rates and disappointing
news on corporate earnings are expected to hold equity prices near their current levels on
average over the forecast period. Output growth is projected to slow slightly from this
year's pace, keeping the unemployment rate near 4 percent in 2000 and 2001. In these
circumstances, inflation in the core consumer price index is projected to pick up next year
and still further in 2001, reaching 2-3/4 percent in the latter year; overall consumer price
inflation runs in the 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent range over the next two years, restrained by
anticipated declines in energy prices.
(7) Given the circumstances of the looming century date change, the economic
outlook might not weigh as significantly in the Committee's consideration of its action at
this meeting as is usual. The Committee might see the heightened potential for financial
dislocation at this time as sufficient reason to keep policy on hold at this meeting, choosing
alternative B. Although financial markets have been much more liquid in recent weeks
than many participants had anticipated earlier in the year, various indicators still suggest that
trading is likely to be thin and investors unusually risk averse around year-end. Market
participants have apparently interpreted Federal Reserve actions to deal with potential
liquidity problems around the century date change, along with the adoption of a symmetric
directive at the last meeting, as virtually ensuring that the intended federal funds rate would
be left unchanged this month. With this prevailing expectation, a monetary tightening
would prompt substantial adjustments in portfolios. The extent of the resulting drop in
market prices could well be exacerbated by the thinness of markets and by the urgency that
market participants are likely to feel to complete their adjustments quickly before market
liquidity erodes further. Under the circumstances, the Committee may not want to incur
even the small risk of a potentially costly market disruption that might follow a policy
tightening, especially when any increase in inflation pressures resulting from a short delay
would be quite limited. Overall consumer price inflation is expected to moderate a little,
which should help damp inflation expectations, and most of the restraining effects of a
near-term policy firming are already built into financial market prices.
(8) Even abstracting from century date change considerations, the Committee
might not be persuaded that policy does in fact need to tighten over the next few months.
Incoming data over the intermeeting period have suggested that cost pressures and price
increases have remained subdued despite strong economic growth, perhaps because
productivity gains have been still greater than expected. This combination could be viewed
as suggesting that the economy can run with unusually taut labor markets for some time
longer before underlying inflation pressures intensify. On the demand side, the Committee
may feel that the 75 basis points of tightening implemented to date may result in more
restraint on demand than in the staff forecast. Premature or unnecessary tightening would
tend to hold gains in output and employment over the intermediate term below the
economy's full potential. In light of uncertainties on both the supply and demand sides of
the economy, the Committee might see considerable benefits in awaiting more data with
which to evaluate underlying trends.
(9) If the Committee believes that there is a reasonable possibility that
macroeconomic fundamentals could be balanced enough to make tightening unnecessary
within the next few months, it should choose a symmetric directive. 4 Such a directive,
accompanied by an announcement that emphasized that inflation could remain subdued
despite the strength of the demand, would cause market participants to take out much of
the tightening of monetary policy during the early part of 2000 that is currently built into
financial quotations. Although the thinness in markets in advance of year-end makes
reactions difficult to gauge, interest rates could drop appreciably, especially at intermediate
maturities, as those expectations were unwound, and equity markets would rally further.
The value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets could edge lower. However, these
market responses may be damped if the announcement were only perfunctory--that is, not
accompanied by any explanation--leaving open the possibility that the symmetry was
motivated by concerns about the century date change rather than a sense that policy was in
fact equally likely to tighten or to ease in coming months.
(10) If, in contrast, the Committee were concerned about mounting inflation
pressures and, as a consequence, saw reasonably high odds that it might tighten in the next
few months, it might want to convey a sense of these odds to market participants so that
the possibility of firming would remain built into the structure of market interest rates.
However, the Committee's desire at the same time not to add to market uncertainty and
volatility around the century date change may raise the issue of how best to impart its
assessment of the risks. Announcement of a shift from the existing symmetric directive to a
directive tilted toward tightening would most readily communicate concerns about incipient
price pressures and the likelihood of action in February. Although the wording of the
announcement could effectively rule out a firming in the weeks surrounding the century date
change, a drawback of this approach is that the asymmetry might be highlighted in press
accounts, running some risk of unsettling markets when they are vulnerable to dislocation.
Even more assurance to market participants that an intermeeting tightening was not
imminent might be provided by adopting a symmetric directive, while using the
announcement to give the Committee's sense of a risk of heightened inflation pressures
going forward; such assurance would be bought at the expense of possibly adding to
confusion in markets about the Committee's use of biases and their meaning. Many market
participants expect adoption of an asymmetric directive, and the structure of interest rates
already appears to embody at least 75 percent odds of a tightening in February. As a
consequence, while rates might firm a little as a tightening in February came to be perceived
as more assured under either variant, any increase would likely be small.
(11) As noted, considerations relating to the century date change would seem to
militate against tightening at this meeting. Nonetheless, the Committee might wish to
contemplate the 25 basis point tightening of policy at this meeting under alternative C--
perhaps as background for selection of an asymmetric directive or even for consideration of
an intermeeting move once risks associated with the century date change have faded. In the
staff forecast, core inflation picks up--and is poised to move higher beyond the projection
horizon--even with 75 basis points of further tightening and the more rapid rates of
productivity growth that the staff has built into the forecast over recent months. In effect,
faster productivity growth, other things equal, needs to be reflected at some point in higher
real interest rates to keep the influences of the associated boost to earnings--working on the
demands for capital goods and, through wealth, on consumption--from driving aggregate
demand further beyond aggregate supply. Still higher interest rates would be needed to
bring the levels of demand and supply into balance so as to forestall rising inflation. Indeed,
based on incoming spending data and the continued upward march of equity prices, the
Committee may see the risks to aggregate demand as having shifted further to the upside
over recent months, possibly requiring more restrictive financial conditions than assumed in
the staff forecast just to keep the output gap from widening. A firming action at this
meeting or in mid-January would be only a little prompter than in the staff forecast. But it is
likely to be associated with a sharper rise in market interest rates as market participants
inferred from the timing of the action that the Federal Reserve was much more concerned
about near-term inflation risks than they had perceived and was on a steeper tightening path
than now incorporated in the yield curve. As noted above, a tightening at this meeting
would pose some risk of prompting financial market disruptions.
(12) Assuming the selection of alternative B and no significantly untoward
developments over year-end, some further abatement of the unusual risk aversion and
demand for liquidity currently evident in markets should be apparent over the first few
weeks of 2000. Risks spreads could narrow somewhat, but they should remain wider, and
other credit terms tighter, than in the period before the market disruptions in the summer
and fall of 1998. Measured from October to March, domestic nonfinancial sector debt is
expected to expand at a 5-1/2 percent pace, roughly in line with nominal income, placing
this aggregate in March in the upper half of its 3 to 7 percent provisional range.
(13) After its Y2K-related runup late in the year, expansion of the monetary
aggregates is expected to moderate substantially over the first few months of the new year.
Currency growth should slow sharply. Similarly, the recent surge in large time deposits
should substantially unwind, as bank credit growth settles down from its Y2K-related bulge
and depository institutions return to more typical funding patterns. M2 also should
continue to respond to the earlier tightenings in the stance of monetary policy and the
associated widening in the opportunity cost of holding retail monetary assets. From
December to March, M2 and M3 are projected to grow at 4 and 3-3/4 percent annual rates,
respectively under alternative B. Measured over the October-to-March period to abstract
from most Y2K influences, M2 is forecast to expand at a 5-1/2 percent rate under that
alternative. This growth would leave this aggregate in March at the upper end of its
provisional 1 to 5 percent annual range. M3 is projected to expand at an 8-1/2 percent pace
over the same period, placing it in March somewhat above its provisional 2 to 6 percent
annual range.
Directive Language
(14) Presented below for the members' consideration is the operational paragraph
for the intermeeting period
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
To promote the Committee's long-run objectives of price stability and
sustainable economic growth, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in
reserve markets consistent with MAINTAINING/increasing/DECREASING the federal
funds rate AT/to an average of around ____ [DEL: 5-1/2] percent. In view of the evidence
currently available, the Committee believes that prospective developments are equally likely
to warrant an increase or a decrease [MORE LIKELY TO WARRANT AN INCREASE/A
DECREASE THAN A DECREASE/AN INCREASE] in the federal funds rate operating
objective during the intermeeting period.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
Alt. B Alt. C
Monthly Growth Rates
Oct-99
Nov-99
Dec-99
Jan-00
Nov-99
Dec-99
Feb-00
Mar-00
Quarterly Averages
1999 Q1
1999 Q2
1999 Q3
1999 Q4
2000 Q1
Growth Rate
From
Oct-99
Nov-99
Dec-99
Mar-00
Mar-00
Mar-00
Alt. B Alt. C
All Alternatives
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Monthly
Dec 98
Jan 99
Feb 99
Mar 99
Apr 99
May 99
Jun 99
Jul 99
Aug 99
Sep 99
Oct 99
Nov 99
Weekly
Oct 15 99
Oct 22 99
Oct 29 99
Nov 5 99
Nov 12 99
Nov 19 99
Nov 26 99
Dec 3 99
Dec 10 99
Dec 17 99
Daily
Dec 1 99
Dec 2 99
Dec 3 99
Dec 6 99
Dec 7 99
Dec 8 99
Dec 9 99
Dec 10 99
Dec 13 99
Dec 14 99
Dec 15 99
Dec 16 99
Dec 17 99
December 20, 1999
Short-term Long-term
CDs Conventional home
Treasury bills secondary Comm. U.S. government constant Indexed yields Moodys Municipal Conventional home
dl smarket a Baa Buye primary market
3-month 6-month 1-year 3-month 1-month 3-year 5-year 10-year 30-year 5-year 10-year Fixed-rate ARM
p - preliminary data
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
Money and Debt Aggregates
SeasonallyDecember 20, 1999
Seaeonally adlusted
oney stock measures Domestic nonfinancial debt
nontransactions components U.S.
Period M1 M2 M3 other' total'
In M2 In M3 only government'
Annual arowth rates(1) L
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
Levels (Sbillions)
Monthly
Weekly
1999-Nov. 1 1105.7 4623.3 3517.6 1706.1 6329.4
Dec. 6p 1111.4 4631.2 3519.8 1773.3 6404.5
p preliminary
December 17,1999
Weekly
September 8
December 1
8
15
Memo: LEVEL (bil. $) 6
December 15
NET CHANGES IN SYSTEM HOLDINGS OF SECURITES 1
Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted
I Treasurycoupons
- 2,000 -2,000
3,550 --- 3,550
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR)
CLASS II-FOMC
Net change
outright
.. -5,213
960 -7,266
--- -3,449
-. 4,985
- 7,313
-7 8,703
- 29,351
875 29,293
December 15
L1 year
0.
