Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
JANUARY 29, 1999
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) January 29, 1999
Class I -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The decision to leave the intended level of the federal funds rate unchanged at the
December FOMC meeting was widely expected and produced little reaction in financial
markets.1 Since then, long-term Treasury rates have moved up a little, on balance (Chart 1);
apparently, incoming data suggesting stronger-than-expected economic growth more than offset a
tendency for developments in Brazil to spur safe-haven demands for dollar assets or to generate
expectations of some spillover directly into the U.S. economy. Federal funds and eurodollar
futures rates also edged up over the intermeeting period and now suggest investors see little
possibility of an ease at the February meeting but still place some odds on easing by mid-year.
Short-term interest rates moved down over the intermeeting period. Private yields for lower-
rated firms fell as much as 1 percentage point as the influence of year-end pressures disappeared;
Treasury bill rates, which edged lower, may have been depressed by the Treasury's unanticipated
cut-back in bill issuance as well as purchases by Japanese authorities in association with
intervention. Broad indexes of equity prices have increased considerably since the last meeting,
supported in part by unexpectedly good earnings reports for the fourth quarter. The performance
of shares of technology firms was particularly strong.
(2) Despite developments in Brazil, most measures of domestic credit market stress
either stabilized or showed some further improvement over the intermeeting period. Yield
spreads for corporate bonds over Treasuries narrowed slightly further but remain well above the
low levels of recent years (Chart 2). Rate spreads in the commercial paper market, which had
been boosted considerably by year-end pressures, essentially returned to levels prevailing before
the Russian default. Implied volatilities on longer- and shorter-term debt instruments also have
moved down on net over the intermeeting period. Responses to the January bank lending officer
survey suggest that a much smaller proportion of domestic banks were tightening lending
standards over the past couple of months than in the fall, although the number of foreign banks
tightening standards remained quite high in the recent period; both sets of banks reported some
further tightening of lending terms.
(3) Since the December FOMC meeting, the exchange value of the dollar is about
unchanged on balance, as measured by the major currencies index, but has risen 1-1/2 percent
versus the currencies of a broad group that also includes other important trading partners. The
sharp increases in Japanese government bond yields in late December may have contributed to a
rise in the yen against the dollar to a level not seen in over two years, prompting the Japanese
authorities to intervene in mid-January. The dollar appreciated over 4 percent relative to the yen
immediately following the intervention, and it has drifted higher since then, ending the
intermeeting period about unchanged. The euro depreciated more than 2-1/2 percent on balance
since trading in the currency began on January 4, as data releases confirmed a slowdown in
growth and the lack of inflationary pressures in many parts of the euro area, particularly in
Germany. The Bank of England lowered its repo rate 25 basis points on January 7, surprising
most market analysts, who had not expected another cut so soon, and the dollar appreciated about
The Desk did not intervene on behalf of the System or the Treasury.
(4) Prices of emerging market financial assets were importantly influenced by events
in Brazil. The declaration on January 6 by the state of Menas Gerais of a moratorium in its debt
payments to the central government, a relatively minor event in its own right, crystallized fears
that the Brazilian central government would be unable to accomplish the deep fiscal reforms seen
as the only sustainable solution to its financial problems. Faced by continuing outflows of
capital, Brazilian authorities were eventually forced to let the real float. The initial reaction was
euphoric in Brazilian stock and bond markets, but in subsequent days, the real depreciated
further and capital outflows continued despite rising domestic short-term interest rates. On
balance over the intermeeting period, the real depreciated about 40 percent, equity prices rose 14
percent, and Brady bond yield spreads widened about 275 basis points. The perceived risk of
contagion to the rest of Latin America was evidenced by increases in the Brady yield spreads for
other Latin American countries ranging from 40 to 250 basis points, increases in domestic
interest rates, and a 3-3/4 percent appreciation of the dollar versus the Mexican peso. In addition,
the widely publicized announcement by Argentina that it was considering a full dollarization of
its economy was seen, at least in part, as an attempt to insulate its currency board regime from
the Brazilian crisis. The impact of the Brazilian crisis was also felt in emerging Asia, with
rumors of possible devaluations in Hong Kong and China resurfacing in foreign exchange
markets. Nonetheless, changes in interest rates, stock prices, and currency values were mixed in
the region over the intermeeting period as weakness in the latter part of the period offset strength
earlier in the period in many economies.
(5) M2 and M3 advanced in December at rates of 10-1/4 and 11-1/2 percent,
respectively, extending the rapid growth that began in the fall and leaving expansion during the
fourth quarter the fastest quarterly advance of the year for both aggregates. 2 The liquid
components of M2 and M3, especially money market funds, were particularly strong, both in the
month and over the quarter. Money growth likely has been bolstered by the effects of the recent
policy easings on opportunity costs, strong nominal GDP, and perhaps as well continued
heightened demands for liquid and safe assets. The velocities of M2 and M3 in the fourth quarter
fell at the fastest rates in many years--and, in the case of M2, faster than would have been
predicted based on historical relationships with opportunity costs. Monetary growth has
moderated appreciably so far in the new year, and, averaging over December and January, both
aggregates have slowed, as expected in the last bluebook.
(6) The growth of the total debt of the nonfederal sectors remained rapid over the
fourth quarter, averaging 9 percent. In the household sector, strong spending on durable goods
and housing in an environment of low interest rates has generated robust demands for consumer
and residential mortgage credit. Businesses, too, have borrowed heavily in recent months to fund
both continued rapid growth in capital outlays in the face of sluggish profit growth and large
cash-financed equity retirements. Although spreads on corporate bonds remain wide, markets are
receptive, dealers are more willing to take positions, and, outside the junk bond sector, yield
levels are no higher than earlier last year. Investment-grade bond issuance of nonfinancial firms
surged in November and remained strong in December before moderating a bit in January. A
considerable part of these longer-term funds has been used to pay down short-term debt,
including commercial paper and bank loans, which boomed in the fall when longer-term capital
markets were disrupted. The recovery of junk bond issuance that began in November has
extended into the new year, including a sharp rise in its lower-tier component. State and local
borrowing stayed brisk through year-end, spurred by new spending projects and pre-funding to
take advantage of low interest rates. The federal government continued to pay down debt,
holding total nonfinancial sector debt growth to about a 6-1/4 percent rate over the fourth quarter.
MONEY, CREDIT, AND RESERVE AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Nov. Dec. Jan. 1998:Q4
Money and Credit Aggregates
M1
Adjusted for sweeps
Domestic nonfinancial debt
Federal
Nonfederal
Bank credit
Adjusted1
Reserve Measures
Nonborrowed reserves
Total reserves
Adjusted for sweeps
Monetary base
Adjusted for sweeps
Memo: (millions of dollars)
Adjustment plus seasonal borrowing
Excess reserves 1624
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Longer-Term Strategies
(7) This section considers alternative longer-term strategies for monetary policy and
highlights some important risks to the outlook. The staff FRB/US model is used to extend the
Greenbook forecast for a number of years and to examine both a policy designed to achieve price
stability and the effects of alternative assumptions about important features of aggregate demand
and supply.
(8) Under the baseline scenario, monetary policy firms in the years beyond the
Greenbook horizon in order bring the unemployment rate gradually up to the NAIRU.3 In the
baseline, many of the forces at work over 1999 and 2000 persist in the following years and cap
the rise in inflation. On the supply side of the economy, the relative price of oil rises slowly,
potential GDP expands at a 2-3/4 percent rate, and the long-run NAIRU remains at the staffs
current estimate of a little under 5-1/2 percent--though, over the intermediate term in the baseline
the effective NAIRU is a bit higher to offset the inflationary impetus of a falling dollar. Among
the factors influencing aggregate demand, the federal budget surplus as a percent of nominal
GDP averages around its level in 2000, and the stock of federal debt falls from 45 percent to
almost 10 percent of nominal GDP over the next ten years. The relatively moderate rate of
decline in the ratio of stock-market wealth to nominal GDP over the Greenbook forecast period
is extended through 2003, but the ratio then stabilizes at a level equal to that of mid-1997.
Foreign real GDP growth is assumed to pick up to almost 3-3/4 percent in 2001 and thereafter.
The foreign exchange value of the dollar, using the broad index, depreciates in real terms by
about 1-1/2 percent per year over the Greenbook forecast period on average, but at a 5 percent
annual rate over the extended forecast horizon. This depreciation causes the current account
deficit to level off in the out years, albeit at about 5 percent of nominal GDP.4
(9) In the baseline scenario, shown by the solid lines in Chart 3, core PCE inflation
rises over the Greenbook forecast period and beyond.5 The unemployment rate is about a full
percentage point below the NAIRU at the beginning of 2001, oil prices are on the upswing, and
the dollar continues to depreciate. The Committee is assumed to start tightening immediately
after the Greenbook horizon, raising the nominal federal funds rate to nearly 6-1/2 percent in
subsequently, but like the unemployment rate, to a level somewhat above its long-run
equilibrium path in order to offset the price effects of the continuing depreciation of the dollar.
The alternative strategy, shown by the dotted lines, is designed to achieve price stability--
defined as core PCE inflation of 3/4 percent, most of which is accounted for by measurement
bias. This strategy calls for the Committee to begin tightening early in 1999 to head off some of
the intensifying inflationary pressures in the Greenbook forecast.6 This prompt response allows
the rise in the nominal funds rate to be gradual and moderate, amounting to about a percentage
point over the next three years, although some of that increase occurs after unemployment turns
up and inflation turns down. Achieving price stability requires pushing up the real federal funds
rate and the unemployment rate to rather high levels for some time because labor markets remain
strained for the first several years and there are ongoing adverse supply developments over the
entire period.
(10) The persistent favorable surprises in inflation witnessed over recent years can be
explained in a Phillips curve framework by some combination of an unanticipated step-down in
the NAIRU and favorable shocks to prices and labor compensation. The simulations shown in
Chart 4 look at the implications for monetary policy of some variations from the assumptions in
the baseline forecast about these factors. The lower NAIRU scenario (the dot-dash lines)
assumes that the natural rate of unemployment fell to 4-1/2 percent in the mid-1990s, implying
that the recent slowdown in inflation has resulted more from a changed labor market structure
and less from temporary price shocks than in the staff analysis. With the lower NAIRU, the labor
market is currently close to balance, the real funds rate is now at its natural rate, and the
Committee can cap core PCE inflation at about 2 percent going forward by having the nominal
funds rate parallel the slight downward trajectory of the equilibrium real funds rate. In contrast
to this favorable outcome, the adverse price shocks scenario (shown by the dotted lines)
examines a situation in which the staff analysis of inflation has been essentially correct, but
previous beneficial price shocks reverse by more than in the baseline. Specifically, this
simulation is based on the assumption that oil prices climb $5 above their baseline level by the
end of 1999 and maintain this gap in real terms thereafter, and the costs of employee benefits rise
at a pace 1 percentage point faster than in the baseline over the next four years.7 In response to
higher total PCE inflation, which rises more rapidly than core inflation because of the effect of
energy costs, the Committee (following the Taylor rule) raises the federal funds rate starting in
early 1999. The policy response to adverse price shocks under the Taylor rule means that both
inflation and unemployment run above the baseline for a while--in effect, the obverse of the
previous few years, when favorable price developments were taken in both lower inflation and
lower unemployment.
(11) Spending on producers' durable equipment in 1998 was considerably stronger
than forecast by the staff one year ago. Chart 5 presents domestic demand risk scenarios keyed
off alternatives to the baseline path for investment demand. The stronger demand scenario,
shown by the dotted lines, embodies additional--but gradually diminishing--investment surprises
in 1999 and beyond that have the cumulative effect of raising the stock of producers' durable
equipment 7 percent above the baseline. This increase in the capital stock ultimately boosts the
levels of labor productivity and output in the nonfarm sector about 1 percent. Over the near term,
however, the resulting increment to aggregate supply falls considerably short of the stimulus to
demand. Although the unemployment rate falls, inflationary pressures are contained by the
uptick in productivity and the prompt response of the Federal Reserve. The Committee is
assumed to start tightening early in 1999 and to raise the federal funds rate to 7 percent by 2002
in order to keep inflation at 2-3/4 percent in the long run. The weaker demand scenario (shown
by the dot-dash lines) interprets a portion of the investment surge of recent years, not as an
indication of a permanent increase in desired capital stocks relative to their baseline levels, but as
a reflection of overly optimistic firms. In this scenario, firms reassess their capital stock needs
and scale back the pace of accumulation over the next few years. With aggregate demand softer,
the Committee, following the Taylor rule, would substantially reduce the funds rate in 1999 and
present in the baseline show through in rising inflation, the Committee begins to firm policy in
parallel with the baseline path.
(12) The staff has built into the baseline a gradual depreciation of the dollar that limits
the deterioration of the current account and the rate of increase in the net foreign indebtedness of
the United States. However, exchange-rate adjustments are typically not so gradual, and Chart 6
presents a weaker dollar scenario in which the depreciation of the dollar that is assumed over
the baseline horizon is more front-loaded: The dollar depreciates very sharply by the end of
imparts both an aggregate demand shock--as the relative price change spurs demand for U.S.
goods--and a price shock--as the prices of imports and import-competing products rise. The
Committee, seeing both lower unemployment and higher inflation, raises the nominal funds rate
sooner and by more than in the baseline. But even this tightening, implied by the Taylor rule,
still allows a larger pickup in inflation over the next few years.
Ranges for Money and Debt
(13) The ranges for money and debt in 1999 that the Committee selected on a
provisional basis last July are presented below. As in other recent years, the Committee chose
ranges for the monetary aggregates that it viewed to be consistent with long-term price stability
and historically typical velocity trends; those selections have not necessarily reflected its
expectations for actual money growth over the coming year that might accompany a desired path
for nominal GDP. The Committee has judged velocities of the monetary aggregates to be so
unpredictable over annual periods that it could not form reliable expectations for the coming
year's monetary growth and, hence, could not place special weight in policy decisions on
deviations of growth from those expectations. While the Committee also has not paid particular
attention to growth of domestic nonfinancial debt, the range it has chosen for this aggregate has
been aligned with expectations for actual growth over the year ahead rather than with growth
consistent with price stability. Apart from cyclical variations and a protracted downward shift in
the 1980s, debt velocity has been fairly stable over long periods of time. Should the Committee
wish to align the debt range with expected growth under price stability and stable debt velocity,
that range presumably would be centered in the neighborhood of 3 percent--the same as for M2--
given the staff estimate of potential real GDP growth of 2-3/4 percent and an upward bias in the
GDP deflator of around 1/2 percent. The table below also gives staff projections for money and
debt in 1999, which are explained in the text that follows and may provide reference points--even
if somewhat unreliable--to assess money and debt growth as the year progresses.
Money and debt growth
(in percent)
Debt 6.3 5-1/4 3 to 7
Nominal 5.1 4
GDP
(14) The behavior of the monetary aggregates last year provided some mixed readings
on their value as indicators of economic performance. Velocity fell sharply, unexpectedly, and
for reasons that are not fully understood. The Committee looked past accelerating money late in
the year when it eased policy in the wake of the market turbulence that followed the Russian
default. The Committee recognized that a good part of that money growth reflected the market
turmoil, which itself had the potential for adverse consequences for the domestic economy.
Nonetheless, some of the unexpected strength in money last year was associated with
unanticipated strength in the economy, even though the miss in money was far larger than that in
nominal GDP. This experience suggests that the aggregates may have retained some value as
signals, perhaps because some of the factors contributing to the rapid growth in money, such as
lower interest rates and rising stock market wealth, also contributed to the strength in aggregate
demand. Even the rapid money growth associated with market turbulence may have been
Chart 7
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost M2 VelocityRatio scale
M2 Velocity
Ratio scale
Intercept Fit from 1994:Q3- 1998:Q4
(slope taken from lower regression line)
:04 94:Q3
99:Q4
Fit from 1959:Q2 - 1989:Q4
Opportunity Cost (ratio scale)
Ratio scale
Percentage pointsRatio scale
M2 Velocity
(left scale)
M2 Opportunity Cost
I I I I I I I I I
/ IF
00, .
* Two quarter moving average
ariussur er s s i s r r
providing some information, namely that the banking system was sufficiently healthy to cushion
the effects of disruptions in securities markets on spending.
(15) In the staff forecast, assuming no change in the federal funds rate, nominal GDP
decelerates to 4 percent in 1999. Under the circumstances, M2 is projected to grow 6 percent in
the upper end of its price-stability range set provisionally last July. A portion of the decrease in
velocity of nearly 2 percent can be attributed to residual adjustments of M2 asset holdings to the
decline in market interest rates and opportunity costs last fall. In addition, money market mutual
funds will likely grow more briskly than might be suggested by interest rate relationships; in an
environment of high, but not rising, equity prices and a historically high weight of equities in
portfolios, savers may be attempting to rebalance portfolios, and money market mutual funds
should capture at least some of the reallocation. We have built in a pickup in currency growth
late in the year in anticipation of increased demand in advance of the century date change, but
this largely reflects substitutions away from deposits within M2. The projection allows for only a
slight increase in M2 growth later in the year owing to greater demand for insured deposits from
investors becoming concerned about the safety of mutual funds and other capital market
instruments around the time of the century date change.
(16) Growth in M3 is projected to slow to 8 percent this year, still a good bit above
the upper end of its provisional price-stability range. In large part, the deceleration reflects the
expectation that bank credit and associated funding needs will moderate from their outsized
growth of 1998. In the wake of the repricing of liquidity and risk last summer and fall, bank
credit was boosted by a shift by businesses from market to bank financing, unusual difficulties in
securitizing loans amid the market turmoil, and attractive investment opportunities in securities.
Absent new shocks to the financial system, these factors are expected to recede, and bank and
thrift credit should expand at a pace closer to that of total debt and nominal GDP. In addition,
growth in money market mutual funds in M3 is projected to slow from the exceptional rate of
programs to businesses moderates. We have allowed for a bit more of a pickup in M3 than in
M2 as a consequence of the century date change. Investors' concerns about placing funds
directly in securities markets could create market pressures that would induce firms to shift
toward bank credit, which would be financed in part by issuance of wholesale deposits in M3.
(17) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to expand 5-1/4 percent
this year, in the middle of the provisional range for this aggregate. The deceleration, from 6-1/4
percent growth in 1998, is accounted for by both a larger paydown of federal debt, owing to a
larger projected surplus, and some moderation in growth of nonfederal debt. Borrowing by
businesses falls off, even as the financing gap rises, in keeping with the anticipation of a cooling
of merger activity from the torrid pace of recent quarters. In addition, household borrowing
tapers off, reflecting a moderation in growth of outlays on consumer durables and housing as
well as an edging lower of mortgage refinancing (which often involves some net borrowing) in
an environment of fairly stable mortgage rates. Credit supply conditions should not be affecting
debt growth much in 1999; banks and other lenders are not likely to tighten standards and terms
noticeably further on loans to businesses and households, though they will probably remain less
accommodative than before the turmoil of last year. In securities markets, we expect that some
of the unusually large spreads on lower-rated bonds and various mortgage instruments will
narrow as investors pursue favorable opportunities to boost returns, which will lower borrowing
costs for those sectors.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(18) Information received since the December FOMC meeting has suggested
considerably more strength in domestic demand, as well as a higher path for stock prices, than
anticipated in the December forecast, although prospects for foreign economies, on net, appear
somewhat weaker. Balancing these forces, the staff has boosted its forecast for expansion of real
GDP, to around 2-1/2 percent in both 1999 and 2000, still assuming an unchanged stance of
monetary policy over the forecast period. With economic growth now projected to be just short
of its potential, the staff anticipates that the unemployment rate will hold close to its December
level of 4.3 percent, rather than increasing to nearly 5 percent as expected in December. Mainly
owing to the higher trajectory for resource utilization, the staff forecast now sees stronger
inflation pressures than in the December Greenbook; spurred in part by a turnaround in prices of
oil, other commodities, and many other imports, key measures of inflation pick up about 1
percentage point between 1998 and 2000.
(19) Even if the Committee agreed with the Greenbook analysis that inflation could
well move higher, it might choose to keep the intended funds rate unchanged at this meeting, as
in alternative B. The situation in global financial markets remains somewhat unsettled, and the
Committee may see that as posing a continued risk of further global contagion that ultimately
could jeopardize the U.S. expansion. Furthermore, with inflation quite low by many measures
and inflation expectations likely to be well contained, any price acceleration should be relatively
gradual. In these circumstances, refraining from tightening at this meeting still should leave the
Committee sufficient time to halt any uptrend in inflation before it gained substantial momentum.
Moreover, delay might buy time for the market to realize that a tightening of policy will be
necessary, reducing the odds on an outsized market reaction. Finally, the ongoing string of
favorable wage and price reports might suggest that, despite tight labor markets, inflation risks
are somewhat less than embodied in the staff forecast.
(20) If, by contrast, the Committee saw increasing inflation as the primary threat to
sustained economic expansion, it might choose the 25 basis point hike in the funds rate of
alternative C at this meeting. The Committee might read the persistence of surprisingly strong
growth in aggregate demand, exceptionally high levels of resource utilization, and soaring equity
prices as evidence that real short-term interest rates are sufficiently below their equilibrium
values to justify prompt action. Although inflation picks up only gradually in the staff forecast,
deferring action could allow inflation pressures to build and necessitate a more pronounced
policy firming at a later date that would impose greater restraint on the real economy. Markets
have weathered both the year-end and, to date, the Brazilian crisis, suggesting that conditions
may be resilient enough to withstand a slight firming of U.S. policy. Indeed, to the extent that a
portion of the cumulative 3/4 percentage point ease last fall reflected the Committee's desire to
cushion the economy against potential financial market disruptions that have not materialized, it
might now be appropriate to take back some of that easing. The Committee might even be
concerned that inflation could accelerate more sharply than envisioned in the staff forecast,
perhaps because faster-than-projected economic growth would put greater pressure on labor
markets or because the staff had earlier underestimated the role of temporary factors in damping
inflation, so that when these factors turn around the underlying tautness of labor markets will
show through forcefully to wages and prices.
(21) The 25 basis point easing contemplated in alternative A might be seen as
appropriate if the Committee remained concerned about the possibility that economic and
financial weakness abroad might prove deeper and more widespread than now expected. The
situation in Brazil is continuing to deteriorate, but the staff forecast builds in only limited
contagion to other emerging market economies. In Japan, the risks still may be seen as tilted to
the downside in view of the relatively high level of the yen, the backup in bond yields, and the
proximity of the nominal short-term interest rate to zero. In Europe, an ECB intent on building
its inflation-fighting credibility may be reluctant to counter a weakening economy by the easing
of monetary policy that is assumed in the staff forecast. Given these uncertainties, it is not
surprising that investors in international and domestic financial markets still appear to be quite
cautious about credit risk, suggesting the possibility of additional widening of spreads and
restraint on credit supply in response to unexpected adverse economic developments from
abroad. In these circumstances, a slight easing of the stance of monetary policy might be viewed
as a prudent measure to provide additional assurance that the expansion of domestic economic
activity will not weaken unduly should such events occur. In light of the slack conditions in
global economic activity, such an action would be unlikely to prompt a significant increase in
inflationary pressures for some time to come, even if the downside risks did not materialize.
(22) Investors place high odds on monetary policy being left unchanged at this
meeting. Thus, if the intended funds rate were left at 4-3/4 percent, as under alternative B, short-
and long-term interest rates should hold near their current levels, as would the value of the dollar
on foreign exchange markets. Over the intermeeting period, however, if data on the economy
and prices come in along the lines of the staff forecast, intermediate- and long-term rates could
back up some as investors continue to unwind their expectations of any further easing of Federal
Reserve policy later in the year. Under the anticipated conditions of solid economic growth,
concerns about credit quality should abate further, and bond market spreads should edge down a
little from their current high levels.
(23) In light of prevailing expectations about monetary policy, financial markets would
react sharply to the tightening of alternative C. Unless the policy announcement hinted strongly
that the FOMC saw the move as a limited action, say intended to reverse some of the extra
"insurance" against adverse financial developments that was put in place with the last easing,
the backup in interest rates could be particularly large. Market participants might be concerned
that the move signaled that inflation risks were more serious than previously thought and could
well be followed by additional tightening. The prospects for rising debt-service burdens might
lead to some increase in risk premiums. The advance in yields on private securities could
provoke a substantial correction in equity prices, as investors trimmed expectations of profits and
discounted expected earnings at higher rates. The value of the dollar on foreign exchange
markets could rise appreciably.
(24) In view of the strength of recent economic activity, investors might be puzzled by
implementation of alternative A, but they likely would conclude that the shift represented another
small, and perhaps final, adjustment of policy to turbulence abroad designed to ensure that U.S.
economic growth remained robust. Short-term market rates would decline noticeably, but bond
yields and spreads would probably fall only a bit. The foreign exchange value of the dollar likely
would weaken, and equity prices could ascend further.
(25) In line with the staffs projections of annual growth of the monetary aggregates
that were discussed in the previous section, M2 and M3 are expected to slow somewhat over the
first several months of this year as the growth of nominal GDP moderates and the effects of
previous declines in interest rates abate. Under the unchanged funds rate of alternative B and the
economic conditions foreseen in the Greenbook, M2 is projected to expand at a 5-1/2 percent
pace and M3 at a 7-1/2 percent rate over the January-to-June period. Domestic nonfinancial
sector debt is expected to decelerate as well, growing at a 5-1/4 percent pace from December to
June and remaining near the middle of its provisional 3-to-7 percent annual range.
Directive Language
(26) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording relating to the
Committee's ranges for the aggregates in 1999 and the operational paragraph for the
intermeeting period. The wording of the operational paragraph reflects the new language
approved at the December meeting.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In furtherance of these
objectives, the Committee [DEL: reaffirmed] at THIS [DEL: its] meeting [DEL: on June 30-July 1 the] ESTABLISHED
ranges [DEL: it had established in February] for growth of M2 and M3 of __ TO __ [DEL: 1 to 5] percent and
__ TO __ [DEL: 2 to 6] percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1998 [DEL: 1997] to the
fourth quarter of 1999 [DEL:1998]. The range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was SET
maintained at __ TO __ [DEL: 3-to 7] percent for the year. [DEL: For 1999, the Committee agreed on a
tentative basis to set the same ranges for growth of the monetary aggregates and debt, measured
from the fourth quarter of 1998 to the fourth quarter of 1999.] The behavior of the monetary
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the economy and financial markets.
OPERATIONAL PARAGRAPH
To promote the Committee's long-run objectives of price stability and sustainable
economic growth, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets
consistent with maintaining/INCREASING/DECREASING the federal funds rate at/TO an
average of around 4-3/4 percent. In view of the evidence currently available, the Committee
believes that prospective developments are equally likely to warrant an increase or a decrease
[MORE LIKELY TO WARRANT AN INCREASE/A DECREASE THAN A DECREASE/AN
INCREASE] in the federal funds rate operating objective during the intermeeting period.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Money and Credit Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
All Alternatives
Monthly Growth Rates
Jan-99
Feb-99
Mar-99
Apr-99
May-99
Jun-99
Quarterly Averages
1998 Q4
1999 Q1
1999 Q2
Growth Rate
From To
Dec-98 Jun-99
Jan-99 Jun-99
