Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
DECEMBER 14,2000
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) December 14, 2000
Class II -- FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Market expectations about the future course of monetary policy were
revised down appreciably over the intermeeting period amid signs of weakening
growth in economic activity, deteriorating conditions in some segments of financial
markets, and public comments by monetary policy makers about the implications of
these developments. Judging by futures market prices, investors have cut their
forecasts of the federal funds rate at the end of 2001 about 1/2 percentage point since
the last FOMC meeting, to around 51/2 percent (chart 1). Most market participants
now expect the Committee to announce at this meeting that it sees the risks as evenly
balanced, and they appear more confident that the target federal funds rate will be
trimmed 25 basis points at the late-January meeting.' The shift in the economic and
policy outlook pulled down yields on nominal Treasury coupon securities 35 to 55
basis points. Yields on ten- and thirty-year inflation-indexed securities declined less,
Chart 1
Financial Market Indicators
Expected Federal Funds Rates Estimated from Selected Treasury Yields
Financial Futures* Percent
F y7.00 -ly
DaIly
--.---. November 14, 2000 6.75
S December 14, 2000
- 6.50
- 6.00
I I I I I I I I I 5.00
Dec Feb Apr Jun Aug Oct Dec Feb
Sep Jan May Sep Jan May Sep
1998 1999 2000
Vertical line indicates last FOMC date
Selected Equity Indexes
lndex(9/1/98) = 100
Sep Jan May Sep Jan May Sep
1998 1999 2000
Vertical line indicates last FOMC date
Selected Risk Spreads*
Basis Points
Sep Jan May Sep Jan May Sep
1998 1999 2000
*The spreads compare the yields on the Mernll Lynch 175 and BBB indexes
with the Mernll Lynch AAA index. Vertical line indicates last FOMC date
Selected Private Long-Term Yields
Percent Percent
Sep Jan May Sep Jan May Sep
1998 1999
Vertical line indicates last FOMC date.
2000
Spread of Low-Tier CP Rate Percentage
over High-Tier CP Rate* Points
Daily
2000 /
1998-1999
1995-1997 • .
Oct Nov Dec
*30-day nonfinancial, A2/P2 rate less A1/P1 rate
about 10 basis points. The narrowing gap between nominal and indexed yields may in
part reflect a notable reduction in longer-term inflation expectations.
(2) The marking down of prospects for economic growth, along with
additional warnings and negative reports on corporate earnings, weighed on equity
prices and elevated risk spreads in securities markets, especially for firms with ratings
at or below the lower end of the investment-grade scale. However, much of the
marked drop in equity prices between the last FOMC meeting and the end of
November was rolled back following statements by Federal Reserve officials that
solidified expectations that policy would be eased in early 2001. On balance, broad
indexes of equity prices fell 3 to 13 percent. Yields on higher-rated investment-grade
bonds shed 40 to 50 basis points, in line with those on Treasury securities. Yields on
lower-rated investment-grade issues were down somewhat less, bringing the total
increase in their spreads over the highest-quality corporate rate to about 3/4 percentage
point this year. Yields on junk bonds rose 20 basis points over the intermeeting
period; their risk spreads widened 70 basis points, for a cumulative increase of nearly
much more apparent in money markets. In the commercial paper market, rate
spreads between top- and second-tier issues jumped 20 to 85 basis points on balance.
The largest increase occurred at the one-month maturity, reflecting the inclusion of a
considerable premium for taking on risk over the year-end as the maturity date of the
paper moved into 2001. Spreads also widened for paper whose maturity dates did not
cross over into next year.
(3) Business financing strengthened appreciably in November from its
depressed level in October, but its composition reflected the disparate market
conditions for high- and low-rated firms. Gross issuance of investment-grade
corporate bonds surged as their yields fell and investors remained receptive to such
offerings. In contrast, junk bond issuance was anemic. Gross equity issuance also
rose, but was concentrated in seasoned, rather than initial, offerings. Bank lending to
businesses remained subdued, perhaps reflecting weak capital spending as well as the
more stringent lending standards and terms reported by banks over recent quarters.
In the household sector, total consumer credit continued to grow at a moderate pace
in October, down from the rapid increases of earlier this year; available data from
banks for November do not suggest additional slowing. The decline in mortgage rates
since the spring appeared to support residential mortgage growth. Federal debt
continued to contract.
(4) M2 growth sagged to a 2-3/4 percent annual rate in November, down from
(chart 2).3 Growth over October and November was much weaker than in the
preceding two months, likely in response to the slower growth of income and
spending since midyear. M2 growth may have received a boost going into December
from temporary outflows from bond and equity mutual funds in the final weeks of
November. Growth of M3 slowed less than that of M2 in November, in part owing
to increased issuance of large time deposits as banks reduced their reliance on net
borrowing from overseas offices. Even so, the expansion of M3 has been relatively
sluggish in the past two months, reflecting the slow growth of bank credit.
(5) With perceptions mounting that growth of economic activity in the
major foreign industrial countries-especially those in the euro area-was generally
cooling by less than in the United States, yields on the longer-term government
obligations of these countries fell somewhat less than those on U.S. Treasury
securities over the intermeeting period. The foreign exchange value of the dollar
declined about 1-1/4 percent against a basket of the major currencies, stemming largely
from losses of 3-1/4 percent and 1-3/4 percent, respectively, vis-à-vis the euro and the
Canadian dollar. A national election in Canada in late November decisively
strengthened the ruling party's parliamentary majority and helped buoy the Canadian
dollar. By contrast, weaker-than-expected economic data, stalled business sentiment,
Chart 2
Financial Flows and Exchange Rates
Net Inflows to Bond and Equity Mutual Funds
Percent $ Billion
S12 Monthly rate
p - Projected based on partial data
Total Growth
Debt of Domestic Nonfinancial Sectors
Nonfederal Growth
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Exchange Rates
Other Important
Trading Partners
Index(9/1/98) = 100
Broad
Index
Major
Currencies
MARA RJ
M2 Growth
Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
and political uncertainties in Japan weighed on the yen, which depreciated 4 percent
on net against the U.S. dollar.4
(6) Vulnerabilities in several emerging markets contributed to a 1/2 percent
appreciation of dollar's value against an index of the currencies of our other important
trading partners over the intermeeting period. Banking sector problems in Turkey led
to difficulty in maintaining that country's crawling foreign exchange peg. Overnight
rates temporarily moved into the four-digit range to staunch capital flight, and
Turkish longer-term risk spreads rose more than 200 basis points on balance over the
intermeeting period. Concerns about weakness in the high-tech sector depressed
financial markets in many Asian emerging market economies, especially in Korea and
Taiwan. While the government of Argentina moved closer to enacting fiscal reforms,
risk spreads on its debt remained elevated. Moreover, spreads on Brazilian and
Mexican debt widened a little, suggesting some regional spillover of investor concerns.
Still, global investors apparently distinguished among differing risks, and the overall
emerging market bond spread rose only slightly, on net, over the intermeeting period.
MONEY AND CREDIT AGGREGATES
(Seasonally adjusted annual percentage rates of growth)
Sep. 2000 Oct. 2000 Nov. 2000 Nov. 20001
Money and Credit Aggregates
Domestic nonfinancial debt 5.0 2.7 n.a. 5.2
Federal -4.8 -10.0 n.a. -6.6
Nonfederal 7.4 5.7 n.a. 8.4
Policy Alternatives
(7) In light of weaker-than-expected economic data, a further tightening of
financial conditions for riskier firms, and somewhat lower equity prices, the staff has
marked down substantially its forecast of the path of spending. Output growth is
projected to be especially soft in the near term, reflecting inventory adjustments in
some industries as well as weaker spending on high-technology products. But, with
the federal funds rate unchanged, economic growth returns to a pace not far below
the growth of potential in 2002, buoyed by lower oil prices, the declining value of the
dollar, and more stimulative fiscal policy. Pressures in labor markets ease over the
projection period, with the unemployment rate rising to 5 percent by the final quarter
of 2002-in the neighborhood of the staffs estimate of the short-run NAIRU at that
time. Core consumer inflation is flat over the forecast period, albeit at a rate a bit
above the average pace of the past couple of years, as the indirect effects of lower oil
prices offset the effects of a weaker dollar and, over the first part of the period, still
notable pressure on resources.
(8) If the Committee shares the staffs assessment of the economic
fundamentals and views a period of subpar economic growth as not only likely but
also necessary to stabilize core inflation, it might prefer the unchanged federal funds
rate of alternative B. In addition, recent substantial revisions to the near-term
outlook may suggest that the economic situation is quite fluid and that the degree of
conviction about any particular outcome is relatively low. Leaving policy unchanged
would provide time for more evidence to accumulate that could potentially clarify the
outlook for spending and productivity growth. Of course, this benefit must be
weighed against the potential costs of inaction. In the current circumstances, the
Committee may view economic conditions as implying that the potential costs of
inaction at this meeting would be lower than usual if economic outcomes turn out
differently than now anticipated. On the one hand, in the event of somewhat slower-
than-expected economic growth going forward, the quicker dissipation of labor
market pressures resulting from a short delay in easing policy might not be
unwelcome, given that labor markets are very tight and inflation is probably at the
high end of the range that might be considered acceptable in the long run. If, on the
other hand, pressures on prices intensify because economic growth rebounds more
promptly than expected or unit labor costs accelerate, then the Committee should
have sufficient time to react before higher inflation becomes entrenched because long-
term inflation expectations appear to be firmly anchored.
(9) If the Committee is not yet convinced that growth is likely to move
enough below potential to offset continuing, though probably reduced, concerns that
inflation will pick up, it may choose to retain the balance of risks statement weighted
toward heightened inflation pressures. However, the Committee might see the changes to
the outlook since its last meeting as large enough to justify a shift to a statement of
balanced risks or even one tilted toward economic weakness. Even if inflation still seems
likely to edge higher, the weaker outlook for economic activity should reduce the
acceleration in prices. And with output growth expected to be slower than potential,
the Committee may at the same time have equal or greater concerns about achieving
its other goal of sustainable economic growth. As already noted, in the staff forecast a
flat nominal funds rate is sufficient to cap core consumer inflation at a rate a bit above
its level of recent years and to raise the unemployment rate to the neighborhood of its
natural rate, perhaps suggesting approximately balanced risks.5 However, with
expectations of growth in productivity and earnings evidently moving lower,
equilibrium real interest rates likely have fallen in recent months, perhaps by more
than implied by the staff forecast, suggesting higher odds of excessive economic
weakness if the current stance of policy were maintained. Moreover, incoming data
on spending, combined with the tightening of conditions in financial markets and
deteriorating consumer sentiment, may also signal that there is an increased downside
asymmetry to the outlook for aggregate demand.
(10) While financial market participants expect policy to be eased early in
Committee will move to a statement of balanced risks, which would be seen as
opening up the possibility of a shift in the stance of policy in the near term. Given
these expectations, the choice of alternative B with a statement of balanced risks
should have little effect on financial markets. If the Committee instead reiterated that
the risks are weighted toward increased inflation pressures, investors likely would push
back the timing and reduce the odds and likely extent of easier policy next year. In
that case, interest rates and the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets would
move higher, and equity prices would decline. By contrast, if the Committee
announced that risks were weighted toward economic weakness, investors likely
would increase the amount and move forward the timing of expected easing going
forward. Bond and equity markets would rally, and the value of the dollar likely
would decline. With the Federal Reserve seen as alert for signs of economic
weakness, the response of markets to incoming data that pointed in that direction
might be accentuated.
(11) If the Committee thinks that output growth is likely to slow appreciably
more than envisioned in the staff forecast, then it might choose the 25 basis point
easing of alternative A. Such an assessment of growth prospects might reflect
concern that the reduced pace of economic expansion, additional financial difficulties,
and weaker earnings growth could be in the process of eroding consumer and
business sentiment and tightening financial conditions more than in the Greenbook.
In this circumstance, a prompt easing of policy, by bolstering asset values and
confidence, might help short-circuit this interactive process. Easier policy also might
be in order if the Committee believes output growth along the lines of the staff
forecast is likely, but reads the evidence as suggesting a considerably higher sustainable
level of output, and hence a correspondingly lower NAIRU, than estimated by the
staff. Under these circumstances, even if the Committee thinks that some reduction
in the level of demand on productive resources is appropriate, it might want to ease
policy slightly now given both the lags with which changes in policy influence the
economy and the substantial rise in the unemployment rate projected by the staff.
(12) With no policy move expected at this meeting, adoption of alternative A
would presumably trigger a rally in bond and stock markets and a decline in the
foreign exchange value of the dollar. The size of the resulting moves in asset markets
would depend on the accompanying statement of the balance of risks. If the
Committee announced that it believed risks to be in balance, investors could well
interpret the easing as the Committee "buying insurance" against a possible further
weakening of growth. Such an action would probably be viewed as mostly bringing
forward in time policy actions that market participants already anticipate, but the
effects in financial markets still would be substantial. An even larger effect could be
expected if the Committee instead announced that risks appeared to be weighted
toward economic weakness, as investors came to expect a greater cumulative easing of
(13) If the Committee judges that core inflation already has moved above the
range consistent with effective price stability, and that the prospects for a reversal
given the current stance of policy are small, then it might be inclined to tighten policy
output growth were seen as unlikely to slow by as much as in the staff forecast,
perhaps because the Committee believes that equity investors have already taken
reduced earnings prospects into account, and so views equity prices as more likely to
resume at least a gradual uptrend than to be flat as in the staff forecast. Moreover, the
Committee may be concerned about the upside risks to labor costs that could result
from workers either attempting to reverse the hit to real wages that has resulted from
higher energy prices or to catch up with previous increases in productivity at a time
when the acceleration in productivity may have ended.
(14) A policy tightening at this meeting would come as a considerable
surprise. Even if the Committee shifted to a statement of balanced risks, expectations
of policy easing likely would be reduced appreciably, and so the expected path of the
federal funds rate would be significantly higher. Bond and stock prices would fall, and
the dollar likely would rise. Risk spreads probably would widen further as
expectations of higher interest rates and slower growth boosted market participants'
concerns about debt repayment problems.
(15) Under the staff forecast, credit conditions are expected to tighten only a
little further, and primarily for marginal borrowers. While markets remain receptive to
better credits, business borrowing from November to March is anticipated to be at a
pace well below that of earlier this year. Growth in investment slows, but so too does
growth in internal funds, and the stepdown in borrowing is attributable to slower
accumulation of liquid assets and reduced merger activity by those firms facing less
accommodative credit conditions. Household debt growth also should decline, as
spending on durables increases more slowly than it has in recent years. Federal
surpluses result in further substantial paydowns of Treasury debt. All told, the debt of
domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to advance at about a 4-3/4 percent annual
rate through March of next year, a bit below the growth in nominal GDP.
(16) From November through March, M2 is projected to expand at a
months. The pickup brings growth in M2 close to that of spending, reflecting in part
the waning of the effects of previous tightenings. M3 growth is expected to rebound
from its lows in October and November as bank credit growth picks up. However,
with the expansion of bank credit seen as fairly weak in the months ahead, M3 is
projected to advance at a rate well below that of earlier in the year.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(17) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for (1)
the directive and (2) the balance-of-risks sentence to be included in the press release
issued after the meeting.
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in
output. To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate
future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with maintaining/
INCREASING/DECREASING the federal funds rate at/TO an average of
around ____ 6-1/2 percent.
(2) Balance-of-Risks Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price stability and
sustainable economic growth and of the information currently available, the
Committee believes that the risks [ARE BALANCED WITH RESPECT TO
PROSPECTS FOR BOTH GOALS] [continue to be weighted mainly toward
conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures] [ARE
WEIGHTED MAINLY TOWARD CONDITIONS THAT MAY
GENERATE ECONOMIC WEAKNESS] in the foreseeable future.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
Growth Rate
Alt. A Alt. B Alt. C
M2 M3 Debt
Greenbook Forecast*
*This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Review of Debt and Money Growth in 2000
A surging economy resulted in rapid growth of the debt and the monetary aggregates
over the first half of the year, but the expansion of credit and money eased in the second half
of the year as the pace of economic growth slowed markedly. Financial flows were also
influenced by the tightening of monetary policy from mid-1999 through May of this year and
by greater risk aversion shown by lenders toward the end of the year.
Domestic Nonfinancial Sector Debt
Aggregate debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors grew 5-1/4 percent over 2000, a
considerable slowdown from the almost 7 percent gains posted in 1998 and 1999.6 Some of
this slowdown is attributable to the federal government, which paid down 6-3/4 percent of its
debt, compared with 2-1/2 percent last year. In addition, nonfederal debt growth moderated,
falling to 8-1/2 percent from a 9-1/2 percent pace last year.
Business debt expanded strongly over the first half of 2000, propelled by rapid
growth in capital spending, even as actual and anticipated monetary policy tightening pushed
corporate borrowing rates higher, and by share repurchases and cash-financed merger
activity. In the second half of the year, however, business borrowing slowed appreciably, as
firms trimmed the pace of investment spending. Prospects for weaker economic growth, in
combination with a substantial rise in the default rate on junk bonds and in repayment
difficulties in the syndicated loan market, apparently caused lenders to reassess credit risks.
Increasingly large fractions of banks firmed terms and standards on business loans over the
course of the year, and financing conditions in the corporate bond market tightened
significantly for issuers with lower credit ratings. Spreads between high-yield and
investment-grade corporate bonds soared late in the year to levels above those seen in the
fall of 1998. This widening was accompanied by substantial outflows from high-yield bond
funds and a sharp cutback in junk bond issuance. Firms also had greater difficulty raising
funds in the equity market, as the increased volatility of stock prices and the substantial drop
in valuations in some sectors caused IPOs to fall off later in the year.
Growth in commercial mortgage debt slowed somewhat this year, to an estimated
rate of 9-1/2 percent. Fundamentals in the commercial real estate market appeared to remain
solid, and delinquency rates on commercial mortgages stayed around their historic lows.
In the household sector, consumer credit grew rapidly in the first half of the year,
boosted by continued strength in spending on durable goods, but slowed some in the second
half as the expansion of consumer spending cooled. Growth in home mortgage debt over
the year was relatively strong, easing only modestly from last year's pace. In total, household
debt increased 8-3/4 percent in 2000, well above the expansion in disposable personal income.
As a result, the household debt service burden rose further to a level just below the previous
peak in the mid-1980s. Nevertheless, there was little deterioration in the performance of
household loans, as delinquency rates on home equity loans, mortgage credit, and consumer
credit edged only slightly higher. Household net worth relative to disposable income
declined over the year as a result of falling equity prices, in contrast to the strong increases of
recent years. Despite the considerable volatility in equity markets, households continued to
accumulate equity mutual funds, favoring capital appreciation over less risky types of funds.
Growth of state and local government debt was anemic in 2000. Gross issuance of
long-term municipal bonds was well below the robust pace of the past two years, as
refunding offerings were held down by higher interest rates and the need to raise new capital
was limited by strong tax revenues. Net issuance was also damped by paydowns of
previously advance-refunded bonds. Credit quality in the municipal market improved
considerably this year, with credit upgrades outnumbering downgrades by a substantial
margin, except in the not-for-profit health care sector.
The federal government paid down debt at a rapid pace, as the budget surplus for
fiscal 2000 rose to $237 billion. To maintain large, regular issues of new securities in order to
preserve their liquidity, the Treasury initiated a debt buyback program and repurchased
$30 billion par value of outstanding bonds over the year. The prospect of a considerable
reduction in the supply of Treasury debt over coming years appeared to pull down Treasury
yields relative to private yields and to contribute to an abrupt inversion of the Treasury yield
curve early in the year. By the end of fiscal 2000, the stock of marketable Treasury debt had
fallen about $1/2 trillion from its peak in 1997. Through 1999, nonfederal debt had expanded
enough to more than replace the reduction in Treasury debt, so that the ratio of overall
nonfinancial debt to GDP actually rose modestly. This ratio fell in 2000, however, as the
Treasury debt paydown accelerated and corporate borrowing slowed.
Depository Credit
Depository institutions continued to play an important role in meeting the demand
for credit by businesses and households, as depository credit grew more strongly than total
nonfinancial debt over 2000. Depository credit expanded rapidly through late summer,
reflecting strong loan demand by households and businesses as well as a willingness of banks
to extend large volumes of credit given their ample capital base, solid profits, and
expectations that the economy would continue to grow strongly. In the last four months of
the year, however, depository credit growth declined appreciably, as household lending
slowed to a moderate pace and business lending nearly dried up. Several banks also shed
large amounts of government securities over that period.
Increasing proportions of domestic banks tightened standards and terms on business
loans as the year progressed, with the share in the fourth quarter reaching the highest level
since November 1991. Banks reportedly tightened credit conditions most aggressively on
riskier loans, likely concerned by the continued rise in delinquency and charge-off rates on
C&I loans. The tightening was also more severe for large and middle-market firms; fewer
banks reported firming standards and terms for small businesses, consistent with surveys of
small businesses indicating that few were having much difficulty obtaining credit. Most
banks did not tighten credit conditions significantly for household loans.
Monetary Aggregates
M3 expanded 8/4 percent this year, above the 7-3/4 percent pace in 1999. Growth
again outpaced that of nominal income, and M3 velocity declined for the sixth year in a row.
The increase in M3 was particularly robust over the first three quarters, as banks used the
managed liabilities in this aggregate to help fund the rapid expansion of bank credit.
Institutional money funds also grew briskly despite the tightening of policy early in the year.
M3 growth receded in the final months of the year, as the flattening of bank credit led to a
drop in the issuance of managed liabilities.
M2 grew about 6 percent in 2000, down modestly from 6-1/4 percent in 1999. In part,
the deceleration reflected the impact of rising short-term interest rates, which increased the
opportunity cost of holding M2. The behavior of M2 over the year was largely consistent
with the relationship between its velocity and opportunity cost observed over recent years.
The depressing effects of higher interest rates were most apparent in the liquid deposit
components, whose rates respond very sluggishly to movements in market rates. Growth in
small time deposits and retail money market mutual funds, whose rates do not lag market
rates as much, was considerably stronger. Currency growth was held down early in the year
by a run-off of balances that had been elevated by Y2K concerns, and it has remained
surprisingly sluggish over the remainder of the year, apparently reflecting weakness in both
domestic and foreign demand.
GROWTH OF THE CREDIT AND MONETARY AGGREGATES
(in percent)1
Components of the Monetary Aggregates
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost Ratio Scale
Percentage Points
M2 Velocity
(left scale)
* Two-quarter moving average.
M2 Velocity
Ratio Scale
Opportunity Cost (ratio scale)
M3 Velocity
Ratio scale
Domestic Nonfinancial Debt Velocity
Ratio scale
Monthly
Dec 99
Jan 00
Feb 00
Mar 00
Apr 00
May 00
Jun 00
Jul 00
Aug 00
Sep 00
Oct 00
Nov 00
Weekly
Oct 13 00
Oct 20 00
Oct 27 00
Nov 3 00
Nov 10 00
Nov 17 00
Nov 24 00
Dec 1 00
Dec 8 00
Dec 15 00
Daily
Nov 28 00
Nov 29 00
Nov 30 00
Dec 1 00
Dec 4 00
Dec 5 00
Dec 6 00
Dec 7 00
Dec 8 00
Dec 11 00
Dec 12 00
Dec 13 00
Dec 14 00
December 15, 2000
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Short-term Long-term
Treasury bills CDs Conventional home
Federal ary et secondary Comm. U.S. goverment constant Indexed yields Moody's Municipal mortgages
Federals secondary market market paper maturity yields a Bond primary market
p - preliminary data MFMA JWR
Stictly Confidenbal (FR)
Class II FOMC
Money and Debt Aggregates mb 000
Seasonally ad tedDecember 2000
Seasonally adjusted
Money stock measures Domestic nonhnancial debt
nontransactions components
M1 M2 M3 other' tota'Period In M2 In M3 only government other tota
p preliminary
pe preliminary estimate
Changes in System Holdings of Securities
(Millions of dollars, not seasonally adjusted)
Strictly Confidential
Class II FOMC
December 14, 2000
T___reasury Bills Treasury Coupons Federal Net change Net RPs 5
Agency total
Net Redemptions Net Net Purchases 3  Redemptions Net Redemptions outright Short- Long- Net
Purchases 2 (-) Change <1 1-5 5-10 Over 10 (-) Change (-) holdings4 Term6 Term 7 Change
Oct
Nov
Sep 27
Oct 4
Oct 11
Oct 18
Nov 1
Nov 8
Nov 15
Nov 22
Nov 29
Dec 6
Dec 13
Intermeeting Penod
Nov 15-Dec 14
Memo' LEVEL (bil $)
Dec 14
'79 1,515
!97 -2,297
188 -4,188
)02 -3,077
138 -2,907
'09 -3,670
- 109
- 184
--- 2,181
)21 -971
- 75
- 138
--- 97
--- 101
--- 900
- 780 3,137
- 2,496
acquired in exchange for maturing bills Excludes maturity shifts and rollovers of maturing issues
- 3,562
1,986 -1,433
MRA DHS
