Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version 
available based on original copies culled from the files of the FOMC Secretariat at the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  This electronic document was 
created through a comprehensive digitization process which included identifying the best-
preserved paper copies, scanning those copies,1 and then making the scanned versions 
text-searchable.2  Though a stringent quality assurance process was employed, some 
imperfections may remain.
Please note that this document may contain occasional gaps in the text.  These 
gaps are the result of a redaction process that removed information obtained on a 
confidential basis.  All redacted passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable 
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS II FOMC
JUNE 21,2002
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.) June 21, 2002
Class II – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments1
(1) The FOMC’s decision on May 7 to leave the intended federal funds rate
at 1-3/4 percent and to retain a neutral balance-of-risks statement came as no
surprise to financial markets.2  Treasury yields fell a few basis points that afternoon,
though, as market participants focused on the language in the accompanying
statement indicating that the Committee remained uncertain about the extent and
timing of the strengthening in final demand.  The mixed bag of subsequent economic
data releases–along with heightened geopolitical tensions, warnings of terrorism, and
further revelations of questionable corporate accounting practices–led investors to
mark down their assessment of the strength of the economic expansion and to
withdraw somewhat from taking on risk.  As a result, market participants now see
monetary policy on hold into the fall, with no change in the balance-of-risks
assessment, and have lowered the expected path of the intended funds rate about
uncertainty about that path, at least at longer horizons, has increased appreciably.
(2) Consistent with the downward revision to policy expectations, yields on
short- and intermediate-term Treasury notes have fallen about 25 to 35 basis points
since the May FOMC meeting.  Given that the yield on ten-year indexed Treasury
Chart 1
Financial Market Indicators
Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar
2002 2003 2004
June 20, 2002
May 6, 2002
Expected Federal Funds Rates Estimated from
Financial Futures*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures rates with an
 allowance for term premia and other adjustments.
June 20, 2002
May 6, 2002
Months Ahead
Eurodollar Implied Volatility Term Structure
Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun
2000 2001 2002
Ten-Year TIPS
Selected Treasury Yields*
*Nominal Treasury yields are estimated from a smoothed yield curve based
 on off-the-run securities.
Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun
2000 2001 2002
Long-Run Inflation Expectations
Michigan Survey
Philadelphia Fed Survey
TIIS Inflation
Compensation*
*The inflation rate that would equalize the price of the ten-year TIIS and
 the value of a portfolio of nominal zero-coupon securities with the
 same payments.
debt has not moved much, the decline in the comparable nominal yield implies that
inflation compensation has dropped by the same amount.  In contrast, survey
measures of expected inflation have held steady.  In part, the drop in yields on
nominal Treasury securities may have owed to heavier safe-haven flows that were
prompted by heightened geopolitical tensions and a downdraft in equity prices.3
While earnings reports for the first quarter mostly matched analysts’ expectations,
guidance about corporate sales prospects tended to be downbeat, on balance, helping
to push major equity indexes 3-3/4 to 7-1/4 percent lower over the intermeeting
period (chart 2).  In fixed-income markets, spreads over comparable Treasury
instruments have fallen somewhat for most investment-grade corporate bonds but
have risen substantially for high-yield bonds, consistent with an apparently increased
tendency for investors to shy away from riskier securities.  Indeed, risk spreads for
some highly leveraged firms rose to levels that induced them to postpone issues.
Flows into equity and junk bond mutual funds, which had been strong earlier this
year, dried up in May and early June, while flows into other types of domestic bond
funds picked up.
(3) On balance over the intermeeting period, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar against other major currencies has declined about 3-1/2 percent (chart 2).  The
dollar’s slide was broad-based as indications of softer U.S. growth and a scaling back
of expectations regarding near-term Federal Reserve tightening apparently lessened
the attractiveness of dollar assets and prompted concerns that capital inflows from
Chart 2
Financial Market Indicators
Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun
2000 2001 2002
Wilshire 5000
Selected Equity Indexes
Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun
2000 2001 2002
Implied Volatility of the S&P 100 (VIX)
Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun
2000 2001 2002
High Yield*
(left scale)
Ten-year BBB
 (right scale)
Ten-year Swap
(right scale)
Spreads of Selected Private Long-Term Yields
over Ten-Year Treasury
*Source. Merrill Lynch.
Sep Dec Mar Jun Sep Dec Mar Jun
2000 2001 2002
Broad Index
Major
Currencies Index
Other Important
Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar
Exchange Rates
abroad may no longer increase fast enough to support the dollar against the backdrop
of a growing U.S. current account deficit.  The decline against the yen was interrupted
several times by foreign exchange intervention by Japanese authorities in late May and
early June.  Government bond yields were essentially unchanged in Japan and have
declined 15 to 20 basis points in Europe, somewhat less than the drop in the
comparable U.S. Treasury yield.  Foreign equity markets have moved substantially
lower, with the largest declines in Europe.  The losses in Japan were smaller amid
scattered indications of improved economic performance there.  U.S. monetary
authorities did not intervene in foreign exchange markets,
(4) On balance, the dollar’s value against the currencies of other important
trading partners has risen 1 percent over the intermeeting period.  Markets reacted
noticeably during the intermeeting period to growing concerns about economic and
political problems in several Latin American countries.  The dollar’s decline against
major currencies and scaled-back expectations for U.S. growth seemed to spill over to
Mexican markets, with the peso dropping about 4 percent against the dollar and share
prices falling almost 12 percent.  Uncertainties ahead of Brazil’s autumn elections and
worries about its large volume of debt maturing soon caused spreads on Brazil’s
sovereign bonds over comparable Treasuries to widen more than 600 basis points.
The Argentine peso fell 12-1/2 percent further against the dollar, as efforts to stabilize
the Argentine economy remained stalled.  In contrast, currencies of several emerging
Asian economies–including South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, and Indonesia–firmed
against the dollar amid further indications that first-half growth there has been robust
and that recovery may be extending beyond technology-based export sectors.
(5) Nonfinancial businesses have borrowed relatively little on net in the past
two months.  Net bond issuance in May was very weak, commercial paper continued
to run off, and bank loans were up only a little (chart 3).  Equity issuance, however,
held up well last month, as some firms sold shares in an attempt to assuage investor
concerns about leverage even in the face of falling stock prices.  Households expanded
their consumer debt at a moderate rate in April, and data from commercial banks
suggest similar growth in May.  Home mortgage debt, which expanded at a 10 percent
annual rate in the first quarter, appears to be on track for another strong showing in
the current quarter as housing activity remains robust and mortgage refinancings, with
the associated cashing-out of equity, continue to be brisk.  On a seasonally adjusted
basis, Treasury debt held by the public increased in May.  The statutory debt ceiling,
which applies to gross public debt (not seasonally adjusted), hit its $5.95 trillion limit
in mid-May and continues to bind.  Tax collections this month have been running
about as expected, and it still appears that Treasury will not have the means to get past
the end of this month without resorting to extraordinary accounting devices absent an
increase in the debt ceiling (see the box on the next page).
(6) M2 grew at a 5 percent annual rate on average over April and May
(chart 3).  Tax effects, arising from buildups and runoffs in liquid components that
differ from those embedded in the seasonal factors, significantly boosted May growth
after having depressed April growth by a similar amount.  The reduced attractiveness
of stocks, as reflected in a halt of equity mutual fund inflows last month, probably also
contributed to rapid M2 growth in May, particularly in retail money market funds.
The opportunity cost of holding M2 has been relatively stable over the first half of the
year, and its velocity appears to have leveled out as well after its sharp drop in 2001.
Chart 3
      Debt and Money Growth
Consumer Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of Household Debt
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
e Estimated.
Commercial paper*
C&I loans*
Bonds
Growth of Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt
Billions of dollars
Monthly rate
* Seasonally adjusted.
Purchase (left scale)*
Refinancing
(right scale)*
MBA Residential Mortgage Indexes
Weekly, s.a.
*  4-week moving average.
Note.  March 16, 1990 = 100 for n.s.a. series.
Growth of Federal Debt
Q1 Q2 J A S O N D J F M A M
2000 2001 2002
Growth of M2
Q1 Q2 J A S O N D J F M A M
2000 2001 2002
M2 Velocity
(left scale)
M2 Opportunity Cost*
(right scale)
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
Ratio Scale
Percentage Points
e Estimated.
* Two-quarter moving average.
The Treasury Debt Ceiling
Since May 16, 2002, the Treasury has used accounting devices to stay under the $5.95 trillion
statutory debt ceiling.  Over this period, it has disinvested as much as $30 billion from
government trust funds (chart).  The Treasury has publicly identified $80 billion of such
potential accounting devices it would be willing to employ.  If it holds to that stated amount, the
issue may come to a head on June 28th, when a large amount of interest must be credited to
various federal trust funds in the form of nonmarketable Treasury securities that are subject to
the debt ceiling.
Tax collections in June have not provided much extra cash to allow the Treasury to pay down
existing debt and create enough room under the ceiling to issue debt to meet its month-end
obligations.  As a result, the announcement of the June 26th auction of two-year notes, which
normally would have been made on June 19th, has been postponed until the Treasury has
assurance of borrowing authority.  However, market  prices do not suggest that participants are
particularly concerned about the crisis, presumably because they expect the Congress to resolve
the issue before the Treasury defaults (even to a government trust fund) or the Treasury to take
extreme measures to stave off default.
In previous debt-ceiling emergencies, the political wrangling has typically gone down to the wire. 
As the deadline approaches, the Treasury may look for ways to disinvest the trust funds further,
or the Congress may grant a temporary exemption from the ceiling for certain debt issues.
Policy Alternatives
(7) Although market participants apparently viewed economic data over the
intermeeting period as having a weakish cast, the staff outlook had not been as
buoyant to begin with, and the broad contour of the forecast has changed little.  From
the staff’s perspective, the incoming nonfinancial data have generally aligned with
expectations–with the notable exception of disappointing indicators of consumption
in the current quarter.  Moreover, with equity prices lower and businesses apparently
less confident, the staff has edged down the projected growth of real GDP this year
and next.  As a consequence, the assumed inception of policy tightening has been
postponed until early next year.  The staff now assumes the funds rate will reach 3-1/2
percent by the fourth quarter of next year, Treasury coupon yields will move higher
from their new lower level as the tightening occurs, but quality spreads on corporate
bonds will narrow as the economy’s expansion continues.  Stock prices are anticipated
to hold this year near their current level–about 6 percent below the assumption in the
May Greenbook–and trend up next year.  As the appetite of global investors to shift
portfolios to dollar assets is assumed to fail to keep pace with the burgeoning current
account deficit, the foreign exchange value of the dollar is seen as moving lower
through the end of next year, in contrast to the fairly flat path previously envisioned.
Against this backdrop, forecasted growth in real GDP over the next six quarters
outpaces that of its potential, closing much of the current output gap by the end of
next year.  The tendency for economic slack to put downward pressure on core
inflation in the interim, however, is about offset by an upturn in import prices, so core
PCE inflation holds just below 1-1/2 percent this year and next.
(8) At the end of the Greenbook forecast period in the fourth quarter of
equilibrium level, and pressures on inflation in either direction are muted.  But in the
staff view, forces are in play that will require further policy action to maintain the
economy along a sustainable path beyond the Greenbook horizon.  A depreciating
dollar will steer more foreign demand toward U.S. markets, and domestic firms will
find capital spending to be increasingly attractive over time, raising the equilibrium real
federal funds rate and necessitating a policy response.  Against this backdrop,
alternative scenarios were created using the FRB/US model to explore challenges to
monetary policy.  In all cases, the model was solved to find a path for the funds rate
beginning next quarter that minimizes squared deviations of output from its potential
and the inflation rate from a long-term target, with a small penalty applied to changes
in the funds rate.  Moreover, as in similar exercises in recent Bluebooks, the policy
maker is assumed to operate with complete knowledge of the forces shaping the
extended outlook—that is, to have “perfect foresight.”  Those forces shaping the
outlook extended through 2007 include the complete structure of the economy as
approximated by FRB/US and judgmental assumptions made to preserve a few key
features of the staff outlook beyond the Greenbook horizon.  In particular, potential
output is expected to grow at a rate of 3-1/4 percent after 2003, and the
unemployment rate consistent with stable inflation is anticipated to hold at 5-1/4
percent.  The decline in the real exchange rate is assumed to steepen modestly to 3
percent per year by 2004 and stay at that pace thereafter, and growth in foreign
economic activity is assumed to climb to 3-3/4 percent, thereby allowing the current
account to stabilize relative to nominal GDP.  Growth in federal expenditures is
assumed to be restrained sufficiently to prevent further deterioration in the unified
deficit past 2003.  (In general, the extension of the Greenbook forecast for this round
differs little from what was shown in the May Bluebook.)
(9) The dashed line in the upper panel of chart 4 plots the staff assumption
for the nominal federal funds rate over the Greenbook baseline, which ends in 2003.
Chart 4
"Perfect Foresight" Strategy for Monetary Policy
Baseline
1
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
Perfect Foresight Baseline*
Greenbook
*Historical Values through 2002:Q2,Perfect Foresight
Simulation values thereafter.
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Percent Percent
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
The solid line shows the path for the funds rate in the “perfect foresight” baseline
chosen by a policy maker with a long-run inflation target for PCE inflation of about
inflation deviating from its target.  The perfect foresight path for the funds rate rises
sooner but slightly more gradually than assumed in the Greenbook.  With this increase
in the nominal funds rate, the real funds rate rises along with its gradually increasing
equilibrium value.  By 2006, the real rate reaches its long-run equilibrium level of
output, putting the unemployment rate on a gradual descent to its natural rate.  The
economic slack over that period more than counters the inflationary impetus of the
assumed depreciation of the dollar, keeping core PCE inflation near its assumed 1-1/4
percent goal.
(10) The volatility of stock prices over the intermeeting period highlights the
possibility that investors may become more sensitive to taking on risk, perhaps leading
to lower stock prices than in the Greenbook and adverse effects on spending.  In the
alternative scenario provided in Chart 5, an assumed increase in the equity risk
premium produces a stock market price decline of about 20 percent over the
second half of the year (the same as in the alternative stock market scenario in the
Greenbook).  In response to the contraction in aggregate demand associated with that
decline in wealth, the perfect foresight policy maker responds relatively quickly,
trimming the nominal funds rate about 1/2 percentage point by the end of the year
(the dotted line).  As a result, both unemployment and inflation track the baseline
closely.  Because of the persistent weakness in equity prices, the nominal funds rate
remains more than 1/2 percentage point below the baseline level through 2000,
eventually bringing the real rate to its new lower equilibrium level of about
Chart 5
Stock Market Decline Scenario
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
Baseline*
Stock Market Decline*
*Perfect Foresight Simulations
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Percent Percent
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
(11) These policy paths are obviously quite sensitive to the assumed long-
term goal for inflation, a topic addressed in the alternative inflation targets scenario
of Chart 6.  The dashed and dotted line, respectively, consider the paths preferred by a
policy maker with an inflation target 1/2 percentage point lower and 1/2 percentage
point higher than the baseline goal of 1-1/4 percent.  Given the assumed equal
weights on deviations of output and inflation, a perfect-foresight policy maker wishing
to enforce an inflation goal of 3/4 percent would raise the federal funds rate quickly
and hold it at a higher level than in the baseline so as to maintain more slack in
resource markets over the next five years.  An inflation goal of 1-3/4 percent entails
putting the nominal funds rate below 1-1/2 percent for the rest of this year.
(12) The staff forecast suggests that the current degree of policy
accommodation must be maintained for a time to support reasonably vigorous
economic expansion that prevents inflation falling further from already low levels.  If
the Committee agrees with this assessment and finds the associated outcome for
inflation to be acceptable, it could elect to leave its policy stance unchanged and
retain a statement of balanced risks.  Given the current degree of slack in the
economy, the Committee can wait until it sees more evidence that sustained strong
growth is in train before beginning to remove the current degree of monetary policy
ease.  The Committee might hold rates unchanged, even if it saw a distinct possibility
of a stronger outlook for economic activity than in the Greenbook, if it also viewed
the inflation rate as quite unlikely to move higher for a considerable time or to be
already at a level members viewed as on the low side of a working definition of price
stability.  While market participants seem a bit more glum about the economic outlook
of late, they probably had outsized expectations to begin with, perhaps inclining the
Committee to view the recent deterioration in market prices as a move toward more
Chart 6
Alternative Inflation Targets
Nominal Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
Higher Inflation Target*+
Baseline*
Lower Inflation Target*+
*Perfect Foresight Simulations
+Higher and lower inflation targets are 1/2 percentage
point above and below the baseline target, respectively.
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
PCE Inflation (ex. food and energy)
(Four-quarter percent change)
Percent Percent
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
appropriate valuations rather than as a harbinger of an unacceptably weak economy
that would merit a policy response.
(13) The Committee could view the incoming data on slowing final demand
and the increased skittishness of investors in U.S. financial markets as indicating that
at the current funds rate the risks to the Committee’s objective of sustainable
economic growth had again begun to outweigh the risks to its goal of maintaining
long-run price stability, suggesting that it opt to state that the risks were weighted
toward economic weakness while keeping its policy stance on hold.  Capital
spending has yet to show convincing evidence of a sustained upturn, and recent news
on retail sales and consumer confidence has been on the soft side.  Indeed, the
Committee may sense an increased risk of a severe deterioration in consumer and
business confidence that could stem from terrorist attacks or international conflicts or
from further news of accounting and corporate governance irregularities.  In that same
vein, the Committee may be concerned that substantially weaker equity prices may be
in the cards, perhaps along the lines of the scenario discussed previously.  Appreciably
softer real growth than in the Greenbook would augment any tendency for the core
inflation rate to decline, a tendency that would be accentuated if the Committee
believed that the natural rate of unemployment was significantly lower than estimated
by the staff.  If the Committee views these arguments as applying with considerable
force, it may want to consider easing policy 1/4 percentage point at this meeting.
Market participants, however, do not put any weight on this possibility, raising the risk
of an outsized, potentially counterproductive,  reaction to such a move.
(14) Although the economic expansion has slowed in the second quarter, it
has not stalled, and final demand appears to be growing at about the rate the staff
expected at the May meeting.  Production and employment are advancing, and the
incoming data have pointed to a nascent turnaround in business spending on capital
equipment and software, which the Committee viewed as essential for a robust
recovery.  As a consequence, with both monetary and fiscal policy quite stimulative,
the Committee may see reasonably strong growth in the second half of the year as
now somewhat more assured and view its concerns about the foreseeable future
beginning to center more on the long-run inflation risks inherent in its policy stance.
Under these circumstances, the Committee could choose to keep policy unchanged
but move to a balance of risks tilted toward inflation.  Although the Committee
may not see an immediate policy adjustment as needed, it might anticipate having to
start tightening its policy stance fairly soon and may want to convey that sense to
market participants.  The current real federal funds rate is much lower than staff
estimates of its equilibrium value (as discussed in the box, “Estimates of the
Equilibrium Federal Funds Rate,” on the next page).  At some point, the prevailing
real funds rate would set in motion an excessively robust economic boom that, if
sustained, would lead inevitably to higher inflation.  If the Committee thought the
foreign exchange value of the dollar was now firmly on a downward trend, price
pressures might be expected to mount as higher import prices give domestic
producers the “pricing power” they have thus far been lacking.  In such a case, the
Committee might conclude that an immediate tightening of 25 basis points is
warranted to start heading off inflationary momentum.
(15) Markets currently expect the Committee to refrain from altering its policy
stance or its assessment of the risks at this meeting, so confirming this expectation
would leave little imprint on financial prices, absent a surprise in the accompanying
announcement.  Choice of risks weighted mainly toward economic weakness would
cause market participants to push back in time the advent of policy tightening and
possibly lower the slope of the subsequent trajectory of the funds rate as well.
Conversely, a switch to a preponderance of risks weighted toward heightened inflation
Estimates of the Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
In this Bluebook we have made two sets of changes to our estimates of the equilibrium real
federal funds rate that are displayed in Chart 7.
First, the technique used to extract the persistent components of the FRB/US model errors
employed in the calculation of the FRB/US estimates has been changed.  In past Bluebooks, the
model errors were split into temporary and more persistent components using a centered moving
average (in the case of the estimate based on historical data and the staff forecast) and a one-sided
moving average (in the case of the estimate based on historical data only).  Going forward, a more
sophisticated detrending algorithm (a Hodrick-Prescott filter) will be used in both cases, with a
two-sided version of the algorithm applied in the first case and a one-sided version in the second. 
As shown in the table, in the current quarter the new estimates are close to those reported in the
May Bluebook, which were calculated using the old methodology.  However, the new series differ
more substantially from the old at times in the past.
Second, we have added two new measures of the equilibrium real funds rate to the table and
chart:  an FRB/US measure that employs the two-sided detrending algorithm but does not make
use of the staff forecast, and a measure based on the statistical filter that relies on a one-sided
version of the filter and the historical data alone.
As a general rule, the one-sided measures that employ only the historical data should provide a
better sense of how the equilibrium funds rate in a given quarter might have been seen in “real-
time,” that is, based on information through that quarter.  (The measures are not truly real-time
estimates because, for example, the parameters of the models are based on all of the data, and the
final revised data are used rather than the data available at the time.)  By contrast, the two-sided
measures use later data to improve the estimates of the equilibrium funds rate earlier in the
period, with the two-sided measures that employ the staff forecast also allowing the staff’s
assessment of the outlook to influence those estimates.  Because the one-sided measures are not
revised in light of later observations, they provide noisier estimates of the equilibrium funds rate.
Also note that the chart plots the estimate of the equilibrium real rate derived from indexed debt
yields separately from the range of estimates produced by macroeconomic models.
pressures would advance the market’s expectation of the timing of policy firming and
possibly increase the extent of anticipated additional tightening as well.  The reaction
of the expected funds rate path would, of course, be even more pronounced if policy
were to be eased or tightened 25 basis points.  Short-term interest rates could closely
follow the markets’ revisions to the path of the expected funds rate, and the
Chart 7
Actual Real Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Estimated Equilibrium Real Rates
Actual Real Funds Rate
TIIS-Based Estimate
Historical Average: 2.76
  (1966Q1-2002Q1)
Current Rate
Percent
Equilibrium Real Funds Rate Estimates
May Bluebook
May Bluebook
May Bluebook
May Bluebook
May Bluebook***
May Bluebook***
May Bluebook
Statistical Filter
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data*
Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data*
FRB/US Model
 - Two-sided:
     Based on historical data**
Based on historical data and the staff forecast
- One-sided:
     Based on historical data**
Treasury Inflation-Indexed Securities
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
* Also employs the staff projection for the current and next quarters.
** Also employs the staff projection for the current quarter.
***The estimates reported in the May Bluebook are not comparable to the current estimates owing to the
methodological changes reported in the text box.
immediate response of stock prices seems likely to be in the opposite direction.  The
reaction of bond yields is more difficult to predict.  In the past few years, bond rates
have often tended to move in the same direction as stock prices following policy
announcements (as discussed on the box on the next page).  If financial markets revert
to the previous average pattern, however, bond rates would move in the same
direction as the funds rate expectations, though by less.
(16) Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected on the Greenbook policy
assumptions to expand at around a 6 percent rate over the last three quarters of the
year, faster than the anticipated growth in nominal GDP over that period.  After a
surge this quarter, federal debt growth is seen as slowing sharply in the second half of
the year, though remaining positive in association with continued federal deficits.  The
average growth of nonfederal debt should rise at about a 5-3/4 percent rate over the
last three quarters of the year.  Over this interval, household borrowing is likely to
slacken compared with the first quarter, pulled down by an anticipated lower pace of
home mortgage debt growth.  Business borrowing, in contrast, is expected to pick up
from its subdued first-quarter performance, as increases in capital spending outrun
internal funds.  With both banks and investors in financial markets being rather
selective in advancing funds to businesses, the staff foresees credit restrictiveness for
lower-quality borrowers as providing only a small degree of restraint to business
spending.  Although some deterioration for marginal household borrowers also has
occurred, consumption is not likely to be appreciably restrained by credit conditions.
The staff is projecting M2 growth of 5 percent from May to December of this year,
faster than its 4 percent rate of expansion from December to May.  With short-term
interest rates little changed, growth of M2 for the four quarters of 2002 is expected to
be 5 percent, about in line with the expansion in nominal GDP.
Table 1 :  Changes in market quotes on days of
FOMC m eetings and intermeeting policy actions,
Stock prices
prices fa ll
Yields fa ll 37 17
Yields rise 19 27
Table 2 :  Changes in market quotes on days of
FOMC m eetings and intermeeting policy actions,
Stock prices
rise
Stock prices
fall
Yields fa ll 27 27
Yields rise 27 20
The Market Reaction to Policy Surprises
In principle, bond yields and stock prices should incorporate expectations of the path for policy
rates–appropriately discounted and adjusted for risk–that will prevail over their lifetimes.  Because
the federal funds rate tends to move relatively smoothly through time, market participants would
typically react to any current policy surprise by extrapolating some of that change into the future. 
Thus, a Committee decision that was not fully expected tends to (but does not always) shift the
path of expected future short rates in the same direction.
In that case, and holding all else equal, it
would be expected that a surprisingly tight
(loose) policy decision would raise (lower)
longer–term yields.  Because investors
should discount expected corporate
earnings by that same expected path of
short rates, surprisingly tight (loose) policy
should lower (raise) equity prices.  Over
time, this should produce a negative
correlation between bond yields and stock
prices in periods when important news
about monetary policy is being revealed.  In
fact, as shown in Table 1, bond yields and
stock prices moved in the opposite
direction–the upper left and lower right cells of the table–on 64 percent of the days that the
Committee met or acted between meetings from 1988 to 1998.
But all else does not seem to have been equal since 1998.  On days of FOMC meetings or
intermeeting policy actions from 1999 to the present, the expected opposite reaction of stock
prices and bond yields occurred less than 50 percent of the time. (Table 2).  One reason that stock
prices and bond yields sometimes move in the same direction seems to stem from the effect of
changes in near-term policy expectations on
investors’ outlook for earnings growth.  For
example, near-term policy expectations
dropped sharply following the unexpected
policy easing on January 3, 2001, and the
move seemed to buoy the confidence of
equity market investors.  Stock prices rallied
sharply that day, and policy expectations
farther in the future moved up significantly
as well, perhaps on a view that higher equity
prices would bolster future aggregate
spending though a “wealth effect.”  On net,
the increase in policy expectations at longer
horizons outweighed the drop in near-term
policy expectations resulting in an
appreciable rise in bond yields that day.
Alternative Growth Rates for Key Monetary and Credit Aggregates
M2 M2 M3 Debt
Lower 25bp No change Raise 25bp Greenbook Forecast*
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Language
(17) Presented below for the members' consideration is draft wording for (1)
the directive and (2) the “balance of risks” sentence to be included in the press release
issued after the meeting (not part of the directive).
(1) Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining /INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around ___1-3/4 percent.
(2) “Balance of Risks” Sentence
Against the background of its long-run goals of price
stability and sustainable economic growth and of the information
currently available, the Committee believes that the risks continue to be
balanced with respect to prospects for both goals [ARE WEIGHTED
MAINLY TOWARD CONDITIONS THAT MAY  GENERATE
HEIGHTENED INFLATION PRESSURES] [ARE WEIGHTED
MAINLY TOWARD CONDITIONS THAT MAY GENERATE
ECONOMIC WEAKNESS] in the foreseeable future.
Strictly Confidential (FR)-
Class II FOMC
June 24, 2002
Exhibit 1
Money Aggregates
Seasonally adjusted
nontransactions components
Annual growth rates(%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
  1999            
  2000            
  2001
Quarterly(average)
  2001-Q2         
       Q3         
       Q4         
  2002-Q1
Monthly
  2001-May        
       June       
       July        
       Aug.        
       Sep.        
       Oct.        
       Nov.        
       Dec.        
                   
  2002-Jan.        
       Feb.        
       Mar.        
       Apr.        
       May  p
Levels ($billions):
Monthly
  2002-Jan.        
       Feb.        
       Mar.        
       Apr.        
       May  p
Weekly
  2002-May   6     
            13     
            20     
            27     
                   
       June  3p    
            10p
Period
In M3 onlyIn M2
p preliminary
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
Exhibit 10 June 21, 2002
SELECTED INTEREST RATES
(percent)
Jun 
Jul 
Aug 
Sep 
Oct 
Nov  
Dec  
     
Jan  
Feb  
Mar  
Apr  
May
Apr  
Apr  
May  
May  
May  
May  
May  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun  
Jun
