Content last modified 05/27/2010.
Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL (FR) CLASS I FOMC
DECEMBER 9, 2004
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Strictly Confidential (F.R.)     December 9, 2004 
Class I – FOMC
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The Committee’s decision at the November meeting—to increase the target
federal funds rate 25 basis points to 2 percent, to assess the risks to sustainable
economic growth and price stability as balanced, and to retain the “measured pace”
language—had been widely anticipated and prompted little reaction in financial
markets.1  Over the intermeeting period, expectations for the path of policy over the
next year firmed slightly on net (Chart 1), apparently owing to inflation releases that
were a bit higher than anticipated, the Chairman’s remarks at the European Banking
Congress on November 19, dollar depreciation, and the effect of falling oil prices on
the growth outlook.  This modest firming of near-term policy expectations occurred
even though data on real activity came in a little softer on balance than the market had
anticipated.  Beyond next year, the expected trajectory of policy appears to have been
revised down a bit.  Judging from federal funds futures, investors have almost
completely priced in a quarter-point tightening at this meeting.  The Desk’s survey of
primary dealers indicates that they unanimously anticipate a quarter-point tightening
as well as retention of an assessment of balanced risks and the “measured pace”
language.  Futures quotes imply that investors expect about 50 basis points of
cumulative tightening over the first three meetings in 2005 and another 25 basis
points later in the year.
(2) The small upward revision in policy expectations for the next year
contributed to a modest rise in yields on shorter-term Treasury coupon securities.2
However, longer-term Treasury yields, which were buffeted during the period by
speculation about prospects for foreign official holdings of Treasury securities,
finished the period 5 to 10 basis points lower, perhaps reflecting in part the weaker-
than-expected data on economic activity.3  Much of the decline in longer-term yields
was concentrated in forward rates at distant horizons.  The volatility of long-term
interest rates implied by options prices edged lower over the period.  TIPS yields fell
extending its advance of the past several months.  Inflation compensation over the
subsequent five years, however, remained well anchored, and survey measures of
long-term inflation expectations were little changed.
(3) Investment-grade corporate bond yields fell somewhat more than those on
comparable Treasury securities over the intermeeting period, implying a further
decline in risk spreads of 5 to 10 basis points (Chart 2).  Speculative-grade spreads
also edged down.  Market commentary noted sizable inflows to junk bond mutual
funds and brisk issuance of speculative-grade bonds as evidence of strong investor
appetite for riskier securities.  Spreads on agency debt narrowed slightly despite
persisting issues regarding GSE accounting and oversight, apparently in response to
slowing growth of agency balance sheets and speculation that monetary authorities in
some foreign countries have begun shifting the composition of their official portfolios
away from Treasuries and toward agency securities.  Investors noted the steep
increase over recent weeks in agency securities held in custody at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York as evidence in support of this hypothesis.  Year-end pressures in 
                                           
2 The expectations hypothesis of the term structure implies that about half of the rise in the two-year 
yield over this intermeeting period had been expected at the time of the November meeting and so 
does not reflect revisions to policy expectations. 
3 The Treasury debt ceiling was binding early in the intermeeting period, but this had limited market 
repercussions, and the ceiling was subsequently raised on November 18.
money markets have been subdued so far this year (see box).  Major equity indexes
ended the period up 1½ to 4 percent, buoyed in part by falling oil prices, while
implied volatility on equities declined a little further.
(4) For most of the intermeeting period, the dollar continued its recent
downward trend even though new data from major foreign industrial countries
generally suggested somewhat more tepid economic growth than had been expected
(Chart 3).   Toward the end of the period, the dollar registered a sharp uptick, but for
the period as a whole it lost about 1 percent versus a basket of other major currencies.
Year-end Pressures
Year-end funding pressures have been subdued so far this year.  These pressures were 
negligible in 2003 but had been substantial in previous years.  As shown in the bottom left 
panel, the spread of yields on thirty-day A2/P2 commercial paper over A1/P1 paper was 
little changed as the maturity of the paper crossed over year-end.  The spread of one-month 
term federal funds over Treasury RP rates (the bottom right panel) rose about 20 basis points 
as the maturity crossed into the new year, but this spread has since come back down.  Quotes 
on federal funds futures imply that the effective federal funds rate over year-end is not 
anticipated to depart much from the market’s expectation of a 2¼ percent target.
The strengthening of business sector credit quality and the sharp decline in the amount of 
outstanding commercial paper over the last few years have likely reduced the premium  
investors require to hold lower-rated paper over the turn of the year.  Year-end pressures in 
uncollateralized overnight funding markets may have been tempered by the slightly below-
target effective federal funds rates at the end of 2002 and 2003, coupled with the very low 
level of volatility of the funds rate in recent years.
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2003 2004
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Index(12/31/02=100)
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
FOMC Daily
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2003 2004
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields
Percent
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2003 2004
Stock Price Indexes
Index(12/31/02=100)
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
FOMC Daily
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2003 2004
EMBI+ Index
Basis Points
Overall
Brazil
Negative views on the dollar appeared to owe mainly to market participants’
increasing focus on the financial implications of the U.S. current account deficit.
Adding downward pressure were news reports that the monetary authorities in China
and Russia may be replacing some of their dollar holdings with euros.  The dollar’s
descent against the euro and yen provoked several statements by European and
Japanese officials of their readiness to intervene.
.  On
balance, the dollar depreciated about 1¾ percent against the yen and 2¾ percent
against the euro.  In contrast, the dollar moved up 2¼ percent versus the Canadian
dollar, reflecting lower oil prices and recent data showing weaker Canadian exports
and employment.  The signs of slower growth in major foreign industrial countries
were reflected in declines of about 5 to 30 basis points in yields on most long-term
government bonds, while stock prices moved in narrow ranges.
(5) The dollar also depreciated 1¼ percent against currencies of our other
important trading partners during the intermeeting period.  The dollar fell 5 percent
versus the Korean won, and the Bank of Korea cut its policy rate 25 basis points.
Korea reported a large increase in its foreign exchange reserves that was attributed to
intervention operations aimed at blunting the impact of the won’s rise on domestic
economic growth.  The dollar also depreciated versus several other Asian currencies,
notably including the Taiwan dollar and Thai baht.  The Bank of Mexico once again
tightened monetary policy to restrain inflation, and the dollar fell 1¼ percent against
the peso.  Although the pace of growth in Brazil appears to have slowed somewhat,
financial markets continued to reward that country’s improved economic performance
this year.  Brazilian stock prices climbed 4½ percent more during the intermeeting
period, and Brazil’s EMBI+ spread narrowed 40 basis points.  Concerns about
inflationary pressures prompted the Brazilian central bank to tighten monetary policy
in mid-November for the third time in the past four months.  Over the intermeeting
period, the dollar fell about 1¼ percent against the real.
(6) Domestic nonfinancial business-sector debt grew at about a 5 percent
annual rate in the third quarter and appears to have accelerated in the current quarter.
Net issuance of corporate bonds, especially those with speculative grades, rose smartly
in November, spurred in part by a pickup in merger and acquisition activity (Chart 4).
Short-term business borrowing, however, turned negative, with a sizable runoff in
commercial paper offsetting a modest increase in C&I loans at banks.  Household
mortgage debt grew at a rapid pace in the third quarter and, given the sustained
strength in home sales, likely has continued to expand briskly in the current quarter.
Federal debt is estimated to be surging at a 10 percent pace in the fourth quarter.
Total domestic nonfinancial sector debt appears to be advancing at about an 8 percent
annual rate in the fourth quarter, the same pace as in 2004 as a whole.
(7) M2 rose at about a 6¼ percent annual rate in November, up from
than nominal income in the fourth quarter, in line with the slight increase in the
opportunity cost of holding M2 assets.  Retail money funds, in particular, have been
weak as investors evidently have found alternative investments, such as Treasury bills
and bond and stock funds, more attractive.  Inflows to equity funds are estimated to
have picked up in November, following the upward trend in stock prices over the past
few months.  For 2004 as a whole, M2 is estimated to have expanded 5¼ percent, and
its velocity appears to have risen about 1 percent as opportunity costs increased.
Appendix B analyzes the growth of money and the debt of domestic nonfinancial
sectors this year.
Chart 4
Debt and Money
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
Monthly rate
Growth of Household Debt Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
e Estimated.
Q3 e
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of Federal Debt
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
e Estimated.
Note. Treasury debt held by the public at period-end.
Growth of Nonfinancial Debt
Percent, s.a.a.r.
e Estimated.
Growth of M2
e Estimated.
H1 H2 J F M A M J J A S O N
2003 2004
Velocity
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
Percent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
Policy Alternatives
(8) Since the publication of the November Greenbook, incoming data on
spending and employment have been a bit stronger on balance than the staff had
anticipated, and the outlook for near-term economic activity has been marked up as a
result.4  Moreover, the recent rise in equity prices, declines in oil prices and the foreign
exchange value of the dollar, and unexpectedly large gains in home prices are carried
forward in level terms in the projection, providing a noticeable boost to aggregate
demand.  Equity prices are assumed to rise at a rate yielding risk-adjusted returns
similar to those on fixed-income investments; oil prices are projected to decline
somewhat further, in line with futures quotes; the dollar is expected to depreciate
gradually from its current lower level; and the pace of house price appreciation is
forecast to slow to more modest rates in coming quarters.  The stimulus to spending
from these factors is offset, in part, by a higher projected path for the federal funds
rate, with the Committee now assumed to raise the funds rate to 2¾ percent by the
end of 2005 and 3¼ percent by the end of 2006, in both cases 50 basis points higher
than in the November Greenbook.  The projected path for the ten-year Treasury yield
has been marked up a bit as well.  Long-term yields are expected to be roughly steady
over the projection period, with the effects of rising short-term rates largely offset by
reductions in expected future short rates as inflation pressures prove to be more
subdued than currently anticipated by investors.  Against this financial backdrop,
GDP growth averages a bit less than 4 percent over 2005 and 2006, about the same as
for this year.  With potential output expanding at nearly a 3¼ percent pace, the
unemployment rate edges down to about 5 percent, the staff’s estimate of the
NAIRU, by the end of 2006, and the output gap is essentially closed.  The effects on 
                                           
4 The discussion in this paragraph is based on developments since the publication of the November 
Greenbook.  Of particular note, the employment report for October, which was released between 
Greenbook publication and the November FOMC meeting, was appreciably more robust than had 
been anticipated in the November staff forecast.
prices of the modest slack in resource markets in the interim are offset by the pass-
through of this year’s rise in energy prices, and core PCE inflation is forecast to
remain near 1½ percent in 2005 and 2006.  However, with energy prices on a
downward track, overall PCE inflation falls back from 2½ percent this year to about
(9) This Bluebook presents three alternatives for the Committee’s consideration
(see Table 1).  Under Alternative B, the federal funds rate would rise 25 basis points,
but the statement would imply that the Committee saw a distinct possibility of a pause
in tightening at an upcoming meeting.  Alternative C also envisions a 25-basis-point
tightening, but the accompanying statement would give no indication that a pause was
likely.  In all three cases, the description of labor market conditions in the rationale
paragraph has been adjusted in light of the incoming data.  In Alternative A, the
federal funds rate would remain at 2 percent.  Similarly, under all three alternatives,
the Committee is assumed to retain both an assessment that the risks to its goals of
stable prices and maximum sustainable growth are balanced and the “measured pace”
language contained in the last several statements.
(10) If the Committee views developments over the intermeeting period as
having provided further evidence that the expansion is solidly on track, then it might
be inclined to continue removing policy accommodation at a measured pace by
tightening policy another 25 basis points at this meeting.  Should the Committee also
expect that substantial further tightening will be desirable fairly soon, then it might
want to issue a statement such as that in Alternative C, which does not hint at a
possible pause in tightening at coming meetings.  Despite the four policy moves over
the past several months, the real federal funds rate remains below the lower end of
the 70 percent confidence band around the estimates of the short-run equilibrium real
interest rate derived using the staff’s new methods.  The current rate is also below the
estimate of the equilibrium rate that is implicit in the Greenbook forecast.  (See the
Table 1: Alternative Language for the December FOMC Announcement
November FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 2 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 
2¼ percent.  The Committee’s policy 
actions since mid-2004 have resulted 
in a significant reduction in the degree 
of monetary policy accommodation.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 
2¼ percent.
The Committee believes that the stance 
of monetary policy remains somewhat 
accommodative and, coupled with 
robust underlying growth in 
productivity, is providing ongoing 
support to economic activity.
Nonetheless, the Committee believes 
that, even after this action, the stance 
of monetary policy remains somewhat 
accommodative and, coupled with 
robust underlying growth in 
productivity, is providing ongoing 
support to economic activity.
[Unchanged from
November statement]
Output appears to be growing at a 
moderate pace, but labor market 
conditions have been improving only 
gradually, apparently evidencing 
continued business caution.
Output appears to be growing at a 
moderate pace despite the earlier rise 
in energy prices, and labor market 
conditions continue to improve 
gradually.
Output appears to be growing at a 
moderate pace despite the earlier rise in 
energy prices, and labor market 
conditions continue to improve 
gradually.
[Unchanged from 
November statement]
[Unchanged from 
November statement]
[Unchanged from 
November statement]
[Unchanged from
November statement]
[Unchanged from
November statement]
[Unchanged from
November statement]
Assessment 
of Risk
With underlying inflation expected to 
be relatively low, the Committee 
believes that policy accommodation can 
be removed at a pace that is likely to be 
measured.  Nonetheless, the 
Committee will respond to changes in 
economic prospects as needed to fulfill 
its obligation to promote price stability 
and sustainable growth.
[Unchanged from 
November statement]
[Unchanged from 
November statement]
box entitled “New Estimates of the Equilibrium Real Rate” and Chart 5.)  These
revised estimates may suggest that a somewhat more rapid and substantial tightening
than previously perceived may be required to remove policy accommodation and head
off a buildup of inflationary pressures.  In addition, members may anticipate more
slowing in the underlying pace of productivity growth than does the staff.  Such a
development would add to upward pressure on unit labor costs, and hence on overall
inflation rates.  Also, the Committee may believe that effective labor market slack
going forward could turn out to be quite limited—for example, if labor market
participation, which has yet to turn distinctly higher, fails to increase as much as in the
staff forecast.  In either case, the Committee might anticipate that aggregate demand
will continue to expand at a pace above that of its potential for some time and
consequently deem considerable further progress toward a more neutral policy stance
desirable over coming months.  Alternative C would also seem appropriate if
members were concerned that longer-term inflation expectations could move higher
were the Committee not seen as responding sufficiently to inflationary impulses
emanating from the decline in the dollar and the previous rise in oil prices.
(11) The statement in Alternative C could be quite similar to that released
following the November meeting.  In light of the relatively soft employment report
for November, however, the announcement could indicate that labor market
conditions “continue to improve gradually.”  Also, in view of the significant decline in oil
prices in recent weeks, the clause on output could be revised to refer to the “earlier”
rise in energy prices.  The general similarity of the language to that employed in
November and the continued characterization of the policy stance as “accommodative”
would avoid the suggestion that the Committee believes a pause in policy tightening is
likely in the near term.  As drafted, the statement retains a balanced assessment of
risks to sustainable growth and price stability—an assessment that some members
might see as conditioned on an appropriate path for policy going forward—as well as
New Estimates of the Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
This Bluebook introduces new estimates of the equilibrium real federal funds rate.  
The new estimates were developed to address shortcomings of the earlier measures 
that, as reported in the Bluebook Readership Survey, made them difficult to interpret.1  
One problem with the earlier measures was that the concept underlying the measures 
was not defined clearly.  For example, the time horizon—the period over which the 
output gap would be projected to close if the real funds rate were kept at its 
equilibrium level—differed across measures and was not clearly specified.  Second, the 
chart summarizing the various measures may have given a misleading picture of the 
uncertainty surrounding the point estimates.  Finally, the two-sided estimates that 
were included would seem to be inappropriate for real-time policymaking.
The new chart reports two kinds of equilibrium rate measures, differing in terms 
of their time horizon.  The short-run equilibrium rate is defined to be the rate that, if 
sustained, would be projected to close the output gap in twelve quarters.  The 
medium-run measure is defined to be the rate projected to prevail in seven years 
under the assumption that monetary policy will act to eliminate economic slack in 
three years and to hold output at potential thereafter.  The new estimates are 
calculated based on three different models: a single-equation model of the output gap, 
a small structural model consisting of equations for five key macroeconomic variables, 
and the staff’s large-scale model (FRB/US).  In addition to the range encompassing 
the point estimates of the three models, the chart also displays confidence bands that 
illustrate the uncertainties surrounding the range of model estimates.  Also shown are 
the Greenbook-consistent measure of the short-run equilibrium rate—which is based 
on a version of the FRB/US model that has been adjusted to match the Greenbook 
forecast—and the medium-run equilibrium rate consistent with TIPS yields.
The new model-based estimates shown in this Bluebook suggest a higher current 
level for the equilibrium real federal funds rate than did the range based on the old 
methods that was included in the November Bluebook.  This difference occurs mainly 
because we have dropped the measures based on the statistical-filter model, which 
exhibited implausibly large responses to surprises in output.  The Greenbook-
consistent measure currently yields an equilibrium rate lower than model-based 
estimates because the Greenbook projects that the recent weakness in aggregate 
demand will diminish more gradually than the models predict.
It should be noted that the appropriate stance of policy relative to the equilibrium 
estimates in a given instance will depend on policymakers’ objectives and the 
projected paths for output and inflation.  Thus, these estimates of the equilibrium rate 
should not be interpreted as policy prescriptions, but rather as potential inputs to the 
policy process.
Chart 5
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Bands
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures for 2004:Q4
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence band
90 percent confidence band
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
   Greenbook-consistent measure 1.5 1.1
   Single-equation model 1.9 1.9
   Small structural model 2.6 2.6
   Large model (FRB/US) 2.2 1.8
   Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (0.8 - 3.6(
      90 percent confidence interval -0.1 - 4.4(
Medium-Run Measures
   TIPS-consistent measure 1.8 1.8
   Single-equation model 2.2 2.2
   Small structural model 2.8 2.8
   Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.7 - 3.3(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.9 - 3.7(
Equilibrium Real Rate Chart: Explanatory Notes
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to return
output to its potential level over time.  The short-run equilibrium rate is defined as the rate that would
be anticipated to close the output gap in twelve quarters, and the medium-run concept is the value of
the real funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years under the assumption that
monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and then keep them
equal thereafter.  With the exception of the TIPS-consistent measure, the real federal funds rates
employ the log difference of the core PCE price index over the previous four quarters as a proxy for
expected inflation, with the staff projection used for the current quarter.  TIPS indexation is based on
the total CPI.
Measure Description
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap
and its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.  In light
of this model’s simple structure, the short-run measure of the equilibrium real rate
depends only on the recent position of output relative to potential, and the medium-run
measure is virtually constant.
Small Structural
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables: the
output gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of
output, and the real bond yield.  Unlike the estimates from the single-equation model,
values of the equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with
output growth, fiscal policy, and capital markets.
Large M odel
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US— the staff’s large-scale econometric
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.  These
projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the
three-year horizon relevant for the short-run concept but are less sensible over longer
horizons.  Thus, we report only the short-run measure for the FRB/US model.
Measures of the equilibrium real rate cannot be directly obtained from the Greenbook
forecast, because the Greenbook is not based on a formal model.  Rather, we use the
FRB/US model in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook forecast to
derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that its
simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is
run off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the
output gap.  The medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed
because it requires a relatively long extension of the Greenbook forecast.
TIPS-consistent Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) incorporate investors’
expectations of the future path of real interest rates.  The seven-year instantaneous real
forward rate derived from TIPS yields reflects the short-term real interest rate expected
to prevail in seven years as well as any applicable term premium.  The term premium is
assumed to be 70 basis points.
the “measured pace” language.  If the Committee nonetheless thought the margins of
unused capacity could be relatively narrow and wanted to convey somewhat greater
concern about the inflation outlook, it might do so by noting in the rationale
paragraph that labor market conditions “continue to improve,” without indicating that
the improvement was gradual, and that “the earlier rise in energy prices and an
escalation of business costs have the potential to contribute to upward pressure on
(12)     Market participants have essentially priced in a 25-basis-point rise in the
federal funds target at this meeting and anticipate only relatively small changes in the
statement.  As a result, an announcement like that in Alternative C would likely have
little effect on financial markets.  However, a statement that included a reference to
possible inflation pressures would presumably lead investors to boost their expected
path for the federal funds rate, increasing real and nominal interest rates and weighing
on stock prices.  Such a statement would also likely raise the sensitivity of market
participants to inflation news over the intermeeting period.
(13) The Committee may believe that, as in the Greenbook forecast, fostering
sustainable economic growth and price stability will likely involve continued policy
tightening but at a less rapid pace going forward than has been the case over the past
six months.  For example, members may expect only gradual diminution of the
business caution that has damped the economic expansion over the last few years
despite unusually accommodative monetary policy.  If the Committee held such a
view, it might want to couple a 25-basis-point move at this meeting with a statement
like that in Alternative B, which is intended to signal the possibility of a pause in the
adjustment of policy before long.  While an additional hike in rates at this meeting
would be consistent with a number of standard policy rules (Chart 6), some of those
rules also suggest a pause fairly soon if output and inflation evolve as projected in the
Greenbook.  Indeed, another 25 basis points of tightening at this meeting would bring
Chart 6
Actual and Assumed Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Values from Policy Rules and Futures Markets
Shaded region is the range of values from rules 1a, 2a, 4, 5, and 6 below
Actual federal funds rate and Greenbook assumption
Market expectations estimated from futures quotes
Values of the Federal Funds Rate from Policy Rules and Futures Markets
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
** Computed using average TIPS and nominal Treasury yields to date.
Policy Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, Bt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt-yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, B* policymakers’
long-run objective for inflation, it-1 the lagged federal funds rate, gt-1  the residual from the rule’s
prescription the previous quarter, (yt+3|t-yt+3|t*) the staff’s three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap,
() yt+3|t-) yt+3|t*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less potential output growth three quarters ahead,
Bt+3|t a three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t-ut+3|t*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast of the
unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from the Greenbook and staff memoranda
closest to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Rule Specification
Root-mean-
square error
Rules with Imposed Coefficients
.83a .32a
Rules with Estimated Coefficients
it = .53it-1 + 0.47 [1.07 + 0.97(yt-yt*)
        + 1.51Bt]+ 0.48gt-1
.23 .25
it = .72it-1 + 0.28 [0.46 + 1.07(yt+3|t-yt+3|t*)
        + 1.66Bt+3|t] + 0.32gt-1
.25 .26
it = 0.49it-2 + 0.51 [0.27
        ! 2.10(ut+3|t-ut+3|t*) + 1.60Bt+3|t] .45 .61
it = 0.97it-1+ [-1.21 + 0.66Bcomp5|t] .43b .46
a RMSE for rules with imposed coefficients is calculated setting B*=2.
b RMSE for TIPS-based rule is calculated for 1999:1-2004:3.
the real federal funds rate to the lower edge of the 70 percent confidence band for the
model-based estimates of the short-run equilibrium rate and only about ½ percentage
point below the equilibrium measure consistent with the Greenbook.  Money market
futures rates suggest that market participants already place some probability on a
slowing in the rate of policy tightening, but if the Committee saw a pause before long
as fairly likely it might want to convey that expectation at this meeting.
(14) The possibility of a pause in the tightening process could be signaled by
noting in the statement that “the Committee’s policy actions since mid-2004 have resulted in a
significant reduction in the degree of monetary policy accommodation.” 5  The statement could go
on to say that “Nonetheless, . . . the stance of policy remains somewhat accommodative” rather
than characterizing the current stance of policy simply as “accommodative” as in the
November statement.  The reference to the reduction in policy accommodation
would suggest to investors that Committee members were considering the effects of
the cumulative policy adjustment to date, and that, with policy now viewed as only
“somewhat” accommodative, policymakers might be ready to slow the pace of
firming.  However, a statement along these lines would leave open the option of
tightening again at the February meeting if incoming information suggested that
another move was appropriate.  For example, the Committee pointed to the
cumulative easing of policy in its June 2001 statement, but it nonetheless eased policy
further at its August meeting.
(15) The release of the announcement for Alternative B would likely lead to
some easing of financial conditions.  Although investors have priced in a 25-basis-
point increase in the target federal funds rate at this meeting, they do not anticipate
that the statement will signal the possibility of a pause.  As a result, the statement
could well induce investors to mark down their expected path for the federal funds
rate over coming quarters.  Short- and intermediate-term interest rates would decline
some, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would probably also fall.  Stock
prices would likely rise a bit.
(16) If the Committee were concerned that maintenance of current financial
conditions could risk a return to subpar economic performance, it might want to
consider a pause in the tightening cycle at this meeting, as in Alternative A.  Recent
data and anecdotal reports suggest that businesses remain unusually cautious in
expanding payrolls.  In addition, the expiration of the partial expensing provision at
year-end could slow investment spending more than in the Greenbook.  Moreover,
household saving rates remain very low by historical standards, and a larger-than-
expected rebound in saving propensities could damp household spending
considerably.  Given these uncertainties, and with 100 basis points of tightening
already in place, the Committee might consider it prudent to stand pat at this meeting
to foster easier financial market conditions and weigh incoming data before
considering the appropriate course for policy in February.
(17) The announcement of Alternative A could look much like the one released
following the November meeting.  However, in view of the concerns about renewed
economic weakness that presumably would motivate policymakers to adopt this
alternative, the Committee might wish to characterize the current stance of policy as
only “somewhat accommodative” and indicate that “labor market conditions have been improving
only gradually, apparently evidencing continued business caution.”  The statement could also
The announcement of this policy choice would surprise investors, and real and
nominal interest rates would likely decline, especially at shorter maturities, putting
downward pressure on the dollar.  Stock prices might rise, although the sense that
aggregate demand might be weaker than investors had perceived could lead them to
revise down their outlook for profits, tending to offset the positive effect of lower
interest rates on equity prices.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(18)  Under the staff forecast, M2 decelerates from 5¼ percent growth this year
to 2 percent in 2005, reflecting slower expansion in nominal income as well as the
effects of past and projected policy tightening on the opportunity cost of holding M2
assets.  With the pace of policy tightening assumed to slow through 2005 and 2006,
and nominal income growth steady at 5½ percent, M2 advances at a 3½ percent pace
in 2006.  Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is expected to decelerate over the forecast
period, primarily reflecting some slowing in household debt growth as diminishing
gains in home prices damp the increase in residential mortgage debt.  By contrast,
business debt growth is projected to rise to a moderate pace next year as capital
spending expands and to remain near that rate in 2006.  Federal debt growth slows
next year but rebounds in 2006, reflecting in part the introduction of Medicare
prescription drug coverage.
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
         (percent, annual rate)
Short Run
No Change Raise 25 bp* Greenbook**
Growth From To
* Increase of 25 basis points in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter.
** This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Statement
(19) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
(1) Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around _______ 2 percent.
(2) Risk Assessments
A. The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters to be roughly equal.  With underlying inflation expected to be
relatively low, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be
removed at a pace this is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the
Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to
fulfill its obligation to promote price stability and sustainable growth.
B. The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters to be roughly equal.  With underlying inflation expected to be
relatively low, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be
removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the
Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to
fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.
C. The Committee perceives the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of both sustainable growth and price stability for the next few
quarters to be roughly equal.  With underlying inflation expected to be
relatively low, the Committee believes that policy accommodation can be
removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the
Committee will respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to
fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.
Appendix A Chart 1
The Yield Curve
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
December 9, 2004   
November 9, 2004
Selected Treasury Yield Curves*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Appendix A Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Appendix A Chart 3
Stock Indexes
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
S&P 500*
Appendix A Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Appendix A Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
+
+
+
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
+
+
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
Appendix A Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
Ratio scale, index (1980=100)
Journal of Commerce Index
Ratio scale, index (1967=100)
CRB Spot Industrials
CRB Futures
Appendix A Chart 7
Growth of Real M2 and M3
Appendix A Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2 and Two
Estimates of V*
GDP implicit
price deflator (P)
Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*), given
current M2 and constant V*
Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*) given
current M2 and V* with shift
Constant V*
V* with shift
* Change in GDP implicit price deflator over the previous four quarters.
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
Appendix A Table 1
Selected Interest Rates
(Percent)
p - preliminary data
Dec 
    
Jan 
Feb 
Mar 
Apr  
May  
Jun  
Jul  
Aug  
Sep  
Oct  
Nov
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Oct  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Dec  
Dec
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Nov  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec  
Dec
Appendix A Table 2
Money Aggregates
Seasonally Adjusted
nontransactions components
in M2 in M3 only
M1 M2 M3
Annual growth rates (%):
Annually (Q4 to Q4)
Levels ($billions):
Monthly
Weekly
2004-Oct. 4 1363.7 6339.1 4975.4 2988.8 9327.9
Nov. 1 1350.8 6371.6 5020.7 2964.8 9336.3
8 1340.2 6372.9 5032.6 2961.4 9334.2
p preliminar y
e estimated
