Content last modified 03/31/2011.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
OCTOBER 27, 2005
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2005
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) With investors putting only small odds on a pause in the tightening cycle
following Hurricane Katrina, there was little market reaction to the FOMC’s decision
at the September meeting to raise the target federal funds rate 25 basis points to
growth were balanced, and to retain the “measured pace” language. 1  The expected
path for monetary policy shifted up in subsequent weeks though, as incoming data
indicated that output had been expanding briskly prior to the hurricane and that the
disruptions to economic activity from Hurricane Katrina and Rita were likely to be
less severe than initially feared.  This upward pressure on interest rates may have been
amplified by comments from a number of Federal Reserve officials that were read as
stressing inflation concerns.  By the time of the release of the FOMC minutes,
investors had reportedly anticipated their somewhat hawkish tone, and the market
response to their publication was minimal.  Current readings on futures contracts
indicate that the federal funds rate expected after the December meeting has increased
about 25 basis points over the intermeeting period to nearly 4¼ percent, consistent
with investors placing high odds on a quarter-point rate hike at each of the next two
meetings (Chart 1).2  The level of the funds rate expected to prevail by June 2006 rose
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr.
2005 2006 2007
October 27, 2005
September 19, 2005
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premia and other adjustments.
Nov. Dec. Jan. Mar.
Probability of a 25 b.p. Tightening
at Upcoming FOMC Meetings*
*Estimated from federal funds futures.
September 19, 2005 (black)
October 27, 2005 (red)
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
Spot WTI (left scale) 
Spot Unleaded Gasoline* (right scale)
*Spot wholesale price of gasoline
Energy Prices
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
Five-to-Ten Years Ahead
Next Five Years
Inflation Compensation*
*Based on a comparison of a smoothed TIPS yield curve to a smoothed
nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 36
dealer survey have similarly come to expect more policy tightening, with the majority
now anticipating rate increases at the November, December, and January meetings.
Most of the respondents expect little change in the measured pace and
accommodative language, and six of twenty-two respondents indicated that recent
statements by Federal Reserve officials had influenced their interest rate forecasts.
Uncertainty about the expected path for policy over the coming six months, as
measured by implied volatility read from eurodollar options, has decreased some since
the September meeting, although it remains above its pre-Katrina levels.
(2) Nominal Treasury yields rose 25 to 50 basis points on net, with most of the
advance accounted for by increases in near-term forward rates.3, 4  In addition to
stronger-than-expected economic data, declines in some energy prices likely
contributed to a more positive economic outlook, helping to push yields higher.
Increases at the longer end of the term structure, especially late in the period, may
have been due in part to increased mortgage hedging flows, as suggested by anecdotal
reports.  Despite a higher-than-expected reading on the overall consumer price index
for September, TIPS-based measures of inflation compensation were about
unchanged over the intermeeting period, although they remain 15 to 20 basis points
above the levels seen prior to Hurricane Katrina.
(3) Partly in response to the rise in interest rates, major stock price indexes fell
quarter appear to have largely met or exceeded expectations, investors may also have 
                                                                                                                                        
remaining days prior to the meeting.  Federal funds futures contracts for December and 
January are currently pricing in minimal year-end pressures in the federal funds market.      
3 President Bush’s announcement on October 24 that he was nominating Ben S. Bernanke to 
succeed Chairman Greenspan was accompanied by an increase of a few basis points in 
Treasury yields and a modest rally in equity markets.   
4 Open interest in the September ten-year Treasury futures contract remained elevated 
through its final days of trading.  Nonetheless, all the deliveries were met using the August 
2012 note, which was the cheapest-to-deliver security.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 36
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
Wilshire
Nasdaq
Stock Prices
S&P 500
S&P 500 excluding energy
S&P 500 Earnings Expectations Revisions Index
Mid-
  Oct.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Real Long-Term Treasury Yield*
*Perpetuity Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year expected inflation.
Note. + Denotes the latest observation using daily interest rates and stock 
prices and latest earnings data from I/B/E/S.
Equity Valuation
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Expected Defaults* (left scale)
Bond Default Rate** (right scale)
Expected Defaults of Nonfinancial Companies
and Bond Default Rate
*Firm-level estimates of year-ahead defaults from KMV corporation, weighted
by firm liabilities as a percent of total liabilities, excluding defaulted firms.
**Six-month moving average, from Moody’s Investors Service
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 36
been concerned about the cautious tone to corporate guidance about future earnings
growth.  Implied volatilities from equity options remained low but edged up a bit over
the period in response to several announcements of corporate distress, including the
sudden collapse of Refco, the bankruptcy filings by Delphi, Delta Airlines, and
Northwest Airlines, and the announcement of an SEC investigation into the pension
practices of General Motors (more details about the bankruptcies are provided in the
box “Credit Market Developments”).  The timing of some of the bankruptcy filings
may have been related to the implementation of new bankruptcy rules in October.  As
a result of the problems at these firms, the number of downgrades of corporate bonds
increased, as did the aggregate bond default rate.  However, corporate quality outside
of the automobile and airline sectors remained solid.  Broad indexes of investment-
and speculative-grade corporate bond yields moved largely in line with Treasury yields
over the period, leaving spreads little changed.
(4) The dollar’s foreign exchange value against major currencies rose about
¾ percent on balance over the intermeeting period (Chart 3).5  Somewhat stronger-
than-expected U.S. economic data and the expressed resolve of U.S. officials to
combat inflationary pressures reportedly supported the dollar.  A number of foreign
central bankers conveyed similar determination, heightening expectations of monetary
policy tightening abroad.  In Canada, the Bank of Canada raised its policy rate another
economies, yields on foreign long-term government securities rose a bit less than in
the United States.   The dollar was little changed against the Canadian dollar and the
euro, but gained 1¼ percent against sterling and almost 3¼ percent against the yen.
Although recent Japanese data have been somewhat softer than during the first half of
the year, that economy apparently advanced further.  Bank of Japan officials have
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 36
Credit Market Developments
Four high-profile companies—Refco, Delphi, and Delta and Northwest Airlines—
filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the last six weeks; corporate bonds 
with par value totaling slightly more than $8 billion were affected by these filings.  
Refco, a large derivatives broker, collapsed when clients deserted the firm following 
the revelation of accounting irregularities just two months after its initial public 
offering.  Delphi, the largest U.S. automobile parts manufacturer, cited its inability 
to reach cost-cutting agreements with unions and with General Motors—from 
which it spun off in 1999—as reasons for its filing.  Competition from low-cost 
carriers and soaring fuel prices were instrumental in the airlines’ defaults.  Some of 
these firms may have filed for bankruptcy more quickly than they otherwise would 
have in order to avoid the corporate provisions of the new bankruptcy law, which 
took effect on October 17.
Delphi’s bankruptcy filing rekindled investors’ concerns about credit quality in the 
automobile sector—where spreads on several firms, including Ford and General 
Motors, initially rose sharply and have since remained volatile.  The airlines’ 
defaults, however, elicited little reaction, as they were largely expected.  Refco’s 
collapse had no discernible effect on financial market functioning, as its wind-down 
was orderly and its accounting troubles were seen as isolated.  Overall, the impact 
of the bankruptcies on the broad credit market appears to have been limited.  In a 
sign that investors expect little spillover from the recent defaults, a measure of the 
likelihood that future defaults in the investment-grade sector will be clustered—the 
so-called implied default correlation obtained from CDS index tranches—has 
remained extremely low.  The equivalent measure for the speculative-grade sector 
has picked up, but that increase reflects in part the considerable presence of 
automobile-sector firms in the high-yield CDS index.  Even with the recent 
increase, investors apparently still judge the likelihood of correlated defaults among 
speculative-grade firms to be lower than it was last spring.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 36
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2004 2005
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
Overall
Brazil
EMBI+ Index
Basis Points
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 36
continued to hint that, given their economic outlook, the quantitative easing regime
will likely end during the first half of next year.  Share prices in Japan made solid gains
during the intermeeting period, led by banking and other financial-sector stocks that
reacted positively to passage of the postal reform bill.  Stock prices in other foreign
industrial countries recorded declines of 2 to 7 percent, broadly similar to those in
U.S. markets.
(5) The dollar recorded a small gain against an index of currencies of our other
important trading partners over the intermeeting period.  The dollar moved up
¾ percent against the peso, as the Bank of Mexico eased its overnight lending rate
downward trend against the Brazilian real, and the Brazilian central bank surprised
markets with a 50 basis point easing of its policy rate to counter weakening domestic
demand.  Equity prices in many emerging market countries dropped fairly sharply, as
investor demand for riskier assets appeared to abate with increases in U.S. interest
(6) Domestic nonfinancial debt is estimated to have advanced briskly in the
third quarter, rising 8¼ percent on net (Chart 4).  Growth in household debt appears
to have edged down in the third quarter owing to a slowing in mortgage debt growth,
although the forecast of the latter remains at an elevated level.  Household
bankruptcies surged in the weeks immediately before bankruptcy reforms went into
effect on October 17.  The debt of nonfinancial businesses appears to have risen in
the third quarter at a rate comparable to increases seen in the first half of the year.  In
October, bond issuance has slowed as higher yields may have discouraged new longer-
term issues.  Commercial paper, which ran off at quarter-end, bounced back in early
October.  Bank loans to businesses continued to advance briskly, and the results of
the most recent Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey show some further easing of
lending terms and standards for such loans.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 36
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Nonfinancial Debt
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3 p
Growth of Household Debt
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Household Bankruptcies
Thousands of filings
Weekly, n.s.a.
*Source. Visa Bankruptcy Notification Service.
Oct.24
-20
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
Monthly rate
e Estimated.
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
p Projected.
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 36
(7) M2 expanded at an annual rate of 6 percent in September, bringing third-
quarter growth to 4 percent.  The increase in September was in part attributable to a
surge in retail money market funds and to a boost to currency and liquid deposits
resulting from Hurricane Katrina.6  Growth in nominal output in the third quarter
likely exceeded that of M2, implying a further rise in velocity.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 36
Economic Outlook
(8) The staff has revised down slightly its projection for real GDP growth since
the September Greenbook, as the rise in longer-term yields, drop in equity values, and
appreciation of the exchange value of the dollar over the intermeeting period
established a launching-off point for the forecast consistent with more financial
restraint than in the previous projection.  The outlook is predicated on the same
cumulative amount of policy tightening, which brings the federal funds rate to
completed this year, rather than in the middle of next year.  At the time of the
September meeting, market participants had foreseen a little less tightening than the
staff; now they foresee somewhat more.  As a result, bond yields are forecast to
decline slightly as investors’ expectations for policy gradually come into line with the
lower path in the staff outlook.  As in previous forecasts, the stock market generates
risk-adjusted returns similar to those on fixed-income investments, while the foreign
exchange value of the dollar depreciates modestly.  In the context of these financial
conditions and the impetus to spending from a burst of rebuilding in the Gulf region,
GDP grows a little faster than the 3 percent expansion of potential output next year
and a little slower than that pace in 2007.  The unemployment rate in 2007 edges
slightly above the estimated NAIRU of 5 percent and the output gap widens a bit to
almost ½ percent.  Core PCE inflation picks up to 2¼ percent next year, in light of
some pass-through to inflation expectations of recently elevated headline inflation.
However, falling energy prices help bring overall PCE inflation down from
little economic slack, pull core inflation below 2 percent in 2007.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 36
Policy Alternatives
(9) This Bluebook presents three policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized by the draft statements in Table 1.  Under Alternative A,
the Committee would leave its target for the federal funds rate unchanged at
economic dislocations of the hurricanes and associated effects on consumer and
business confidence, but still signals that remaining monetary policy accommodation
could likely be removed at a measured pace.  Under Alternatives B and C, the
Committee would raise the target federal funds rate 25 basis points.  Alternative B
retains much of the statement the Committee issued after its September meeting,
including the characterization that policy remains accommodative.  Alternative C
takes a somewhat more aggressive tone and eliminates the balance-of-risks,
accommodative, and measured pace language.7
(10) Although core inflation readings have been favorable in recent months,
Committee members may be concerned that, in light of some signs of sharply higher
near-term inflation expectations and reports of greater pricing power, elevated energy
and other costs threaten to pass through significantly to core price inflation.  If the
Committee believes that a continued measured pace of policy firming will prove
sufficient to contain these inflationary pressures, it might be inclined to raise the target
funds rate another 25 basis points at this meeting and choose language as in
Alternative B.  As seen in Chart 5, a 25 basis point increase in the target funds rate
would move the real funds rate into the range of rates estimated by the staff to be
broadly consistent with closing the output gap over the next few years.  However, the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 36
Table 1: Alternative Language for the November FOMC Announcement
September FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to leave 
its target for the federal funds rate 
unchanged.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise its 
target for the federal funds rate by 
25 basis points to 4 percent.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise its 
target for the federal funds rate by 
25 basis points to 4 percent.
Elevated energy prices and 
hurricane-related disruptions in 
economic activity seem to have 
slowed the growth of spending, set 
back employment, and weakened 
consumer and business confidence.  
The persistence of such effects is 
uncertain, but robust underlying 
growth of productivity and 
monetary policy accommodation are 
providing support to economic 
activity.
Elevated energy prices and 
hurricane-related disruptions in 
economic activity seem to have 
temporarily slowed the growth of 
spending and set back employment.  
However, monetary policy 
accommodation, coupled with 
robust underlying growth in 
productivity, is providing ongoing 
support to economic activity.  
Spending will also be boosted by 
rebuilding efforts in hurricane-
affected areas.
The disruptive effects of recent 
hurricanes seem likely to be 
temporary, especially in light of 
increased spending associated with 
rebuilding efforts.  Economic 
growth continues to be supported 
by robust underlying growth in 
productivity.
High energy and other costs have 
added to inflation pressures.  
However, core inflation has been 
relatively low in recent months, and 
longer-term inflation expectations 
remain contained.
The cumulative rise in energy and 
other costs has added to inflation 
pressures.  However, core inflation 
has been relatively low in recent 
months, and longer-term inflation 
expectations remain contained.
Core inflation and longer-term 
inflation expectations remain 
contained. However, high energy and 
other costs have boosted near-term 
inflation expectations and price 
pressures, likely making further policy 
firming necessary.
[no change]
[no change]
Assessment 
of Risk
With underlying inflation expected 
to be contained, the Committee 
believes that remaining policy 
accommodation can be removed at 
a pace that is likely to be measured. 
Nonetheless, the Committee will 
respond to changes in economic 
prospects as needed to fulfill its 
obligation to maintain price stability.
[no change]
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 36
Chart 5
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Bands
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence band
90 percent confidence band
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 1.9 1.9
   Small structural model 2.4 2.3
   Large model (FRB/US) 2.3 1.9
   Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (0.7 - 3.6(
      90 percent confidence interval -0.2 - 4.5(
Greenbook-consistent measure 2.0 1.9
Medium-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.1 2.2
   Small structural model 2.4 2.3
   Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.4 - 3.2(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.7 - 3.7(
TIPS-based factor model 2.1 2.0
Memo
   Actual real federal funds rate 1.85 1.59
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 36
Equilibrium Real Rate Chart: Explanatory Notes
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to return 
output to its potential level over time.  For the first three measures listed below, the short-run 
equilibrium rate is defined as the rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the 
corresponding model’s projection of the economy.  For the first two measures, the medium-run concept 
is the value of the real funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years under the 
assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and 
then keep them equal thereafter.  The TIPS-based factor model measure provides an estimate of market 
expectations for the real federal funds rate seven years ahead.  The actual real federal funds rate shown 
in the chart employs the log difference of the core PCE price index over the previous four quarters as a 
proxy for expected inflation, with the staff projection used for the current quarter.
Measure Description
Single-Equation 
Model
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and 
its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.  In light of this 
model’s simple structure, the short-run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends only 
on the recent position of output relative to potential, and the medium-run measure is 
virtually constant.
Small Structural 
Model
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, and 
the real bond yield.  Unlike the estimates from the single-equation model, values of the 
equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth, 
fiscal policy, and capital markets.
Large Model 
(FRB/US)
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.  These 
projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the 
three-year horizon relevant for the short-run concept but are less sensible over longer 
horizons.  Thus, we report only the short-run measure for the FRB/US model.
Greenbook-
consistent
Measures of the equilibrium real rate cannot be directly obtained from the Greenbook 
forecast, because the Greenbook is not based on a formal model.  Rather, we use the 
FRB/US model in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook forecast to 
derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that its 
simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is run 
off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output 
gap.  The medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it 
requires a relatively long extension of the Greenbook forecast.
TIPS-based 
Factor Model
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’ expectations of 
the future path of real interest rates, but also include term and liquidity premiums.  The 
TIPS-based measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven-year-ahead 
instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the Bluebook publication 
date.  This forward rate is adjusted to remove estimates of the term and liquidity 
premiums based on a three-factor arbitrage-free term-structure model applied to TIPS 
yields, nominal yields, and inflation.  Because TIPS indexation is based on the total CPI, 
this measure is also adjusted for the medium-term difference—projected at 40 basis 
points—between total CPI inflation and core PCE inflation.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 36
Committee may believe that higher real interest rates and a bit more resource slack
will be required to contain inflation, making it appropriate to issue a statement
suggesting that more tightening is likely in store.  Such a policy course might also be
favored if the Committee viewed the current rate of core inflation to be at or above
the upper limit of a range consistent with price stability.  With most measures of labor
compensation posting moderate gains and some reversal of the runup in energy prices
in prospect, members may believe that remaining firming can be done gradually,
consistent with the measured pace language of Alternative B.  While a policy hike at
this meeting would place the funds rate at the high end of the prescriptions of several
policy rules that are based on a 1½ percent objective for core PCE inflation, that is
only a matter of timing because those rules indicate a need for an even higher funds
rate by mid-2006 (Chart 6).
(11) The Committee may wish to begin the rationale portion of the statement
for Alternative B by reaffirming the view that adverse effects of the hurricanes will
probably slow the pace of the expansion only temporarily.  Robust underlying growth
in productivity may still be seen as a support for economic activity.  The statement
could also note the boost to aggregate demand from increased private and public
spending associated with rebuilding efforts in hurricane-affected areas.  While a
range of estimated equilibrium rates, the Committee may still prefer to characterize
policy as accommodative in light of the underlying strength of demand and upward
pressures on inflation.  As for inflation, the Committee could cite indications, evident
in some producer prices and in surveys of near-term inflation expectations, that “The
cumulative rise in energy and other costs has added to inflation pressures,” while still
noting that “core inflation has been relatively low in recent months.”  The
observation that “longer-term inflation expectations remain contained” may be seen
as appropriate to convey a balanced view of the inflation outlook.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 36
Chart 6
Actual and Assumed Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Values from Policy Rules and Futures Markets
Shaded region is the range of values from rules 1a, 2a, 4, 5, and 6 below
Actual federal funds rate and Greenbook assumption
Market expectations estimated from futures quotes
Values of the Federal Funds Rate from Policy Rules and Futures Markets
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 36
Policy Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes 
 
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, πt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt – yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, π* policymakers’ 
long-run objective for inflation, it-1 the lagged federal funds rate, gt-1  the residual from the rule’s 
prescription the previous quarter, (yt+3|t – yt+3|t*) the staff’s three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output 
gap, (Δ yt+3|t – Δyt+3|t*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less potential output growth three quarters 
ahead, πt+3|t  a three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t – ut+3|t*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast 
of the unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from the Greenbook and staff memoranda 
closest to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Root-mean-
square error
Rule Specification 
1988:1-
2005:3
Rules with Imposed Coefficients
a 1.04a
it = 2 + πt + (yt – yt*) + 0.5(πt – π*) .67a .62a
it = it-1 + 0.5(Δ yt+3|t – Δ yt+3|t*) 
          + 0.5(πt+3|t – π*)
.96a .40a
Rules with Estimated Coefficients
it = .51it-1 + 0.49 [1.29 + 0.95(yt – yt*) 
          + 1.45πt]+ 0.53gt-1
.23 .25
it = .71it-1 + 0.29 [0.75 
          + 1.03(yt+3|t – yt+3|t*) + 1.59πt+3|t] 
          + 0.38gt-1
.25 .27
it = 0.48it-2 + 0.52 [0.43 
          – 2.09(ut+3|t – ut+3|t*) + 1.56πt+3|t]
.47 .64
it = 0.97it-1+ [–1.27 + 0.70πcomp5|t] .40
b .41
a RMSE for rules with imposed coefficients is calculated setting π* = 1.5. 
b RMSE for TIPS-based rule is calculated for 1999:1-2005:3.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 36
(12) Futures market quotes suggest that investors are virtually certain of a
dealers expect little change in the nature of the statement.  Therefore, market prices
would likely be essentially unaffected by a 25 basis point increase in the funds rate and
the statement language as under Alternative B.
(13) If the Committee wished to convey greater concern about upside risks to
inflation, it might prefer to combine a 25 basis point increase in the target funds rate
with the language included under Alternative C.  The Committee may especially
favor this alternative if increases in energy and other costs were viewed as beginning
to unmoor inflation expectations, potentially starting an upward shift in inflation
dynamics that would be hard to reverse later.  Even if inflation expectations remain
well anchored for a time, a sharper rebound in spending growth as rebuilding in the
hurricane-affected areas picks up steam may put excessive strains on resources.  The
proposed statement drops the characterization of policy as accommodative, but it
indicates in the comments on inflation (row 3) that further policy firming likely is
necessary on the thought that the Committee might soon envision moving the real
funds rate past its neutral level—that is, to impose policy restraint.  The sentence on
the balance of risks is also eliminated; the Committee might see that formula as
redundant or possibly misleading about the extent of upside inflation risks at present.
The final paragraph on the measured pace language is also dropped, allowing greater
flexibility for possible future adjustments of policy.  The Committee may see this
more forceful tone as warranted in light of the backup in market interest rates,
increase in inflation compensation, and depreciation of the dollar in recent days,
which might be viewed as signs of the emergence of inflation jitters in financial
markets.  Indeed, the Committee may prefer to raise the target funds rate 50 basis
points at this meeting in association with language similar to that under Alternative C
to underscore its determination to resist an increase in inflation.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 36
(14) Market participants would be surprised by the removal of the measured
pace and policy accommodation language and, perhaps, by the explicit indication that
additional firming was likely to be necessary.  With a 25 basis point move and the
language proposed under Alternative C, short-term interest rates and the exchange
value of the dollar would likely rise, while stock prices would fall.  If markets revised
down their outlook for longer-term inflation as a result of the statement, however,
longer-term interest rates might increase only a little.  With a 50 basis point firming,
market participants would likely raise their sense of inflation risks and the near-term
path of expected monetary policy substantially; short- and intermediate-term market
interest rates would jump, the dollar would rally, and the stock market could sell off
(15) Committee members may wish to consider Alternative A if they think that
the recent moderate rates of core inflation are likely to continue and if they see the
outlook for the economy as especially uncertain because of the effects of the
hurricanes and elevated energy prices.  Particularly if the Committee, like the staff,
views the real federal funds rate as in the vicinity of its equilibrium level, a pause in
policy firming might be seen as desirable, partly to await further readings on consumer
and business sentiment and spending.  Such a pause may also be chosen if members
believe that the real estate market is in the process of softening, which heretofore has
been an important spur to household spending.  Under this alternative, the
Committee might refer to “remaining” policy accommodation in the final risk
assessment paragraph.  Markets would be surprised at the decision to leave the target
funds rate unchanged.  Short-term interest rates would probably decline considerably
as markets lowered the probability of near-term tightening moves.  Longer-term
interest rates might be little changed or even back up if investors saw the FOMC as
more tolerant than they expected of an increase in inflation.  The foreign exchange
value of the dollar would likely fall, especially if inflation expectations deteriorated.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 36
Money and Debt Forecasts
(17)  Under the staff forecast, M2 is expected to expand 3¾ percent this year,
almost 2½ percentage points slower than nominal GDP, owing to rising opportunity
costs (Table 2).  With short-term market rates assumed to be unchanged in 2006 and
increases in the opportunity cost of money holding.  As a consequence, M2 is
projected to accelerate to a 4½ percent pace next year and 5 percent in 2007, a little
below and above the growth rates of nominal GDP, respectively.  Domestic
Other Language Alternatives 
 
Committee members have recognized for some time that certain features of its 
policy statement would not prove durable, not the least being its characterization 
of policy as accommodative and its prediction that this accommodation can be 
removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.  The assessment that policy is 
accommodative becomes increasingly problematic as the real federal funds rate 
enters the range of plausible estimates of its equilibrium level.  Moreover, the 
Committee may feel it necessary to move the real funds rate beyond its neutral 
level to unwind inflationary pressures or to roll back some of the rise in inflation 
over the past couple of years.  In doing so, the Committee might be reluctant to 
switch its characterization of policy from accommodative to contractionary.  Two 
alternatives might be considered. 
 
For one, if it is important to convey the sense that policy action will remain 
gradual, the statement could replace the description of the stance of policy with 
words describing the direction of its likely future action.  In particular, the key 
portion of row 5 could read: ". . .  the Committee believes that policy firming can 
continue at a pace that is likely to be measured." 
 
For another, the Committee could drop rows 4 and 5 in favor of a formula for its 
risk assessment.  One such formula, for example, was proposed in a box in the 
September Bluebook.  In that structure, the Committee would provide separate 
assessments of the risks to its two goals under the explicit assumption that the 
stance of policy remains unchanged for the next few quarters.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 36
Table 2
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
M2 M2
No Change 25 bp Increase 50 bp Increase Greenbook Path
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 36
nonfinancial sector debt is expected to grow around 8¼ percent this year and then
decelerate to a 6½ percent pace in 2007.  Less rapid home price appreciation tempers
mortgage borrowing by households, and business debt growth slows with the
deceleration of economic activity.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 36
Directive and Balance-of-Risks Statement
(18) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around ____________ 3¾ percent.
Risk Assessments
A. The Committee perceives that, with appropriate monetary policy
action, the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both
sustainable growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.
With underlying inflation expected to be contained, the Committee
believes that remaining policy accommodation can be removed at a
pace that is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the Committee will
respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its
obligation to maintain price stability.
B. The Committee perceives that, with appropriate monetary policy
action, the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both
sustainable growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.
With underlying inflation expected to be contained, the Committee
believes that policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is
likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 36
changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to
maintain price stability.
C. None.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 36
Appendix Chart 1
Treasury Yield Curve
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
October 27, 2005   
September 19, 2005
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 36
Appendix Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 36
Appendix Chart 3
Stock Indexes
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
S&P 500*
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 36
Appendix Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 36
Appendix Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
                Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 36
Appendix Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
Ratio scale, index (1980=100)
Journal of Commerce Index
Ratio scale, index (1967=100)
CRB Spot Industrials
CRB Futures
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 36
Appendix Chart 7
Growth of Real M2 and M3
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 36
Appendix Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2
Implicit GDP
price deflator (P) Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 36
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
