Content last modified 03/31/2011.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
AUGUST 4, 2005
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 4, 2005
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The Committee’s decision at its June meeting to raise the target federal
funds rate 25 basis points to 3¼ percent, to retain an assessment that the risks to price
stability and to sustainable growth were balanced, and to reiterate the “measured
pace” language was largely anticipated by investors, and the market reaction was
muted.  Over subsequent weeks, a string of better-than-expected data releases on
spending and output along with upbeat corporate earnings reports painted a
consistent picture of solid economic expansion.  News on inflation was read as more
mixed:  Revisions to the national income and product accounts indicated that PCE
inflation last year was noticeably higher than previously estimated, but readings for
recent months came in below market expectations.  Against this background, and with
the monetary policy report and public statements of policymakers seeming to point to
continued measured firming, investors marked up the expected path for policy.1
Options on federal funds futures suggest that investors have become virtually certain
of a 25-basis-point tightening at this meeting, which is consistent with the Desk’s
latest survey of primary dealers.2  Respondents to that survey anticipate no significant
changes to the wording of the FOMC statement this round and expect additional
market futures quotes indicate that the expected funds rate at year-end was boosted
about 35 basis points over the intermeeting period to a bit above 4 percent, and the
rate for year-end 2006 was lifted around 45 basis points to about 4¼ percent
(Chart 1).
(2) Yields on nominal Treasury notes climbed about 35 to 40 basis points over
the intermeeting period.  With much of the increase concentrated in forward rates at
the front end of the curve, the spread between two- and ten-year Treasury yields
narrowed further to around 30 basis points.  The London bombings did not appear to
prompt much in the way of safe-haven flows to Treasury securities or greater market
uncertainty.  Similarly, the announcement of a revaluation of the Chinese renminbi
reportedly had no lasting effect in the Treasury market.3  Over the intermeeting
period, yields on inflation-protected Treasury securities rose roughly in line with those
on their nominal counterparts, implying little net change in inflation compensation.
Inflation expectations as gauged by the Michigan survey also were little changed,
edging down for the short-term measure but rising slightly for the longer-term
measure.  The spot price of West Texas intermediate crude oil rose about $4.00 per
barrel, ending the period close to a record high in nominal terms (Chart 2).  Prices of
far-dated oil futures moved up more than $3.00 on balance.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 35
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec.
2005
August 4, 2005  
June 29, 2005
●
●
Expected Federal Funds Rates
Aug. Nov. Feb. May Aug. Nov. Feb.
2005 2006 2007
August 4, 2005
June 29, 2005
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premia and other adjustments.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
2004 2005
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
2004 2005
Ten-Year Treasury
Six-Month Eurodollar
Options Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
2004 2005
Five-Year
Ten-Year
TIPS Yields*
Daily
FOMC
* Estimates are from a smoothed inflation-indexed yield curve.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
2004 2005
Five-to-Ten Years Ahead
Next Five Years
Inflation Compensation*
*Based on a comparison of an estimated TIPS yield curve to an estimated
nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 35
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
2004 2005
Spot WTI
Long-dated Oil Futures
Daily
FOMC
Oil Price
Bond Default and
C&I Loan Delinquency Rates Percent of outstandings
C&I loan delinquency rate
    (Call Report)
Bond default rate*
*Six-month moving average, from Moody’s Investors Service.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
2004 2005
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
2004 2005
Wilshire
Nasdaq
Stock Prices
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
2004 2005
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Options Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
E/P ratio
Real Long-term Treasury yield*
* Perpetuity Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year expected inflation.
Note. + Denotes the latest observation using daily interest rates and stock 
prices and latest earnings data from I/B/E/S.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 35
(3) Reflecting positive earnings announcements and strong economic data,
spreads on investment-grade corporate bonds edged lower over the intermeeting
period.  Those on speculative-grade securities fell about 60 basis points, nearly
reversing their runup of this spring.  Broad equity indexes rose 3 to 6 percent over the
period, paced by large gains in technology shares, and the implied volatility of equity
prices remained low.  Nonetheless, a rough measure of the equity premium—the gap
between the twelve-month forward trend earnings-price ratio and the real long-term
Treasury yield—held steady at a fairly high level.
(4) Although dollar interest rates rose noticeably relative to those of other
major currencies, the trade-weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar against
other major currencies declined about 1 percent on balance over the intermeeting
period (Chart 3).4  The dollar initially rose after the June FOMC meeting, but it gave
up these gains late in the intermeeting period.  On net, the dollar depreciated about
modest gains against sterling and the yen.  On August 4, the Bank of England
announced a cut in its official target rate of 25 basis points to 4½ percent, citing
downside risks to the economy in the near term.  This decision had been widely
anticipated, and its announcement prompted little market reaction.  Share prices in
foreign industrial countries increased 2 to 6 percent over the intermeeting period.
(5) Against an index of the currencies of our other important trading partners,
the dollar fell about 1½ percent on balance over the period, pulled down by decreases
in its value versus the Mexican peso and Chinese renminbi.  The dollar also declined
against the currencies of several other Asian emerging economies in the wake of
China’s revaluation.  Immediately after China’s announcement, the Malaysian
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 35
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
2004 2005
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
2004 2005
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
2004 2005
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July
Overall
Brazil
EMBI+ Index
Basis Points
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 35
authorities announced that they were adopting a managed float for the ringgit
exchange rate.
(6) Domestic nonfinancial debt appears to have decelerated in the second
quarter, with all major sectors contributing to the slowing (Chart 4).  In the business
sector, internal funds evidently are abundant and capital expenditures are apparently
expanding at only a moderate pace, holding down borrowing by nonfinancial firms in
recent months.  Net bond issuance remained tepid in June and July, and commercial
paper outstanding dropped somewhat, on net, over the same period.  In contrast,
business loans continued to expand briskly on balance.  Data from the Senior Loan
Officer Opinion Survey indicate a further easing of standards and terms on C&I loans
over the past three months and also a further strengthening in demand for such loans,
supported by increased financing needs for investment and mergers and acquisitions.
Household borrowing seems to have slowed a bit in the second quarter but apparently
remained quite brisk, propelled by continued expansion of mortgage debt at close to a
with higher-than-expected tax receipts and a narrowing of the deficit in recent
(7) M2 growth picked up to a 6 percent rate in June, but fell back in July to
around the pace registered over the first five months of the year.  The strength in M2
in June owed primarily to an increase in liquid deposits; a rise in mortgage
prepayments and a bulge in nonwithheld individual income tax payments likely played
a role in that pickup.  Over the first two quarters of 2005, the growth of M2, at a
historical relationships with income and short-term interest rates, perhaps owing to
the flattening of the yield curve.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 35
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Nonfinancial Debt
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2 p
Total
______
Nonfederal
___________
p Projected.
-20
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
Monthly rate
Growth of Household Debt
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
e Estimated.
Growth of Liquid Deposits
s.a.a.r.
Percent
e Estimated.
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
p Projected.
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 35
Economic Outlook
(8) Incoming data on spending and production have led the staff to mark up its
assessment of near-term strength in the economy, and the annual revisions to the
national income and product accounts have induced the staff to trim its estimates of
the level and growth rate of potential output.  Inflation pressures are also greater in
this projection, partly because of the upward revision to the outlook for energy prices.
Consequently, the staff has assumed more policy tightening than in the June
Greenbook, with the target federal funds rate reaching 4 percent in the fourth quarter
of this year and 4¼ percent by the middle of next year, 50 basis points higher than in
June—a path roughly the same as that priced into asset markets.  Bond yields are
expected to remain close to their current higher levels, while equity prices are assumed
to increase further at a pace sufficient to generate risk-adjusted returns in line with
those on fixed-income instruments.  Relative to the last round, the foreign exchange
value of the dollar starts at a level that is a bit lower than anticipated in June and
declines over the forecast period at a slightly faster pace.  The price of West Texas
intermediate crude oil is projected to stay near its recent higher level, in line with
futures market quotes.  Under these assumptions, real GDP is forecast to expand at a
pace slightly above 4 percent over the second half of this year, essentially closing the
output gap by the fourth quarter.  Next year, real output is projected to grow at the
same rate as its potential, about 3 percent.  The flattening out of oil prices and a
deceleration in non-oil import prices cause total PCE inflation to drop from
steady near 2 percent over the forecast period.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 35
Policy Alternatives
(9) Table 1 presents three policy alternatives for consideration by the
Committee.  The federal funds rate would be boosted 25 basis points at this meeting
under Alternatives A and B, and 50 basis points under Alternative C.  Apart from
updating the description of the current economic situation, the proposed
announcement associated with Alternative B is little changed from that issued after
the June meeting.  In contrast, the announcement accompanying Alternative A would
hint at a near-term slowing in the pace of policy tightening, in part by noting that
policy accommodation has been substantially reduced.  The proposed announcement
for Alternative C emphasizes the strength of aggregate spending, suggests that
pressures on business costs and inflation could be increasing, and eliminates all
forward-looking language.  As usual, the Committee could consider combining the
policy action and draft language from more than one alternative or view some of the
language options as possibilities for the future.
(10) If the Committee agrees with the staff’s assessment that a small amount of
slack remains in the economy and that the current configuration of financial asset
prices is likely to prove consistent with the expansion of aggregate spending coming
into line with potential output growth before long, it may be attracted to the 25-basis-
point firming and statement language of Alternative B.  Investors currently anticipate
a quarter-point move at this meeting followed by several additional firmings—
expectations that should be largely preserved by the combination of policy action and
language proposed under this alternative.  And, while recent indicators suggest that
the growth of aggregate demand has been surprisingly buoyant of late, the Committee
may interpret the relatively low inflation readings for recent months as indicating that
prices are not currently in the process of accelerating.  Although the stance of
monetary policy evidently remains accommodative, the gap between the actual real
funds rate and current estimates of its equilibrium value has narrowed considerably
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 35
Table 1: Alternative Language for the August FOMC Announcement
June FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to
3-1/2 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to
3-1/2 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 50 basis points to  
3-3/4 percent.
The Committee believes that , even 
after this action, the stance the degree 
of monetary policy remains 
accommodative and, coupled with 
robust underlying growth in 
productivity, is providing ongoing 
support to economic activity. 
accommodation has been 
substantially reduced.
[no change]
The Committee believes that, even after 
this action, the stance of monetary policy 
remains accommodative and, coupled with 
robust underlying growth in productivity, is 
providing ongoing support to economic 
activity.
Although energy prices have risen 
further, tThe expansion remains firm 
despite high energy prices, and 
labor market conditions continue to 
improve gradually.
Although energy prices have risen 
further, the expansion remains firm 
Aggregate spending, despite high 
energy prices, appears to have 
strengthened since late winter, and 
labor market conditions continue to 
improve gradually.
Although energy prices have risen further, 
the expansion remains firm Aggregate 
spending appears to be expanding 
briskly despite high energy prices, and 
labor market conditions continue to 
improve gradually.
Pressures on inflation have stayed 
elevated, but Core inflation has been 
relatively low in recent months, and 
longer-term inflation expectations 
remain well contained.
Pressures on inflation have stayed 
elevated, but Core inflation has been 
relatively low in recent months and 
longer-term inflation expectations 
remain well contained, but pressures 
on inflation have stayed elevated.
Pressures on inflation have stayed elevated, 
but Core inflation has been relatively 
low in recent months and longer-term 
inflation expectations remain seem well 
contained, but pressures on business 
costs and inflation appear to be 
increasing.
[no change]
[no change]
Assessment 
of Risk
With underlying inflation expected to 
be contained, the Committee believes 
that remaining policy 
accommodation can be removed at a 
pace that is likely to be measured.  
Nonetheless, the Committee will 
respond to changes in economic 
prospects as needed to fulfill its 
obligation to maintain price stability.
[no change]
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 35
since mid-2004 (Chart 5).  According to those estimates, continued policy firming at a
pace of 25 basis points per meeting would bring the real funds rate within the range of
staff estimates of its equilibrium value by November.  But even if members believe
that such a sequence of policy actions is likely to produce sufficient restraint on
inflation, they might judge it premature to send any signal at this time that the course
of policy tightening is nearing completion.  Indeed, in light of the recent indications of
strong economic activity, policymakers may have boosted their sense of the degree of
policy tightening that will prove necessary and may now even see an appreciable
probability that the federal funds rate will need to be raised for a time above its
estimated short-run equilibrium value.  Even with such an assessment, though,
members may judge that continuing to tighten policy at a measured pace, albeit over a
slightly longer period than previously anticipated, should provide adequate restraint
on spending and inflation.
(11) As shown in Table 1, the statement for Alternative B updates the wording
employed in June in light of incoming data on spending, output, and employment by
noting that “Aggregate spending, despite high energy prices, appears to have
strengthened since late winter, and labor market conditions continue to improve
gradually.”5  The Committee might acknowledge incoming price data by noting that
“Core inflation has been relatively low in recent months,” and, with both survey and
TIPS-based measures of inflation expectations little changed, it could reiterate that
“longer-term inflation expectations remain well contained.”  However, it might wish
to emphasize that “pressures on inflation have stayed elevated” by moving that
thought to the end of the sentence.  The statement could again indicate that “with
appropriate monetary policy action, the upside and downside risks to the attainment
of both sustainable growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.”  That
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 35
Chart 5
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Bands
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence band
90 percent confidence band
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
   Greenbook-consistent measure 1.9 1.5
   Single-equation model 1.9 1.9
   Small structural model 2.2 2.8
   Large model (FRB/US) 2.3 2.1
   Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (0.7 - 3.6(
      90 percent confidence interval -0.2 - 4.4(
Medium-Run Measures
   TIPS-based measure 1.9 1.7
   Single-equation model 2.1 2.2
   Small structural model 2.4 2.7
   Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.4 - 3.2(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.7 - 3.7(
Memo
   Actual real federal funds rate 1.19 1.26
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 35
Equilibrium Real Rate Chart: Explanatory Notes
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to return 
output to its potential level over time.  The short-run equilibrium rate is defined as the rate that would 
close the output gap in twelve quarters given a model’s projection of the economy, and the medium-run 
concept is the value of the real funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years under the 
assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and 
then keep them equal thereafter.  The real federal funds rate employs the log difference of the core PCE 
price index over the previous four quarters as a proxy for expected inflation, with the staff projection 
used for the current quarter.  Since TIPS indexation is based on the total CPI, the TIPS-consistent 
measure incorporates an adjustment for the expected difference between CPI inflation and core PCE 
inflation.
Measure Description
Single-Equation 
Model
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and 
its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.  In light of 
this model’s simple structure, the short-run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends 
only on the recent position of output relative to potential, and the medium-run measure is 
virtually constant.
Small Structural 
Model
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, and 
the real bond yield.  Unlike the estimates from the single-equation model, values of the 
equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth, 
fiscal policy, and capital markets.
Large Model 
(FRB/US)
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.  These 
projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the 
three-year horizon relevant for the short-run concept but are less sensible over longer 
horizons.  Thus, we report only the short-run measure for the FRB/US model.
Greenbook-
consistent
Measures of the equilibrium real rate cannot be directly obtained from the Greenbook 
forecast, because the Greenbook is not based on a formal model.  Rather, we use the 
FRB/US model in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook forecast to 
derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that its 
simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is run 
off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output 
gap.  The medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it 
requires a relatively long extension of the Greenbook forecast.
TIPS-consistent Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) incorporate investors’ 
expectations of the future path of real interest rates.  The seven-year instantaneous real 
forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the Bluebook publication date reflects the 
short-term real interest rate expected to prevail in seven years. This forward rate is 
adjusted down for a term premium, assumed to be 70 basis points, and adjusted up for the 
difference between total CPI inflation and core PCE inflation, projected to be 40 basis 
points in the medium run.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 35
assessment would also support retention of the phrase indicating that the removal of
policy accommodation can likely proceed at a measured pace.
(12) Investors appear virtually certain that the FOMC will increase the target
federal funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting, and they reportedly put high odds
on an announcement that retains both the measured pace language and the
assessment that the risks to sustainable growth and to price stability should remain
balanced with appropriate policy action.  Thus, the market reaction to an
announcement along the lines of Alternative B should be relatively modest, although
rates could back up a little in response to the changes in the wording suggesting that
the FOMC was focusing on the strength in spending and inflation pressures.  Barring
significant downside surprises in economic data over coming weeks, investors would
likely come to boost further the already substantial odds placed on additional policy
moves later this year, particularly should public statements by policymakers point to a
continuation of firming.
(13) Recognizing that the cumulative tightening put in place over the past year
has substantially reduced the degree of monetary policy accommodation, the
Committee may believe that the real federal funds rate is now nearing its equilibrium
level.  In view of such an assessment as well as the subdued readings on core inflation
in recent months, the FOMC might opt for Alternative A’s combination of a
Committee could soon slow the pace of policy firming.  This alternative would seem
particularly attractive if members thought that slack in labor markets was greater than
in the staff assessment, implying less need to tighten policy than in the Greenbook.
Even if the Committee believed that it would probably need to tighten policy
somewhat further following a quarter-point step on Tuesday, a near-term pause might
be viewed as prudent to allow more time to evaluate the effects of its cumulative
policy action to date.  A funds rate path incorporating a quarter-point tightening at
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 35
this meeting followed by a shallower trajectory of tightening would be consistent with
the prescriptions from several policy rules (Chart 6).
(14) The draft statement associated with Alternative A could indicate that “The
Committee believes that the degree of monetary policy accommodation has been
substantially reduced,” while again acknowledging that the expansion remains firm
and that labor market conditions continue to improve gradually.  Particularly if the
Committee were concerned about a possible slackening in the pace of trend
productivity growth, it might wish to eliminate the previous language pointing to
robust underlying productivity growth as a factor supporting the expansion.  With
regard to prices, the statement could indicate that “Core inflation has been relatively
low in recent months, and longer-term inflation expectations remain well contained,”
dropping the reference to inflation pressures.  In the penultimate sentence, the
FOMC could indicate that “remaining” policy accommodation can likely be removed
at a measured pace.  Alternatively, if the Committee judged that the real federal funds
rate now was in the neighborhood of its equilibrium level, it might choose to drop the
“measured pace” sentence entirely, thus suggesting that further firming could prove to
be unnecessary.
(15) Market participants expect that the path of the intended federal funds rate
will begin to flatten out around year-end, but market commentary and survey evidence
indicate that investors do not anticipate that the FOMC will signal any such
development next week.  Accordingly, a statement employing the draft wording
shown in Alternative A would likely produce a noticeable downward shift in interest
rates implied by money market futures quotes, as investors priced in a slower pace of
policy action and probably also revised down the likely extent of cumulative
tightening.  That change in policy outlook would likely prompt a rally in bond and
equity markets and some depreciation in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.  If
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 35
Chart 6
Actual and Assumed Federal Funds Rate and
Range of Values from Policy Rules and Futures Markets
Shaded region is the range of values from rules 1a, 2a, 4, 5, and 6 below
Actual federal funds rate and Greenbook assumption
Market expectations estimated from futures quotes
Values of the Federal Funds Rate from Policy Rules and Futures Markets
Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 35
Policy Rules Chart: Explanatory Notes 
       
In all of the rules below, it denotes the federal funds rate, πt the staff estimate at date t of trailing four-
quarter core PCE inflation, (yt-yt*) the staff estimate (at date t) of the output gap, π* policymakers’ long-
run objective for inflation, it-1 the lagged federal funds rate, gt-1  the residual from the rule’s prescription 
the previous quarter, (yt+3|t-yt+3|t*) the staff’s three-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap, (Δ yt+3|t-
Δyt+3|t*) the staff’s forecast of output growth less potential output growth three quarters ahead, πt+3|t a 
three-quarter-ahead forecast of inflation, and (ut+3|t-ut+3|t*) a three-quarter-ahead forecast of the 
unemployment gap.  Data are quarterly averages taken from the Greenbook and staff memoranda closest 
to the middle of each quarter, unless otherwise noted.
Root-mean-
square error
Rule Specification 
1988:1-
2005:2
Rules with Imposed Coefficients
a 1.05a
a .62a
it = it-1 + 0.5(Δ yt+3|t-Δ yt+3|t*) 
          + 0.5(πt+3|t-π*)
.96a .42a
Rules with Estimated Coefficients
it = .51it-1 + 0.49 [1.29 + 0.95(yt-yt*) 
          + 1.45πt]+ 0.52gt-1
.24 .26
it = .71it-1 + 0.29 [0.73 + 1.04(yt+3|t-yt+3|t*)  
          + 1.59πt+3|t] + 0.37gt-1
.25 .27
it = 0.49it-2 + 0.51 [0.29 
          ! 2.11(ut+3|t-ut+3|t*) + 1.59πt+3|t]
it = 0.97it-1+ [-1.24 + 0.69πcomp5|t]
.40b .42
a RMSE for rules with imposed coefficients is calculated setting π*=1.5. 
b RMSE for TIPS-based rule is calculated for 1999:1-2005:2.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 35
the “measured pace” sentence were included, the extent of the rally might be limited
by a recognition that some further policy tightening could still be in the cards.
(16) If the Committee has become significantly more concerned about inflation
pressures of late, it may favor the 50-basis-point increase in the federal funds rate of
Alternative C.  Greater worries about inflation prospects could have been prompted
by the brisk growth in aggregate demand apparently in train in the current quarter,
which could be read as suggesting that asset prices are not exerting sufficient restraint
on spending to keep actual output from overshooting its potential before long.
Moreover, members may see the potential for an intensification of cost pressures
stemming from a variety of sources.  The further rise in far-dated oil futures prices
over the intermeeting period, for example, suggests that business energy costs will
ratchet up somewhat further in coming months.  Also, members may be concerned
about the potential for further acceleration in unit labor costs if their assessment of
the NAIRU is noticeably higher than the staff’s estimate of 5 percent or if they judge
that structural productivity growth could be slowing more sharply than estimated by
the staff.  Indeed, the slower growth of productivity in recent quarters as well as the
lower estimates of productivity implied by the annual revisions to the national income
and product accounts might incline policymakers to trim their views of structural
productivity even more than has the staff.  And, even if they had a baseline outlook
for the economy and prices similar to that in the Greenbook forecast, members may
prefer lower inflation than the 2 percent core PCE rate projected by the staff for late
(17) The Committee could consider a number of modifications to its statement
in conjunction with the selection of Alternative C.  For instance, the FOMC might
wish to delete the reference to “robust underlying growth in productivity.”  Although
the staff continues to forecast solid growth of structural productivity, the Committee’s
confidence on this score may be diminishing and hence it might not wish to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 35
characterize the pace of underlying productivity growth so explicitly.  The statement
could highlight the strength of the economy by stating that “Aggregate spending
appears to be expanding briskly despite high energy prices.”  It could acknowledge
recent price developments while registering some concern about inflation prospects
by noting that “Core inflation has been relatively low in recent months and longer-
term inflation expectations seem well contained, but pressures on business costs and
inflation appear to be increasing.”  As discussed in the June Bluebook, the Committee
might also take this opportunity to eliminate the forward-looking language from the
statement, dropping both the risk assessment and the last two sentences referring to
the measured pace of tightening and to the Committee’s commitment to respond to
economic developments as needed to maintain price stability.
(18) Market participants would no doubt be taken aback by the combination of a
suggested for Alternative C.  Investors might infer that policy firming in the current
cycle would likely bring the funds rate appreciably above 4¼ percent, the peak funds
rate that seems to be currently incorporated in market prices.  Moreover, with the
elimination of the measured-pace language, market participants might come to believe
that at least some of that rate gap could be covered in additional 50-basis-point
strides.  With the expected policy path pushed sharply upward and little forward-
looking guidance provided by the FOMC, investors’ uncertainty regarding the future
path of policy would likely increase.  In all likelihood, the upward revision to policy
expectations would trigger a sell-off in fixed-income and equity markets and a rise in
the foreign-exchange value of the dollar, although the increase in long-term yields and
appreciation of the dollar could be limited if the drop in share prices were especially
sharp.  If the FOMC were particularly concerned about inflation pressures but was
not prepared to hike rates 50 basis points at this meeting, it could couple a quarter-
point move with some of the changes in the statement suggested for Alternative C.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 35
Such a pairing would temper the surprise to market participants, but it would
probably still lead them to mark up significantly their expectations of policy firming.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(19) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 growth this year and next is projected at
only about 2¼ percent and 3½ percent, respectively (Table 2).  M2 velocity is
expected to increase modestly further over the forecast period.  However, the
projected flat yield curve should support the demand for M2 assets, and thus velocity
is likely to remain below the level suggested by historical relationships among money,
nominal income, and short-run opportunity costs.  The growth of domestic
nonfinancial sector debt is forecast to step down somewhat this year and to slow
further in 2006.  Borrowing by households is expected to drop off considerably,
largely reflecting a deceleration in mortgage debt as the pace of home price
appreciation slows and activity in the housing market flattens out.  Federal borrowing
is also likely to slow a little as the budget deficit narrows a bit.  Despite rising capital
expenditures, business borrowing is projected to remain moderate this year and next,
as some firms meet their funding needs by drawing on their large stockpiles of liquid
assets and on repatriations of retained income from abroad.  Overall, domestic
nonfinancial sector debt is expected to expand 7½ percent in 2005 and 6 percent in
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 35
Table 2
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
          (percent, annual rate)
Raise 25 bp* Raise 50 bp** Greenbook***
Monthly Growth Rates
*   Increase of 25 basis points in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter.
**  Increase of 50 basis points in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter.
*** This forecast is consistent with norminal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 35
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
(20) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around ____________ 3¼ percent.
Risk Assessments
A. The Committee perceives that, with appropriate monetary policy
action, the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both
sustainable growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.
With underlying inflation expected to be contained, the Committee
believes that remaining policy accommodation can be removed at a
pace that is likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the Committee will
respond to changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its
obligation to maintain price stability.
B. The Committee perceives that, with appropriate monetary policy
action, the upside and downside risks to the attainment of both
sustainable growth and price stability should be kept roughly equal.
With underlying inflation expected to be contained, the Committee
believes that policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is
likely to be measured.  Nonetheless, the Committee will respond to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 35
changes in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its obligation to
maintain price stability.
C. None.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 35
Appendix Chart 1
Treasury Yield Curve
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
August 4, 2005   
June 29, 2005
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 35
Appendix Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio Scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 35
Appendix Chart 3
Stock Indexes
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
Ratio Scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
S&P 500*
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 35
Appendix Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 35
Appendix Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
+
+
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
                Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 35
Appendix Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
Ratio scale, index (1980=100)
Journal of Commerce Index
Ratio scale, index (1967=100)
CRB Spot Industrials
CRB Futures
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 35
Appendix Chart 7
Growth of Real M2 and M3
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 35
Appendix Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2
Implicit GDP
price deflator (P) Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 35
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 35
