Content last modified 02/09/2012.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
SEPTEMBER 14, 2006
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 14, 2006
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) On the eve of the August FOMC meeting, market participants were
confident—but not completely certain—that the Committee would leave the funds
rate at 5¼ percent.  As a result, the announcement of the decision to put policy on
hold after seventeen consecutive firmings pulled policy expectations a few basis
points lower (Chart 1).1  Those expectations subsequently fell further in response to
softer-than-expected inflation data for July, declines in oil prices, and the minutes of
the August FOMC meeting, which were interpreted as underscoring that Committee
members generally saw price pressures as likely to abate amid moderating economic
growth.  Futures quotes indicate that investors generally believe that the target rate
will be left unchanged at the September meeting and over the remainder of the year.
Further ahead, futures rates now imply about 50 basis points of easing next year and
point to a funds rate of about 4½ percent at the end of 2008.  Respondents to the
Desk’s survey of primary dealers also expect policy easing next year, albeit somewhat
less than that apparent in futures prices.  In addition, the dealers anticipate little
change in the wording of the September FOMC statement.  Implied volatilities
derived from options on Eurodollars futures contracts that expire over the coming
two years remain near the low end of their historical ranges.
(2) Yields on two- and five-year nominal Treasury securities fell about 10 basis
points over the intermeeting period.  By contrast, yields on similarly dated indexed
debt rose, leaving near- and intermediate-term TIPS-based inflation compensation
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
Aug. 7 Aug. 9 Aug. 14 Aug. 17 Aug. 22 Aug. 25 Aug. 30 Sept. 4 Sept. 7 Sept. 12
-0.65
*5-minute intervals.
FOMC
MinutesPPI
Federal Funds Futures and Slope of Eurodollar Futures Curve
PercentPercent
Dec 2006 Federal Funds (left scale)
December 2007 - December 2006
Eurodollar (right scale)
Sept. Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug.
2006 2007 2008
September 14, 2006
August 7, 2006
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug.
2004 2005 2006
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug.
2004 2005 2006
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug.
2004 2005 2006
Next Five Years
Five-Year Forward, Five Years Ahead
Inflation Compensation*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 36
considerably lower.  The appreciable decline in energy prices—spot oil prices fell by
$13 per barrel, on net—and the shortfall of readings on inflation relative to what
markets had anticipated apparently led investors to trim their expectations for near-
term inflation, which is evident in the pronounced decline in short-run inflation
compensation (see the box “Short-run Inflation Compensation”).  Further out the
yield curve, one-year nominal and real forward rates ending in ten years were down a
little, implying only small changes in inflation compensation at that horizon.2
(3) Against the backdrop of lower oil prices, broad stock price indexes
increased about 3 percent, on net, over the intermeeting period (Chart 2).  Implied
volatility of the S&P 500 declined, and spreads of yields on investment- and
speculative-grade bonds over those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities edged
down.  Corporate risk spreads are narrow by historical standards, consistent with
continued solid credit quality and very low expected defaults for the coming year.
(4) The trade-weighted index of the dollar versus major foreign currencies rose
about ¾ percent on net over the intermeeting period, as modest increases against the
euro and sterling and a larger advance relative to the yen were partially offset by a
small decline vis-à-vis the Canadian dollar (Chart 3).3  Nominal yields on long-term
government securities in industrial countries moved down 10 to 20 basis points over
the period, while yields on indexed debt were little changed.  As a result, most of the
decline in nominal yields was concentrated in the inflation-compensation component,
as market participants appear to have revised inflation expectations down in reaction
to the recent drop in oil prices.  In Japan, softer data on inflation and activity led
investors to trim their expectation of policy tightening by the Bank of Japan, and that
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 36
fall Short-Run Inflation Compensation  
 
The inaugural TIPS issue, which was sold in 1997, will mature in January 2007.  The 
rich schedule of issuance since then provides numerous points along the indexed-debt 
yield curve at short and intermediate maturities.  The amount of interest and principal 
that will be paid on the TIPS issue maturing in January 2007 will be determined by the 
average of the CPIs for October and November, making it relatively straightforward 
to calculate inflation compensation for the twelve months ending that period.  More 
generally, quotes on indexed debt maturing in January in each of the next three years 
can be matched up with quotes from the nominal yield curve to generate estimates of 
annual inflation compensation ending in October-November for the next two years as 
well. 
 
The chart below shows that these measures of short-run inflation compensation 
shifted lower over the intermeeting period.  The implied rate for the one-year period 
ending this autumn fell about 70 basis points to 2.45 percent,* and the rates for 
similar intervals ending in 2007 and 2008 fell 5 and 15 basis points, respectively, to 
2.80 and 2.45 percent.
* CPI up to July 2006 has been published, and as a result, most of the inflation compensation from 
October-November 2005 to October-November 2006 is already known.  According to the 
methodology employed here, the unknown portion for that period—that is, the implied monthly 
average seasonally adjusted inflation compensation between July and November 2006—is 
0.06 percentage point.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 36
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug.
2004 2005 2006
Wilshire
Dow Jones Technology
Stock Prices
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug.
2004 2005 2006
Spot WTI
Far-Dated Futures
Daily FOMC
Oil Prices
Real Long-Term Treasury Yield*
*Perpetuity Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year expected inflation.
Note. + Denotes the latest observation using daily interest rates and stock 
prices and latest earnings data from I/B/E/S.
Equity Valuation
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug.
2004 2005 2006
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug.
2004 2005 2006
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Bond Default Rates(left scale)*
Expected Year-Ahead Defaults (right scale)**
Corporate Default Rates
*6-month moving average, from Moody’s Investors Service.
**Firm-level estimates of default weighted by firm liabilities as a percent
of total liabilities, excluding defaulted firms. Source. Moody’s KMV.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 36
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Jan. May Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June
2004 2005 2006
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Jan. May Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June
2004 2005 2006
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields (Nominal)
Jan. May Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June
2004 2005 2006
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Industrial Countries
Jan. May Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June
2004 2005 2006
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock Price Indexes
Emerging Market Economies
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 36
weighed on the foreign exchange value of the yen.  Stock price indexes in most major
industrial countries rose between 1 and 5 percent over the period.
(5) On balance over the intermeeting period, the dollar was about unchanged
against an index of currencies of our other important trading partners.  The Mexican
peso edged down only slightly versus the dollar, despite lingering uncertainty created
by the recent presidential election in that country.  The Brazilian real moved up against
the dollar.  EMBI+ spreads for both Brazil and Mexico remained near record lows.
The heavily managed dollar-renminbi exchange rate moved in a wider daily range over
the intermeeting period than earlier this year, and the currency appreciated 3⁄10 percent
on net.  Some analysts interpreted the larger fluctuations as a possible prelude to
greater flexibility of the renminbi.  The People’s Bank of China increased its
benchmark bank lending rate 27 basis points on August 18, pointing to the rapid
growth of credit and investment.
(6) Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is estimated to be increasing at a
as a projected slowing in household borrowing about offsets a more-rapid expansion
of federal debt (Chart 4).  C&I loans have picked up briskly in recent months, but net
corporate bond issuance has slowed.  On balance, growth of nonfinancial business
sector debt this quarter is expected to remain near its second-quarter pace.  Debt of
the household sector expanded at a 9 percent annual rate last quarter, slightly slower
than in the first quarter, as mortgage borrowing moderated a bit.  The limited
indicators for the current quarter, including July and August bank credit data, point to
some further slowing of household mortgage borrowing, consistent with the cooling
in the housing market.
(7) M2 growth, at a 4 percent annual rate, remained slow in August.  In recent
months, money growth was damped by the moderate expansion in nominal income
and the lagged effects of earlier increases in opportunity cost.  Liquid deposits, whose
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 36
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Household Debt
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of Federal Debt
p Projected.
Note. Treasury debt held by the public at period-end.
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
Monthly rate
p Preliminary.
Growth of Nonfinancial Debt
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3 p
p Projected.
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
e Estimated.
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 36
rates of return tend to lag rising market rates, continued to run off.  In contrast, small
time deposits and retail money funds, whose rates of return tend to adjust more
promptly, increased briskly.  The currency component continued to expand at a
sluggish rate, apparently due to weak overseas demand for U.S. currency.
The Term Structure of Interest Rates and Growth Prospects  
 
Various econometric models of future real GDP growth that include the shape of the 
term structure suggest that the expansion will slow somewhat and that the odds of an 
outright recession have increased, on net, over the course of this year.  For example, a 
model that includes the slope of the yield curve—as measured by the difference 
between three-month and ten-year Treasury yields—and an estimate of the term 
premium, estimated with data over almost the past twenty years, now implies four-
quarter-ahead expansion of just below 3 percent.  This calculation is little changed 
since the August FOMC meeting and is broadly comparable to private sector 
forecasts, such as the Blue Chip consensus.  Also, a model using the slope of the yield 
curve and the short rate suggests that the probability that the economy will be in 
recession within the next four quarters is about 40 percent.  In contrast, respondents 
to the Blue Chip survey this month reported a 25 percent probability of recession.  
Notably, however, the point estimates derived from these models are highly sensitive 
to specification and sample selection, and therefore sizable confidence intervals 
surround implied growth rates as well as recession odds.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 36
Economic Outlook
(8) The staff forecast for real GDP growth has been lowered somewhat, owing
to the effects of a more abrupt slowing in housing activity and lower growth in
potential output.  The stimulus imparted by the recent appreciable decline in energy
prices and by rallies in some financial markets provides only a partial offset to these
effects.  Real GDP is anticipated to expand at about a 1¾ percent annual rate on
balance over the remainder of 2006 before accelerating gradually over 2007 and 2008.
Resource slack follows the same path as in the August Greenbook, with the
unemployment rate edging up to 5¼ percent by the second half of 2008.  The staff
forecast assumes that the Committee holds the stance of policy steady through mid-
yields rise marginally from a level that is about 20 basis points lower than anticipated
in the August Greenbook, and stock prices increase at about a 6½ percent annual rate
from a starting point that is 2 percent higher than in the last forecast.  The foreign
exchange value of the dollar depreciates gradually as in previous forecasts, but along a
track that is 1 percent above that in August.  As suggested by futures quotes, oil prices
are forecast to rebound somewhat from their recent declines but to run considerably
below the path in the previous forecast.  The flattening out of energy prices and other
commodity prices helps to nudge core PCE inflation down from about 2½ percent at
an annual rate in the second half of 2006 to about 2 percent by the end of the forecast
period.  Product and labor market slack also exert a small downward influence on the
inflation outlook by 2008.  Overall PCE inflation runs at 2½ percent in 2007 and
Policy Alternatives
(9) This Bluebook presents three formal policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized by the draft statements in Table 1.  Under Alternatives A
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 36
Table 1: Alternative Language for the September FOMC Announcement
August FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise its 
target for the federal funds rate by 
25 basis points to 5½ percent.
The moderation in economic growth 
appears to be continuing, in part 
reflecting a cooling of the housing 
market.
The moderation in economic growth 
appears to be continuing, in part 
reflecting a cooling of the housing 
market.
Economic growth has moderated 
from its quite strong pace earlier 
this year, partly reflecting a cooling 
of the housing market.
Although core inflation remains elevated, 
recent readings have been slightly more 
favorable.  While some inflation 
pressures persist, they seem likely to 
moderate over time, reflecting reduced 
impetus from energy prices, contained 
inflation expectations, and the 
cumulative effects of monetary policy 
actions and other factors restraining 
aggregate demand.
Readings on core inflation have been 
elevated on balance, and the high levels 
of resource utilization and of the prices 
of energy and other commodities have 
the potential to sustain inflation 
pressures.  However, inflation pressures 
seem likely to moderate over time, 
reflecting reduced impetus from energy 
prices, contained inflation expectations, 
and the cumulative effects of monetary 
policy actions and other factors 
restraining aggregate demand.
Readings on core inflation have 
been elevated on balance, and the 
high levels of resource utilization 
and of the prices of energy and 
other commodities have the 
potential to sustain inflation 
pressures.  In these circumstances, 
the Committee believed that an 
additional firming of policy was 
appropriate to foster a decline in 
inflation.
Assessment of 
Risk
In recent weeks, the upside risks to 
inflation appear to have diminished 
somewhat and downside risks to growth 
have become more significant.  In these 
circumstances, future policy adjustments 
will depend on the evolution of the 
outlook for both inflation and economic 
growth, as implied by incoming 
information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 36
and B, the Committee would again leave the stance of monetary policy unchanged at
this meeting; Alternative A would suggest that the Committee now sees the risks to
growth and inflation as balanced, while Alternative B would repeat the indication
from August that the Committee is concerned predominantly with inflation risks.
Under Alternative C, the Committee would firm policy 25 basis points and, as in
Alternative B, would highlight upside inflation risks.  A few key data releases are
scheduled between the publication of this document and the Committee’s meeting,
including consumer prices for August on Friday and housing starts on Tuesday, so the
wording of the rationale portions of the various draft statements should be viewed as
more tentative than usual.
(10)  The Committee might want to keep the federal funds rate unchanged at
relatively slow pace of growth and the gradual decline in core inflation from an
elevated level in that projection might have little appeal individually, policymakers may
feel that circumstances are such that this combination of outcomes is likely the best
that can be attained, particularly in light of the downward revision to longer-term
growth prospects.  Holding the funds rate steady at this meeting would be generally
consistent with the Committee’s past behavior as captured in the estimated policy
rules shown in Chart 5, as well as with most of the simple policy rules shown in
Chart 6.  Even if members harbored some reservations about the Greenbook outlook,
policy inaction might be favored as balancing the risks of, on the one hand, a more
precipitous downturn in housing and, on the other, some uptick in inflation pressures.
(11) If the Committee deemed it appropriate to keep the funds rate unchanged
at this meeting, its key remaining policy decision would seem to be its assessment of
the risks to the economic outlook and the associated implications for future action.
Alternative B in Table 1 is designed to signal that policy remains more likely to
tighten than ease by repeating the sentiment of the August statement.  Such a position
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 36
Chart 5
Information from Estimated Policy Rules and Financial Markets
* The confidence intervals for market expectations are not available after 2008Q2 since there are no options traded
beyond that horizon.
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Outcome-based rule
   70 percent confidence interval
   90 percent confidence interval
Forecast-based rule
Estimated Policy Rules
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Market-based expectations
   70 percent confidence interval
   90 percent confidence interval
Market Expectations
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 36
Chart 6
Policy Implications of Simple Rules
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Taylor (1993) rule
Taylor (1999) rule
Taylor (1999) rule with higher r*
First-difference rule
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Taylor (1993) rule
Taylor (1999) rule
Taylor (1999) rule with higher r*
First-difference rule
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 36
Policy Rule Charts: Explanatory Notes
For the rules described below, it denotes the federal funds rate for quarter t, while the explanatory 
variables include the staff’s estimate of trailing four-quarter core PCE inflation (πt), its forecasts  
of inflation two and three quarters ahead (πt+2|t and πt+3|t), its assessment of the current output gap 
( *t ty y− ), its one-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap ( *1| 1|t t t ty y+ +− ), its three-quarter-ahead 
forecast of annual average GDP growth relative to potential ( 4 4 *3| 3|t t t ty y+ +Δ − Δ ), and the assumed value 
of policymakers’ long-run inflation objective ( *π ).     
Rule prescriptions are computed using dynamic simulations of the FRB/US model, implemented as 
though the rule is followed starting at this FOMC meeting.  This quarter’s prescription is a weighted 
average of the actual value of the federal funds rate thus far this quarter and the value obtained from the 
FRB/US model simulations using the timing of this meeting within the quarter to determine the weights.  
Except for backward-looking rules, it should be noted that prescriptions near the end of the Greenbook 
horizon also depend on extended baselines. 
 
  
 
Estimated Rules:  Estimation is performed using real-time data over the sample 1988:1-2005:4, and the 
specifications are chosen according to the Bayesian information criterion.  Each rule incorporates a 75 
basis point shift in the intercept, specified as a sequence of 25 basis point increments that occurred 
during the first three quarters of 1998. Confidence intervals, shown only for the outcome-based rule, are 
based on stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model.  The following table indicates the specification of 
each rule used for dynamic simulations and its root mean squared error over the sample 1993:1-2005:4.  
 
Outcome-based rule it =  1.17it-1 – 0.37it-2
+ 0.20 [1.04 + 1.76 πt + 3.32( *t ty y− ) – 2.37( *1 1t ty y− −− )] 
.17
Forecast-based rule
it =  1.16it-1 – 0.36it-2
+ 0.20  [0.89 + 1.74 πt+2|t + 2.32( *1| 1|t t t ty y+ +− )  – 1.40( *1 1t ty y− −− )] 
.16
Market Expectations:  The expected funds rate path is based on quotes from fed funds and Eurodollar 
futures, and the confidence intervals are obtained from options on those futures.  
  
 
 
Simple Rules:  The following table indicates the specification of each rule. 
 
Taylor (1993) rule it = 2 + πt + 0.5(πt – *π ) + 0.5( *t ty y− )
Taylor (1999) rule it = 2 + πt + 0.5(πt – *π ) + ( *t ty y− )
Taylor (1999) rule     
with higher r*
it = 2.75 + πt + 0.5(πt – *π ) + ( *t ty y− )
First-difference rule it = it-1 + 0.5(πt+3|t – *π ) + 0.5( 4 4 *3| 3|t t t ty y+ +Δ − Δ )
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 36
might be viewed as appropriate by the Committee if it saw high energy and other
commodity prices and high levels of resource utilization as implying that the upside
risks to inflation remain substantial.  Moreover, recent data on labor compensation
and productivity, while not fully congruent with other indicators of labor costs, may
also be seen as pointing to potentially substantial inflation risks, as in the “greater
wage pressure” scenario presented in the Greenbook.
(12) The rationale wording for Alternative B could note that the moderation in
economic growth appears to be continuing.  In view of recent information on the
residential construction sector, it could indicate that the housing market is cooling,
rather than referring to a “gradual” cooling as in the August statement.  The
paragraph on inflation could be generally similar to the one in the previous statement.
However, to acknowledge that the most recent data on core inflation were lower than
those in preceding months—but not to be seen as overly optimistic in that regard—
the statement could indicate that core inflation readings have been elevated “on
balance” over recent months.  The Committee might also wish to explain more
explicitly its expectation that inflation pressures seem likely to moderate over time by
citing a reduced impetus from energy prices.
(13) Money market options indicate that investors are quite sure that the
Committee will keep the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent at this meeting.  In addition,
the Desk’s survey of primary dealers indicates an anticipation that the statement
released after this meeting will about replicate the August announcement, apart from
some updating of the characterization of the economy and inflation.  Accordingly, the
market reaction to this alternative should be quite limited.
(14) Judging from current financial quotes, market participants do not view
maintaining the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent for some time as an approach the
FOMC would select to balance competing macroeconomic risks.  Even though the
Committee identified upside risks as its predominant concern in the August
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 36
statement, money market futures prices suggest the anticipation of ½ percentage
point of policy easing next year, an expectation that imparts financial stimulus to the
extent that it has been incorporated in other asset values.  If that stimulus is seen as
excessive, the Committee could use the statement as a means to make plainer its
assessment that the policy rate is more likely to rise than to fall.  In particular, the
Committee could strike the reassuring phrase “on balance” about recent inflation
readings in row 2 of Alternative B and add an explicit characterization of the odds of
future action in row 4.  For example, after explaining that inflation risks remain, the
Committee could add that “. . . policy is more likely to firm than ease going forward.”
(15) In contrast, with overall economic activity apparently decelerating further in
the current quarter, inflation data for July more favorable than in preceding months,
and energy and other commodity prices down notably in recent weeks, the Committee
may now view the upside risks to inflation as having diminished somewhat and as
roughly balanced by the downside risks to economic activity.  If so, the Committee
may be attracted to Alternative A, under which the stance of policy would be
maintained at this meeting and the statement would no longer suggest a predilection
to firm policy going forward.  While moderate economic growth may be viewed as the
modal outcome under an unchanged federal funds rate, the downside risks to growth
may seem considerable in light of the most recent data pointing to a more
pronounced slowing in housing activity, a possibility that is illustrated by the “housing
slump” scenario in the Greenbook.  Moreover, the Committee may see the recent
decline in the prices of oil and other commodities as potentially signaling a slowdown
in global economic growth.  In any case, with the real federal funds rate at the upper
end of the range of model-based estimates of its equilibrium (Chart 7), policy may
now be in a stance that is consistent with below-potential economic growth going
forward, so that resource pressures are likely to diminish some.  And, if the
Committee believes that energy prices probably will not return to their higher levels of
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 36
Chart 7
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval
90 percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.4 2.4
   Small structural model 2.1 2.1
   Large model (FRB/US) 2.7 3.1
   Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (0.9 - 3.9(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.1 - 4.7(
Greenbook-consistent measure 2.6 2.7
Medium-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.2 2.2
   Small structural model 2.2 2.2
   Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.3 - 3.1(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.7 - 3.7(
TIPS-based factor model 2.1 2.1
Memo
   Actual real federal funds rate 2.85 2.78
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 36
Equilibrium Real Rate Chart: Explanatory Notes 
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to return output to its 
potential level over time.  For the first three measures listed below, the short-run equilibrium rate is defined as the 
rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the corresponding model’s projection of the 
economy.  For the first two measures, the medium-run concept is the value of the real federal funds rate projected 
to keep output at potential in seven years under the assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and 
potential output into line in the short run and then keeps them equal thereafter.  The TIPS-based factor model 
measure provides an estimate of market expectations for the real federal funds rate seven years ahead.  The actual 
real federal funds rate is constructed as the difference between the nominal rate and realized inflation, where the 
nominal rate is measured as the quarterly average of the observed federal funds rate, and realized inflation is 
given by the log difference between the staff’s estimate of the core PCE price index and its lagged value four 
quarters earlier.  For the current quarter, the nominal rate is specified as the target federal funds rate on the 
Bluebook publication date.
Measure Description
Single-equation 
Model
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and 
its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.  In light of this 
model’s simple structure, the short-run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends only 
on the recent position of output relative to potential, and the medium-run measure is 
virtually constant.
Small Structural 
Model
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, and 
the real bond yield.  Unlike the estimates from the single-equation model, values of the 
equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth, 
fiscal policy, and capital markets.
Large Model 
(FRB/US)
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.  These 
projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the 
three-year horizon relevant for the short-run concept but are less sensible over longer 
horizons.  Thus, we report only the short-run measure for the FRB/US model.
Greenbook-
consistent
Measures of the equilibrium real rate cannot be directly obtained from the Greenbook 
forecast, because the Greenbook is not based on a formal model.  Rather, we use the 
FRB/US model in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook forecast to 
derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that its 
simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is run 
off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output 
gap.  The medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it 
requires a relatively long extension of the Greenbook forecast.
TIPS-based 
Factor Model
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’ expectations of 
the future path of real interest rates, but also include term and liquidity premiums.  The 
TIPS-based measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven-year-ahead 
instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the Bluebook publication 
date.  This forward rate is adjusted to remove estimates of the term and liquidity 
premiums based on a three-factor arbitrage-free term-structure model applied to TIPS 
yields, nominal yields, and inflation.  Because TIPS indexation is based on the total CPI, 
this measure is also adjusted for the medium-term difference—projected at 40 basis 
points—between total CPI inflation and core PCE inflation.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 36
earlier this year, it may view inflation pressures as likely to ebb slowly, such as in the
Greenbook forecast.  If so, the Committee may not see particularly high odds that
policy will need to be tightened further.
(16) The rationale for Alternative A could be similar to that for Alternative B,
except that the Committee may wish to note explicitly that recent inflation readings
have been slightly more favorable than those of previous months.  In the risk
assessment, the Committee would mention downside risks to growth and indicate that
future policy adjustments, implicitly in either direction, will depend on the
implications of incoming data for the outlook.
(17) While market participants expect no policy action at this meeting, they do
not appear to anticipate a policy statement that identifies downside risks to growth
and that no longer hints at a possible need for additional firming.  Market participants
could read such a statement simply as a step in the transition to the policy easing that
is already foreseen; in this case, there would probably be only moderate effects on
other market prices.  But market participants might instead extrapolate from this
statement, inferring that the Committee was more likely to ease rates before long.  In
this latter case, the downward tilt to the market’s expected path for policy could
steepen somewhat, and shorter-term Treasury yields could decline a little.  The value
of the dollar on foreign exchange markets would likely edge lower, and stock prices
would rally.  The implications for long-term yields could depend in part on what
investors read into the announcement about the Committee’s longer-term inflation
(18) If the FOMC expected stronger growth or higher inflation than the staff, or
if it saw the Greenbook forecast as credible but was unhappy with the forecast path
for inflation, it might wish to take another firming step at this meeting, as in
Alternative C.   The Committee’s concerns about the inflation outlook may have
been exacerbated by recent compensation and productivity data.  Moreover, in the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 36
staff projection, core PCE inflation is projected to remain a bit above 2 percent until
late 2008—an outcome that would mark five consecutive years of elevated core
inflation relative to the objectives cited by a number of members of the Committee.
Overall inflation likewise is forecast to remain relatively high until 2008.  Given this
forecast, members may believe that acceptable progress toward price stability will
likely involve a somewhat firmer stance of monetary policy over coming quarters than
assumed by the staff.  Even if the Committee found the rate of decline in inflation
forecast in the Greenbook to be generally acceptable, it might wish to firm policy
another step at this meeting to provide more assurance that inflation was headed
(19) An announcement associated with Alternative C could, as in the August
statement, indicate that growth “has moderated” and, as in the other alternatives, drop
the word “gradual” in characterizing the cooling of the housing market.  The first
sentence in the inflation paragraph could also be similar to the one in the August
statement, but it might include the phrase “on balance” to acknowledge implicitly the
lower inflation figures published for July.  Rather than repeat the expectation that
inflation pressures would moderate, the Committee could state that it took the firming
action to foster a decline in inflation.  The Committee might also want to indicate
that, despite the firming step, it continued to be concerned with inflation risks, as it
was in August, and again reference the possibility of additional firming.  If, by
contrast, the Committee saw such a step as a final “insurance” move against inflation,
the risk assessment section could take a neutral position and simply indicate that
future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the economic outlook,
thereby suggesting that the Committee no longer had a predisposition to firm policy.
(20) The tightening of policy and the statement shown under Alternative C of
Table 1 would come as a considerable surprise to market participants.  Investors
would likely conclude that at least one more policy firming action was in store after
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 36
the action at this meeting.  Nominal money market rates and shorter-term coupon
yields would rise sharply.  Real rates further out the curve could also increase, but
nominal long-term yields could decline if market participants concluded that the
FOMC was seeking a steeper decline and had a lower ultimate objective for inflation
than they had previously perceived.  With real rates higher, the foreign exchange value
of the dollar would likely rise, and equity prices would probably decline.  However, if
the Committee instead opted to remove the reference to future firming and to suggest
that it saw the risks as balanced after the move, these market responses would likely
be muted considerably.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(21) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 growth is projected to average about
expansion of nominal income and the lagged effects of past policy tightening on
opportunity costs.  The velocity of M2 is forecast to rise 1½ percent over 2006, after
increasing at an average annual rate of 1¾ percent in the previous two years.  Over
rate, about in line with nominal income, as opportunity costs level out and then
decline slightly in response to the cessation of policy tightening.
(22) Household debt is expected to slow noticeably over the next several
quarters.  The rate of expansion of home mortgage debt declines considerably,
reflecting lower residential investment and sharply decelerating home prices.  The
growth rate of business debt is also projected to decline a little, mainly as a result of
much slower commercial mortgage borrowing compared with its torrid pace of recent
years.  Federal sector debt is forecast to expand at a bit more than a 6 percent annual
rate on average over the forecast period.  All told, the growth of domestic
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 36
No Change 25 bp Tightening Greenbook Forecast*
Growth From To
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Table 2
M2 Growth Under Alternative Policy Paths
Monthly Growth Rates
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 36
nonfinancial sector debt is expected to drop from a 6¾ percent pace in the second
half of this year to 6½ percent in 2007 and 6 percent in 2008.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 36
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
(23) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate further seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around ________ 5¼ percent.
Risk Assessments
A. In recent weeks, the upside risks to inflation appear to have diminished
somewhat and downside risks to growth have become more significant.
In these circumstances, future policy adjustments will depend on the
evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as
implied by incoming information.
B. Nonetheless, the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain.
The extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to
address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
C. Nonetheless, the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain.
The extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to
address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 36
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
Appendix Chart 1
Treasury Yield Curve
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
September 14, 2006   
August 7, 2006
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 36
Appendix Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 36
Appendix Chart 3
Stock Indexes
Ratio scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
Ratio scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
S&P 500*
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 36
Appendix Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 36
Appendix Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
                Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 36
Appendix Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
Journal of Commerce Index
Total
Metals
CRB Spot Industrials
CRB Futures
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 36
Appendix Chart 7
Growth of M2
Nominal M2
Real M2
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 36
Appendix Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2
Implicit GDP
price deflator (P) Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 36
