Content last modified 02/09/2012.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
OCTOBER 19, 2006
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 19, 2006
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The FOMC’s decision at its September meeting to leave the federal funds
rate target unchanged at 5¼ percent was largely anticipated by financial market
participants.  Similarly, the wording of the accompanying statement roughly matched
the market consensus, leaving the expected path of interest rates little changed in
response. 1  Over the intermeeting period, investors remained virtually certain that the
federal funds rate target would hold steady for the remainder of this year.
Expectations for policy further ahead, though, moved as much as 30 basis points
lower early in the period in response to a few data releases with a weakish cast.  In
recent weeks, however, those declines were rolled back in the wake of speeches by
FOMC members and the minutes of the September meeting—which were reportedly
read as emphasizing the risks to inflation—as well as stronger-than-expected
economic data.  The market response to these releases was probably heightened by
the monetary policy communications.  Futures quotes currently indicate that investors
expect about 50 basis points of easing during 2007, about what had been anticipated
before the September meeting (Chart 1).  Respondents to the Desk’s survey of
primary dealers also expect the FOMC to ease policy during 2007, although by
somewhat less than implied by futures market quotes.  Investors became a bit more
confident in their expectations about monetary policy in that the implied probability
distribution for the federal funds rate from options on Eurodollar futures contracts
maturing in about six months narrowed further, with about 20 percent probability
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
Oct. Feb. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug.
2006 2007 2008
October 19, 2006
September 19, 2006
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Implied Distribution of Federal Funds Rate about 
Six Months Ahead*
Recent:  10/19/2006 
Last FOMC:  09/19/2006
*Estimates from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, adjusted to 
estimate expectations for the federal funds rate.
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug.
2004 2005 2006
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug.
2004 2005 2006
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug.
2004 2005 2006
Next Five Years
Five-Year Forward, Five Years Ahead
Inflation Compensation*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug.
2004 2005 2006
Spot WTI
Far-Dated Futures
Daily FOMC
Oil Prices
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 42
weight now being placed on tightening and 45 percent being placed on easing by then.
Forward-looking implied volatilities derived from longer-term interest rate derivatives
also remain near historical lows (see box on following page).
(2) Yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury coupon securities rose
slightly, on net, over the intermeeting period.  Inflation compensation for next year
declined modestly, likely reflecting a further fall in spot energy prices, but was largely
unchanged at longer maturities.  Survey data pointed to a decline in household short-
term inflation expectations.  Trading conditions in the Treasury securities market
remained healthy despite reports of substantial liquidations of short positions in
Treasury issues by some large hedge funds (Chart 2).  Similarly, the winding down of
Amaranth, a hedge fund that posted losses in excess of $6 billion in energy trading
and that had positions in several other markets, left no discernible imprint on the
functioning of markets.
(3) Broad equity indexes rose 4 to 5 percent over the intermeeting period.
Investor optimism was reportedly buoyed by a relative paucity of profit warnings
ahead of scheduled third-quarter earnings announcements and, in the event, by
aggregate earnings news that has thus far outstripped expectations with about one-
fifth of the S&P 500 firms having reported; analysts’ estimates now suggest that
earnings for the third quarter will come in 15 percent above the levels of a year ago.
The drop in oil prices may also have supported share values.  Equity implied
volatilities remain near historical lows.  Spreads of investment-grade corporate bond
yields over those on comparable Treasury securities held steady, while those on
speculative-grade corporate bonds narrowed a little.  Corporate credit quality
remained solid, with expected and realized bond default rates staying very low.
(4) The trade-weighted index of the dollar versus major foreign currencies rose
about 1 percent on balance over the intermeeting period, with the gains spread evenly
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 42
Implied volatility, realized volatility, and turning points in monetary policy 
 
Measures of interest rate uncertainty have stayed near historical lows during the past 
few months.  For example, implied volatilities derived from options on two- and ten-
year swap contracts, shown by the black lines below, remain near lows observed in 
the past six years.   
 
Implied volatility could reflect both expected volatility over the horizon of the option 
and a premium for volatility risk.  Past volatility likely informs investors’ expectations 
of future volatility, and realized volatilities on two- and ten-year swap rates are still 
near sample lows after having edged a bit higher over the intermeeting period.  The 
subdued level of realized volatility notwithstanding, some commentators find 
currently low implied volatilities particularly puzzling given that monetary policy 
might be at a “turning point,” denoted by the shaded regions below.*  However, 
reduced-form econometric models that include realized volatility and other variables 
generally indicate that implied volatility is not greater during the periods between 
easing and tightening cycles.
* Historical turning points refer to periods between the last increase (decrease) in the target of a tightening (easing) 
cycle and the first decrease (increase) in the target of a subsequent easing (tightening) cycle.  For the purposes of this 
analysis, the period after the June 2006 FOMC meeting is presumed to be a turning point, although the results reported 
here are insensitive to that assumption.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 42
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Jan. Mar. May July Sept.
2006
Daily Total Trading Volume in Two-, Five-, and 
Ten-year Treasury On-the-Run Notes
Source. BrokerTec Interdealer Market Data. Total interdealer 
market volume estimated from ICAP volume and market share.
Apr. Sept. Feb. July Dec. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Wilshire
FOMC
Stock Prices
S&P 500 EPS
NIPA, economic
profits before tax
Corporate Earnings Growth Percent
*Change from four quarters earlier.
    Source. I/B/E/S for S&P 500 EPS.
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug.
2004 2005 2006
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Apr. Sept. Feb. July Dec. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Bond Default Rates(left scale)*
Expected Year-Ahead Defaults (right scale)**
Corporate Default Rates
*6-month moving average, from Moody’s Investors Service.
**Firm-level estimates of default weighted by firm liabilities as a percent
of total liabilities, excluding defaulted firms. Source. Moody’s KMV.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 42
against most currencies (Chart 3).2  Both nominal and real yields on long-term
government bonds in foreign industrial countries moved roughly in tandem with
those on comparable U.S. securities.  Major foreign stock markets also recorded gains
similar to those in the United States.  On October 5, the European Central Bank
raised its main policy rate 25 basis points, the fifth such increase in the present round
of tightening.
(5) The dollar was down slightly over the intermeeting period against an index
of currencies of our other important trading partners, led by declines of 2 and
most Latin American and Asian markets recorded solid gains over the period.  Prices
of Thai financial assets dropped after the September 19th coup, but they ended the
period higher on balance.  More recently, South Korean equity prices fell somewhat
on news of the nuclear test in North Korea and have since only partially recovered.
(6) Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is estimated to have expanded at an
annual rate of 6½ percent in the third quarter, in line with the second-quarter pace, as
a pickup in government debt growth was likely offset by a moderation in business and
household debt growth (Chart 4).  Consumer credit slowed noticeably over the
summer, and mortgage debt growth is anticipated to have dropped further in the third
quarter, owing largely to an expected further deceleration in house prices.  In the
business sector, growth in C&I loans weakened substantially in September but was
quite strong for the third quarter as a whole.  Bank lending to businesses through
commercial real estate loans slowed during August and September, a pattern
consistent with results from the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, which
indicated a weakening of demand and a tightening of credit standards for such loans.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 42
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Jan. May Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Jan. May Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct.
2004 2005 2006
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields (Nominal)
Jan. May Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct.
2004 2005 2006
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Industrial Countries
Jan. May Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock Price Indexes
Emerging Market Economies
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 42
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Nonfinancial Debt
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3 p
Growth of Household Debt
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt
Monthly rate
p Preliminary.
C&I loans to large and medium-sized firms
Commercial real estate loans
Net Percentage of Domestic Respondents Tightening
Standards for Business Loans Over the Preivous Three
Months
Source: Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 42
(7) M2 grew modestly in the third quarter, evidencing the lagged effects of
prior increases in opportunity costs and slow growth in nominal spending.  Strong
advances in small time deposits and retail money funds offset a runoff in liquid
deposits.  The stock of currency was about flat, owing to continuing weak overseas
demand for U.S. banknotes.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 42
Medium-Term Strategies
(8) Over the intermeeting period, incoming data on economic activity and
inflation were mostly consistent with the staff’s September projection.  Accordingly,
the latest Greenbook forecast continues to point to below-trend economic growth
and gradually ebbing core inflation.  As in September, the forecast is predicated on an
assumption that the Committee maintains the current stance of policy through mid-
projected in September, that is, rising marginally as investors come to realize that
policy is unlikely to be eased next year.  Stock prices once again are anticipated to
increase at about a 6½ percent annual rate, but from a level that is about 3½ percent
higher than anticipated in the previous forecast.  The foreign exchange value of the
dollar is again assumed to depreciate gradually.  Given recent developments in energy
markets, oil prices in the near term are assumed to be about $5 per barrel lower than
in the September projection, but that difference largely unwinds over the next two
years.  Against this backdrop, real GDP growth is expected to slow to around a
September Greenbook.  Thereafter, economic growth picks up gradually to about a
potential GDP.  The sluggish performance over the next few quarters pushes the
unemployment rate up to a little above 5 percent.  The flattening out of energy and
other commodity prices, combined with an expected deceleration in import prices and
slight cooling in product and labor markets, nudges core PCE inflation down from an
annual rate of around 2¼ percent in the second half of 2006 to close to 2 percent by
the end of the forecast period.  Headline PCE inflation is projected to slow to an
annual rate of less than 1 percent in the second half of this year, reflecting the recent
sharp declines in consumer energy prices, but to rebound to 2.7 percent in 2007 and
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 42
(9) To shed light on the economic outlook and policy strategies at a longer
horizon, the FRB/US model was used to construct an illustrative extension of the
Greenbook forecast beyond 2008 based on a set of medium-term assumptions
together with some judgmental adjustments.  Important influences on the inflation
outlook include trend multifactor productivity growth of about 1¾ percent per year,
approximately flat energy prices, and a pickup in real dollar depreciation to an average
rate of 3 percent per year.  Based on these assumptions, the unemployment rate
would need to be a bit above the staff’s assumed long-run NAIRU of 5 percent to
keep the core PCE inflation rate stable.  The illustrative extension also assumes that
the unified federal budget deficit rises gradually from just under 2 percent of GDP in
depreciation and steady growth abroad are sufficient to stabilize the current account
deficit at just below 8 percent of GDP.  Further assuming that both term and risk
premiums on bonds gradually move back to their historical norms, the real funds rate
would need to decline to around 2 percent to keep output expanding along its
potential path.
(10) The value of the equilibrium real federal funds rate (r*) is subject to
substantial uncertainty, which can be seen in the range of different estimates reported
in Chart 5.  The Greenbook-consistent measure of short-run r*—the value that would
close the output gap over the next twelve quarters—has remained around 2½ to
start of the summer in the staff’s assessment of the strength of aggregate demand
relative to potential output.  This judgmental estimate currently lies just above the
range of the three model-based measures of short-run r*.  Model-based estimates of
the medium-run value of r*—the real rate consistent with output at potential at a
horizon of about seven years, on the assumption that monetary policy acts to close
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 42
Chart 5
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval
90 percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.1 2.2
   Small structural model 2.1 2.1
   Large model (FRB/US) 2.7 2.7
   Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (0.8 - 3.8(
      90 percent confidence interval -0.1 - 4.6(
Greenbook-consistent measure 2.8 2.6
Medium-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.2 2.2
   Small structural model 2.2 2.2
   Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.3 - 3.1(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.7 - 3.7(
TIPS-based factor model 2.1 2.1
Memo
   Actual real federal funds rate 2.9 2.9
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 42
the output gap over the next several years and keep it closed thereafter—are also close
to the value implicit in the illustrative Greenbook extension.
(11) Medium-term implications of alternative monetary policy strategies
can be assessed using optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model.  In these
simulations, policymakers and participants in financial markets are assumed to
understand fully the forces shaping the economic outlook (as summarized by the
extended Greenbook projection), whereas households and firms form their
expectations using more limited information.  The optimal path of policy balances
three stabilization objectives:  keeping core PCE inflation close to a specified goal;
keeping unemployment close to the long-run NAIRU; and avoiding sharp changes in
the nominal federal funds rate.  The optimal policy and associated macroeconomic
outcomes depend on the level of the inflation goal and the weights assigned to the
stabilization objectives; these paths also reflect both the structure of the FRB/US
model and the specific assumptions embedded in the extended Greenbook outlook.
(12) The first set of simulations, shown in Chart 6, explores the implications of
alternative goals for core PCE inflation, assuming that policymakers place equal
weights on the three stabilization objectives.  With an inflation goal of 2 percent
(denoted by the solid lines), the optimal control simulation prescribes a nominal funds
rate of about 5¼ percent through the end of next year followed by a gradual decline
to about 4¼ percent by the end of the decade.  Unemployment remains a bit above
the long-run NAIRU of 5 percent and core inflation remains slightly above the
objectives in an environment in which steady dollar depreciation is generating
persistent upward pressure on domestic inflation.  With an inflation goal of
rises to nearly 6 percent next year before declining to about 3½ percent by 2012.  In
this case, the unemployment rate peaks at about 5½ percent later this decade while
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 42
Chart 6
Alternative Long-Run Inflation Objectives
Federal Funds Rate
Five-Year Real Interest Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Four-quarter average
Core PCE Inflation
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 42
core inflation declines gradually towards its goal.  The slow pace of disinflation is
importantly shaped by the high output costs associated with lowering long-run
inflation expectations in FRB/US and by the relative weights that policymakers are
assumed to place on their inflation and unemployment objectives.
(13) Chart 7 depicts two alternative scenarios that illustrate, for an inflation goal
of 1½ percent, how policymaker preferences and the costs of disinflation influence
the policy path in optimal control simulations.  In the first scenario (the dashed lines),
policymakers place considerably greater relative weight on achieving the inflation
objective, rather than placing equal weight on inflation and unemployment
stabilization as in the benchmark scenario (the solid lines).  With a greater focus on
the inflation objective, the optimal funds rate path continues to rise well into 2008
and remains on a track about 50 basis points higher than in the benchmark scenario
for several years thereafter.  As a result, the unemployment rate rises to nearly
decade.  The second scenario maintains the baseline assumption that policymakers
place equal weights on the three stabilization objectives, but departs from the model’s
standard equation for the evolution of long-run inflation expectations; in particular,
this scenario posits that unexpectedly tight monetary policy directly induces wage and
price setters to mark down their assessment of the policymakers’ inflation goal,
thereby diminishing the amount of economic slack needed to reduce actual and
expected inflation in the FRB/US model.3  The optimal policy in this case (the dotted
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 42
Chart 7
Optimal Policy with a 1½ Percent Inflation Objective
Equal weights
More weight on inflation
With learning
Federal Funds Rate
Five-Year Real Interest Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Four-quarter average
Core PCE Inflation
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 42
lines) prescribes a near-term rise in the funds rate to about 6¼ percent by mid-2007,
with subsequent policy easing as long-term inflation expectations converge to the
inflation goal.  The more favorable policy tradeoff is readily apparent in this scenario:
Core inflation descends more quickly towards the 1½ percent goal even though the
unemployment rate is only modestly higher than the long-run NAIRU.
(14) These optimal control policies prescribe broadly similar and relatively stable
funds rate paths over the next two years, in part because all of the simulations are
premised on the same set of assumptions regarding the medium-term outlook.  The
upper portion of Chart 8 provides some information on the extent of uncertainty
about the future course of monetary policy.  The left panel depicts confidence
intervals for the range of federal funds rate outcomes implied by stochastic
simulations of the FRB/US model, assuming that monetary policy is well-
characterized by an estimated outcome-based rule and that the shocks hitting the
economy are typical of the experience over the past two decades.  In the absence of
any shocks, the outcome-based rule (denoted by the dashed line) prescribes a funds
rate path that remains between 5¼ and 5½ percent through mid-2007 and then
declines gradually to about 5 percent.  The stochastic simulations indicate a 70 percent
probability that the prescriptions of the outcome-based rule will fall in the range of
prices on federal funds and Eurodollar futures contracts (right panel) point to
noticeably less uncertainty in financial markets regarding the prospective path of
policy over the next two years.
(15) While optimal control analysis necessitates the use of a macroeconomic
model such as FRB/US, simple policy rules based on a limited set of variables can
serve as benchmarks for monetary policy strategy, and the near-term prescriptions of
baseline case to less than 2, comparable to estimates of the sacrifice ratio for the disinflation 
of the early 1980s.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 42
such rules can be obtained without specifying any particular model.  As shown in the
lower portion of Chart 8, the rules proposed by Taylor (1993, 1999) prescribe a funds
rate of about 4½ to 4¾ percent, depending on the inflation objective (either 2 or
the Taylor (1999) rule—introduced in the August Bluebook—that incorporates a
value of r* that is 75 basis points higher than in the original rule.  Finally, with an
inflation objective of 1½ percent, the first-difference rule—whose prescriptions do
not depend on the level of the output gap or any particular value of the equilibrium
real interest rate—calls for a distinct upward tilt to the path of policy, with the funds
rate rising to 5¾ percent by the first quarter of next year; in contrast, with a 2 percent
inflation goal, the first-difference rule is consistent with holding the funds rate at its
current level.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 42
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(16) This Bluebook presents three formal policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, associated with the draft statements in Table 1.  Under Alternatives A
and B, the Committee would again leave the stance of monetary policy unchanged at
this meeting; Alternative A would indicate that the Committee has no clear view as to
the likely future direction of policy, whereas Alternative B would repeat the statement
from September that further policy tightening may prove necessary.  Under
Alternative C, the Committee would increase the target rate 25 basis points at this
meeting and continue to stress upside risks to inflation.  In all three, the Committee
would acknowledge that economic growth appears to have slowed further in the third
quarter, but the characterization of growth going forward varies across the
(17) If the Committee judges that the news since its decision to hold the funds
target unchanged in September has not significantly altered the outlook for inflation
and activity, it might be attracted to Alternative B.  A combination of below-trend
growth and an edging lower in core inflation, as in the staff forecast, may be viewed as
the best attainable outcome.  With the real federal funds rate around the upper end of
the range of model-based estimates of its equilibrium value as noted earlier, the
Committee might judge the current stance of policy as broadly consistent with
achieving this result.  Moreover, from a risk-management perspective, modest policy
restraint may be viewed as appropriately weighing the competing risks to inflation and
economic growth.  The possibility that inflation expectations could begin to drift
higher and the tightness of the labor market, as evidenced by data on labor
compensation and reports of difficulties in filing certain positions, may both be
viewed as pointing to upside risks to costs and prices in the Greenbook projection.
Despite those upside inflation risks, the Committee may want to refrain from
tightening in light of the downside risks to economic growth, including the possibility
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 42
Table 1: Alternative Language for the October FOMC Announcement
September FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise its 
target for the federal funds rate by 
25 basis points to 5½ percent.
Economic growth appears to have 
slowed further in the third quarter, partly 
reflecting a cooling of the housing 
market.  Although there is a risk that the 
slowdown in economic growth may 
become more pronounced, the economy 
seems likely to expand at a moderate 
pace.
Economic growth appears to have 
slowed further in the third quarter, partly 
reflecting a cooling of the housing 
market.  Going forward, the economy 
seems likely to expand at a moderate 
pace.
Economic growth appears to have 
slowed further in the third quarter, 
partly reflecting a cooling of the 
housing market.  Going forward, the 
economy seems likely to expand at a 
moderate pace.
Readings on core inflation have been 
elevated, and the high level of resource 
utilization has the potential to sustain 
inflation pressures.  However, inflation 
pressures seem likely to moderate over 
time, reflecting reduced impetus from 
energy prices, contained inflation 
expectations, and the cumulative effects 
of monetary policy actions and other 
factors restraining aggregate demand.
Readings on core inflation have 
been elevated and the high levels of 
resource utilization and of the prices 
of energy and other commodities 
have the potential to sustain 
inflation pressures.  Inflation 
pressures seem likely to moderate 
over time, but the extent and speed 
of that moderation is uncertain.  In 
these circumstances, the Committee 
believed that an additional firming 
of policy was appropriate to bolster 
progress towards achieving price 
stability.
Assessment of 
Risk
In these circumstances, future policy 
adjustments will depend on the evolution 
of the outlook for both inflation and 
economic growth, as implied by 
incoming information.
Although the Committee both seeks 
and expects a gradual reduction in 
inflation, it continues to view the 
risks to that outcome as remaining 
to the upside.  The extent and 
timing of any additional firming that 
may be needed to address these 
risks will depend on the evolution of 
the outlook for both inflation and 
economic growth, as implied by 
incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 42
that the housing market could continue to deteriorate.  Holding the federal funds rate
unchanged would permit additional information bearing on the prospects for growth
and inflation to accumulate before making a move in either direction.
(18) With little news since the September FOMC meeting, the Committee could
essentially repeat its previous statement, but acknowledge softness in the economy in
the third quarter.  If the Committee wished to include an explicit assessment of the
prospects for growth, it could also include an additional sentence in row 2 noting that
“Going forward, the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace.”
(19) Money market futures and options indicate that investors remain confident
that the Committee will maintain the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent at this meeting.
Moreover, the Desk’s survey of primary dealers indicates that the accompanying
statement is expected to replicate broadly the September announcement.  The release
of a statement along the lines of alternative B, therefore, would not prove a surprise,
and the market reaction would likely be limited.
(20) In recent statements, the risk assessment has pointed to upside risks to
inflation and the possible need to firm policy further.  However, market participants
appear to attach greater likelihood to policy easing than tightening.  To protest that
view and to underscore its commitment to reduce inflation, the Committee might
choose to modify its words to note that “Although the Committee both seeks and
expects a gradual reduction in inflation, it continues to view the risks to that outcome
as remaining to the upside.”  The variation in wording might also be seen as having
the advantage of eliminating repetition, which in the past has led to market
participants viewing certain phrases as heavily freighted with meaning.  If modifying
the statement along these lines was successful in increasing investors’ perception of
the upside risks to inflation, near-term policy expectations might back up somewhat
and short-term Treasury yields rise.  In this case, the value of the dollar on foreign
exchange markets would likely edge higher, and stock prices could fall.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 42
(21)  In contrast, the Committee might now be more concerned about the
downside risks to growth, perhaps in part as a result of the sharp slowing estimated
for the third quarter.  If so, Alternative A might find some support.  In this
alternative, the stance of policy would be maintained at this meeting, and the
statement would indicate that the outlook was such that the Committee did not have a
clear view as to the likely future direction of policy.  The Committee might judge that
there is a material probability that growth could prove weaker than in the staff
forecast, perhaps reflecting a more pronounced housing market adjustment with more
extensive effects on the rest of the economy, along the lines of the “Housing
correction with spillovers” scenario described in the Greenbook.  Moreover, if the
Committee, like the staff, saw only sluggish near-term growth in activity and
employment, it might be concerned that any additional adverse shocks to demand
could have a disproportionate impact on the economy.  Maintaining the federal funds
rate at 5¼ percent for some time would be broadly consistent with the Committee’s
past behavior as captured in the estimated policy rules presented earlier.  Further, as
pursuit of a 2 percent inflation objective has the federal funds rate remaining near
current levels for the next year or so, before moving gradually lower thereafter.
(22) In order to point out the downside risks to growth, the statement
accompanying Alternative A could note that “there is a risk that the slowdown in
economic growth may become more pronounced.”  To simplify the statement, the
Committee might want to remove from the discussion of inflation the reference to
the high levels “of the prices of energy and other commodities.”  Indeed, the
Committee might see some merit in this simplification for the other alternatives as
well.  Given the competing risks to inflation and growth, the risk assessment might
simply state that “In these circumstances, future policy adjustments will depend on
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 42
the evolution of the outlook for inflation and economic growth, as implied by
incoming information.”
(23) Although market participants expect the current target for the federal funds
rate to be maintained at this meeting, they do not expect a statement that explicitly
identifies risks to growth as well as to inflation and suggests the Committee is no
longer predisposed towards policy firming.  Market participants are likely to interpret
such a statement as implying that the Committee might ease rates sooner than they
had previously thought—and perhaps by even more than the half point reduction
already built in for 2007.  As a result, near-term policy expectations would probably
move lower and shorter-term Treasury yields decline.  The value of the dollar on
foreign exchange markets would likely edge lower and stock prices rally.  The
implications for long-term yields would depend on whether the statement caused
investors to adjust their views about the Committee’s longer-term inflation intentions
or the appropriate path for the real interest rate.
(24) If the Committee expected higher inflation than the staff, or if it thought
the Greenbook forecast was broadly plausible but viewed inflation as remaining
unacceptably high, it might wish to raise the target federal funds rate to 5½ percent at
this meeting, as in Alternative C.  This alternative might be favored if the factors
underlying the increase in core inflation in the first half of this year were viewed as
likely to be more persistent than envisaged in the staff’s projection, perhaps reflecting
an increase in inflation expectations as illustrated in the “Higher expected inflation”
simulation presented in the Greenbook.  In that regard, the Committee may be
concerned that the current level of inflation expectations is already somewhat higher
than the objectives cited by a number of policymakers.  (The box on the following
page discusses various measures of inflation expectations.)  Even if the Committee
shares the staff’s view that inflation is likely to decline gradually over the forecast, it
may view the pace of that decline, in which core PCE inflation is projected to remain
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 42
fall Estimates of inflation expectations 
 
The level of inflation expectations is a key factor affecting monetary policy.  Estimates of 
such expectations can potentially be gleaned from surveys and financial asset prices.  But 
given various technical and measurement issues, these indicators do not typically provide a 
clean read of investors’ expectations of core inflation.  
 
The difference between yields on nominal Treasury securities and those on TIPS contains 
information about investors’ inflation expectations.  However, a number of adjustments are 
necessary to translate the raw spread between nominal and real yields into an estimate of 
core PCE inflation expectations:
• First, the raw spread includes a liquidity premium.  Although the liquidity premium in 
TIPS is estimated to have declined notably over time, and by some recent 
calculations now stands very close to zero, this issue somewhat complicates any 
reading of inflation expectations.
• Second, TIPS compensate investors for inflation with a two-and-a-half month lag, 
and hence raw prices partially reflect inflation that has already occurred.  Adjustments 
for these “carry effects” are straightforward but imprecise.
• Third, TIPS payments are based on the non-seasonally-adjusted headline CPI, not 
the core PCE.  The staff’s forecasts of these two series can be used to translate 
between price indexes under the assumption that financial markets have a similar 
assessment.
• Fourth, the raw spread includes an inflation risk premium.  To separate inflation risk 
premiums from expected inflation, Board staff employs a number of methods based 
on affine term structure models that are necessarily model dependent.
After considering these adjustments and based on the most recently observed differences 
between yields on nominal Treasury securities and TIPS, the staff’s point estimates of 
expected core PCE inflation from the very near term to ten years ahead vary between about 
2.0 and 2.4 percent.  However, the caveats associated with these adjustments suggest 
substantial confidence intervals around these point estimates. 
 
The Desk’s recent survey includes primary dealers’ forecasts of quarterly core PCE price 
inflation from the current quarter through the first quarter of 2008, and the average 
projection across that horizon also ranged from about 2.0 percent to 2.4 percent.  The 
monthly Michigan Survey does not refer to a specific price index, but regressions can be 
used to infer anticipated core PCE inflation from the survey responses.  The most recent 
reading of 2.9 percent over the next twelve months implies expected core PCE inflation of 
approximately 2.6 percent over the same period.  Unfortunately, limited data preclude a 
similar mapping for longer-run expectations.  Finally, assuming the staff’s presumed 
discrepancy between headline CPI and core PCE, inflation expectations for 2007 and over 
the next ten years from the August Survey of Professional Forecasters are about 2.4 and 
2.1 percent, respectively.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 42
above 2 percent beyond 2008, as unacceptably slow.  In the medium-term strategies
presented earlier, for example, bringing inflation below 2 percent in the next few years
involves raising the federal funds rate to about 6 percent over the next several
(25) In the statement accompanying Alternative C, the discussion of growth
could be identical to that proposed for Alternative B.  However, in the second half of
the inflation paragraph, rather than listing the various factors contributing to the
expected moderation in inflation, the Committee could posit that “Inflation pressures
seem likely to moderate over time, but the extent and speed of that moderation is
uncertain.” The discussion of inflation could conclude by stating that “In these
circumstances, the Committee believed that an additional firming of policy was
appropriate to bolster progress towards achieving price stability.”  If, despite the
firming in policy, the Committee continued to be predominantly concerned with
inflation risks, it presumably would want to leave the risk assessment tilted as was
proposed for Alternative B.  However, that sentiment could perhaps be conveyed
more strongly to market participants by adopting the language in paragraph 20 earlier
in this Bluebook noting that the Committee “both seeks and expects a gradual
reduction in inflation.”
(26) The tightening of policy envisaged under Alternative C would catch market
participants unawares.  Investors would revise up sharply their expectations for the
path of policy over the next year or so.  Short- and medium-term nominal and real
rates would rise markedly.  Nominal long-term yields would probably decline if
market participants concluded that the FOMC was seeking a steeper decline in
inflation or had a lower objective for inflation than they previously thought.  With real
rates higher, the foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely rise, and equity
prices would probably decline, perhaps sharply.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 42
Money and Debt Forecasts
(27) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 is projected to expand at around a
nominal income and the restraining effects of past policy tightening.  However, as
opportunity costs gradually decline given the assumed path of the federal funds rate,
M2 growth picks up to around a 5 percent annual rate in 2007 and 2008.
(28) Growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is expected to slow to an
annual rate of around 6¼ percent on average over the forecast horizon, down from
growth of 9½ percent in 2005.  The growth of home mortgage debt is expected to
step down considerably, reflecting both a deceleration in house prices and declining
residential investment.  Business debt growth remains moderate over the forecast
period, as profits flatten out and firms draw on their accumulated cash to finance
growing investment spending.  With the budget deficit projected to widen some over
the next two years, federal government debt is forecast to expand 6 percent in 2007
and 2008, up from the 4½ percent increase expected in 2006.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 42
No Change 25 bp Tightening Greenbook Forecast*
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Directive and Balance of Risks Statement
(29) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around ________ 5¼ percent.
Risk Assessments
A. In these circumstances, future policy adjustments will depend on the
evolution of the outlook for inflation and economic growth, as implied
by incoming information.
B. Nonetheless, the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain.
The extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to
address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
C. Although the Committee both seeks and expects a gradual reduction in
inflation, it continues to view the risks to that outcome as remaining to
the upside.  The extent and timing of any additional firming that may be
needed to address these risks will depend on the evolution of the
outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 42
