Content last modified 02/09/2012.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
DECEMBER 7, 2006
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR)  December 7, 2006
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Neither the FOMC’s decision at the October meeting to keep its target for
the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent nor its policy statement surprised market
participants.1  As a result, the market reaction to the announcement was muted, as
was the response to the subsequent publication of the minutes of the meeting.  Over
the intermeeting period, investors continued to anticipate that the FOMC will leave
policy unchanged at this meeting.  However, partly in response to several weaker-
than-expected economic data releases, they built in some odds of an easing at the
January meeting and significantly lowered their expectations for the path of policy
further ahead.  Futures quotes indicate that market participants now expect more than
anticipated before the October meeting (Chart 1).  However, on average, respondents
to the Desk’s survey of primary dealers expect somewhat less policy easing in 2007—
about 50 basis points.  The primary dealers generally also anticipate the December
FOMC statement to be broadly similar to that in October.  Although some dealers
think that the Committee will allude to some softening in the economic outlook, most
believe that the Committee will continue to emphasize inflation risks.  According to
options prices, market participants’ uncertainty about the near-term path of monetary
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
Dec. Mar. June Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2006 2007 2008
December 7, 2006
October 24, 2006
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Implied Distribution of Federal Funds Rate about 
Six Months Ahead*
Recent:  12/07/2006 
Last FOMC:  10/24/2006
*Estimates from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, adjusted to 
estimate expectations for the federal funds rate.
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)*
Implied Volatilities
*Width of a 90 percent confidence interval computed from the term
structures for the expected federal funds rate and implied volatility.
Apr. Sept. Feb. July Dec. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Change in Implied One-Year Forward Treasury Rates
since Last FOMC Meeting*
Years Ahead
*Forward rates are the one-year rates maturing at the end of the year shown
on the horizontal axis that are implied by the smoothed Treasury yield curve.
Apr. Sept. Feb. July Dec. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Next Five Years
Five-Year Forward, Five Years Ahead
Inflation Compensation*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 40
policy increased somewhat over the intermeeting period—though it remained low by
historical standards—and their outlook for the funds rate became more skewed
toward lower outcomes.
(2) Yields on Treasury securities also fell notably over the intermeeting period.
The yield curve shifted downward in a nearly parallel fashion, with yields on two-
through ten-year nominal Treasury notes dropping about 35 basis points.   These rate
declines apparently reflected, at least in part, a less optimistic economic outlook
among investors.  Both expected future short-term interest rates and term premiums
are estimated to have declined (see box on the next page).  After adjusting for carry
effects, TIPS-based inflation compensation for the next five years was essentially
unchanged over the intermeeting period, and inflation compensation for the
subsequent five years edged somewhat lower on balance.  According to the Michigan
survey, households’ short- and long-term inflation expectations moved down a bit.
(3) Major stock price indexes rose between 2 and 3 percent, on net, over the
intermeeting period (Chart 2).  The decline in bond yields and the continued positive
tone of the final batch of reports on third-quarter corporate earnings evidently offset
the negative effects of the weaker macroeconomic news.  Implied volatility of the
S&P 500 rose somewhat, though it remained near historical lows, and a rough
measure of the equity risk premium widened somewhat.  Spreads of yields on
investment- and speculative-grade bonds over those on comparable-maturity
Treasuries were about unchanged.  Measures of the credit quality of nonfinancial
firms stayed solid, supported by robust earnings and by strong and liquid balance
(4) The trade-weighted value of the dollar versus major foreign currencies fell
late November (Chart 3).  Although the drop did not appear to be triggered by
specific events, it occurred in the context of both weaker-than-expected U.S.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 40
Interpreting the Decline in Treasury Yields over the Intermeeting Period 
 
Nominal Treasury yields declined about 35 basis points over the intermeeting period, with the drop 
spread across the forward rate curve.  To put the size of this move into some historical perspective, 
the average absolute intermeeting change in two- and ten-year Treasury yields since 1994 is 29 and 
27 basis points, respectively.  Judging from TIPS yields, the decline in near-term nominal rates over 
the intermeeting period has been mostly concentrated in real yields.  Further out the term structure, 
a small portion of the decline in nominal forward rates owes to a modest decline in inflation 
compensation. Various estimates suggest that both expected future short-term interest rates and 
term premiums declined, with the latter reflecting, in particular, lower compensation for real interest 
rate risk.   This broad pattern was also evident, albeit somewhat less pronounced, in global bond 
markets as nominal and real rates moved lower in a number of industrialized countries.   
 
To a degree, the drop in yields seems to have been prompted by weaker-than-anticipated indicators 
of aggregate demand against the backdrop of relatively benign inflation data.  To be sure, the initial 
market reaction to recent spending data, as gauged by yield changes in narrow intervals around their 
releases, falls well short of explaining the full movement in yields.  However, market reports suggest 
that incoming information spurred a broader revision to investors’ views regarding the 
macroeconomic outlook.  Primary dealers, for example, have lowered their forecasts of real GDP 
growth in the fourth quarter about ½ percentage point, and to a lesser extent going forward, which 
is consistent with the fall in real interest rates, particularly at the front end of the curve.  And some 
dealers have marked down their estimates of potential output growth, which might help to explain 
some of the decline in real rates at distant horizons.  
 
On balance, the drop in yields over the intermeeting period seems to accord reasonably well with a 
sense that investors may perceive greater downside risks in the outlook for spending and economic 
growth.  Nonetheless, some aspects of recent yield curve developments do not appear to fit so 
neatly with changes in economic fundamentals.  The sizable drop in estimated term premiums, for 
example, seems to run counter to the uptick in some measures of interest rate uncertainty. 
 
Market analysts have offered several other special stories for the drop in yields, but these 
explanations also are not completely satisfying.  For example, some analysts have focused on 
anecdotal reports of strong foreign demand for Treasury securities.  However, available indicators 
do not point to a large increase in such demand.  Similarly, while some market participants have 
suggested that the recent declines in yields have been amplified by mortgage-related hedging flows, 
staff analysis indicates that the current level of rates would be expected to prompt only fairly modest 
hedging demands for longer-duration assets.  Finally, a few commentators have suggested that the 
outcome of the Congressional elections may have played a role in lowering longer-term interest 
rates, perhaps because investors expect federal budget deficits to be reduced.  Although yields 
declined modestly on the day after the election, little evidence can be adduced to support this 
hypothesis. 
 
In summary, while the direction of interest rates over the period seems consistent with changing 
perceptions of economic fundamentals, the magnitude of these changes remains somewhat 
surprising.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 40
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Apr. Sept. Feb. July Dec. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Wilshire
FOMC
Stock Prices
S&P 500 EPS
NIPA, economic
profits before tax
Corporate Earnings Growth Percent
*Change from four quarters earlier.
    Source. I/B/E/S for S&P 500 EPS.
Apr. Sept. Feb. July Dec. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Apr. Sept. Feb. July Dec. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Bond Default and C&I Loan Delinquency Rates
Percent of outstandings
C&I loan delinquency rate
    (Call Report)
Bond default rate*
*Six-month moving average, from Moody’s Investors Service.
Percent of liabilities
Expected Year-Ahead Defaults*
*Firm-level estimates of year-ahead defaults from KMV corporation, weighted
by firm liabilities as a percent of total liabilities, excluding defaulted firms.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 40
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Jan. May Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Jan. May Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct.
2004 2005 2006
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields (Nominal)
Jan. May Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct.
2004 2005 2006
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Industrial Countries
Jan. May Sept. Feb. June Oct. Feb. June Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock Price Indexes
Emerging Market Economies
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 40
economic data and relatively strong economic indicators for Europe.  On balance, the
dollar fell 5¼ percent against the euro, 4¼ percent versus sterling, and about
Canadian dollar, as data on Canadian economic activity were unexpectedly soft.
Yields on long-term government securities in foreign industrial countries registered
declines of 10 to 30 basis points, generally somewhat less than those on comparable-
maturity U.S. Treasury issues.  Major foreign stock markets recorded small net
changes over the intermeeting period.  To combat inflation pressures, the Bank of
England, the Riksbank, the Reserve Bank of Australia, and the European Central
Bank raised their policy rates 25 basis points during the intermeeting period.2
(5) The dollar declined about 1¼ percent on net against an index of currencies
of our other important trading partners.
The dollar’s slow decline
versus the Chinese renminbi accelerated a bit, leaving the dollar about 1 percent lower
by the end of the intermeeting period.  Despite signs of continued strong Mexican
economic performance, the peso weakened because of ongoing political turmoil
surrounding the change in the Mexican presidency; on balance, the dollar gained
about ¾ percent against the peso over the intermeeting period.  Stock prices in
Mexico and Brazil climbed roughly 11 and 8 percent, respectively, and their EMBI+
spreads remained steady near low historical levels.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 40
(6) The debt of the domestic nonfinancial sectors grew at about a 6¾ percent
annual rate in the third quarter and appears to be expanding at nearly that pace in the
current quarter (Chart 4).  Net issuance of investment- and speculative-grade
corporate bonds surged in November, supported by the continued elevated level of
mergers and acquisitions and the decline in yields.  Short-term business borrowing, by
contrast, appears to have moderated somewhat, with C&I loans slowing notably in the
fourth quarter from their rapid pace earlier in the year.  Growth of home mortgage
debt is estimated to have stepped down significantly in the third quarter, about in line
with the sustained deceleration in house prices.  Consumer credit again expanded at a
moderate pace in the third quarter, and data for consumer loans at commercial banks
suggest continued modest growth in the current quarter.
(7) Reflecting the pattern of expansion in liquid deposits, M2 growth jumped in
October but fell back to a 6 percent annual rate in November.  By contrast, small time
deposits and retail money funds—two components of the aggregate whose yields tend
to follow short-term market rates fairly closely—continued to expand briskly.  For the
fourth quarter as a whole, M2 growth appears to be outpacing that of nominal
income, the first decrease in the velocity of M2 in more than two years.  Appendix A
analyzes the growth of money and the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors this year.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 40
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Debt of Nonfinancial Sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of Debt of
Nonfinancial Business
Monthly rate
p Preliminary.
Growth of Debt of Household Sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
e Estimated.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of House Prices
Percent
OFHEO Purchase
Only Index (s.a.)
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
p Preliminary.
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
p Projected.
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 40
Economic Outlook Through 2008
(8) The staff’s forecast for both real GDP and inflation is largely unchanged
from that presented in the October Greenbook.  The underlying pace of economic
growth in the second half of this year is judged to be a touch weaker than had been
anticipated; further out, however, the forecast for real activity is little different, with
growth projected to pick up gradually during 2007 to a rate broadly in line with the
staff’s estimate of sustainable output growth.  As in October, the forecast assumes
that the Committee maintains the current stance of policy through mid-2008 and then
eases slightly.  Longer-term Treasury yields start from a lower level than in the
previous forecast, but rise almost 50 basis points over 2007 as investors come to
realize that policy is unlikely to be eased next year.  Stock prices climb at about a
projected in the October Greenbook.  The real trade-weighted dollar is again assumed
to depreciate gradually, but from a level about 2 percent lower than assumed in
October.  Oil prices edge somewhat higher over the forecast horizon, in line with
futures quotes.  Reflecting the unexpected drop in the unemployment rate earlier this
autumn, the labor market is projected to be slightly tighter through 2007 than had
been anticipated in October, but the higher level of the markup implied by the
downward revision to compensation suggests that firms will largely absorb the
increased cost pressures emanating from the labor market.  Core PCE inflation is
again projected to edge down to about 2 percent by the end of 2008, primarily
reflecting a further waning of the effects of the earlier run-up in the prices of energy
and imported goods and a fall in the rate of increase of shelter costs.  Overall PCE
inflation is expected to be about 2¾ percent in 2007 and 2 percent in 2008.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 40
Update on Medium-Term Strategies
(9) Charts 5 to 7 provide an update of the materials on medium-term strategies
that were presented in the October Bluebook.  The Greenbook-consistent measure
of the short-run equilibrium real federal funds rate (r*)—the value that would close
the output gap over the next twelve quarters—remains at about 2¾ percent, reflecting
the modest changes to the staff’s outlook for aggregate demand over the intermeeting
period (Chart 5).  The actual real funds rate is just above the Greenbook-consistent
measure and at the upper end of the range of model-based estimates of short-run r*.
Optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model prescribe policy paths that are
virtually identical to those presented in the October Bluebook (Chart 6).3  With an
inflation goal of 2 percent, the optimal funds rate remains near 5¼ percent through
funds rate path that peaks at about 6 percent late next year.  The estimated outcome-
based rule prescribes a nearly constant funds rate of about 5¼ percent through the
end of 2008—a path that is substantially tighter than that embedded in financial
market prices (Chart 7).  Options prices continue to suggest noticeably less
uncertainty about the future course of policy among market participants than implied
by FRB/US model simulations.  The near-term prescriptions of several simple rules—
such as those proposed by Taylor (1993, 1999)—have not changed significantly over
the intermeeting period.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 40
Chart 5
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval
90 percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.2 2.1
   Small structural model 2.1 2.1
   Large model (FRB/US) 2.9 2.7
   Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (0.9 - 3.9(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.0 - 4.8(
Greenbook-consistent measure 2.8 2.8
Medium-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.2 2.2
   Small structural model 2.1 2.2
   Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.3 - 3.1(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.7 - 3.7(
TIPS-based factor model 2.1 2.1
Memo
   Actual real federal funds rate 2.9 2.9
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 40
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(10) This Bluebook presents three policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, associated with the draft statements in Table 1.  Under Alternatives A
and B, the Committee would leave the stance of monetary policy unchanged at this
meeting; Alternative A would imply that the risks to economic growth and inflation
were now judged to be broadly balanced, whereas Alternative B would again indicate
that the risks to inflation remained of greatest concern.  Under Alternative C, the
Committee would increase the target rate 25 basis points at this meeting and continue
to emphasize the presence of upside risks to inflation.  The employment report for
November will be published the day after this document is completed; a revised draft
of Table 1 will be circulated if warranted by those data.
(11) If the Committee views a combination of near-trend growth and a gradual
ebbing of core inflation over the next two years as the best attainable outcome in
current circumstances and continues to judge that the current stance of policy is
broadly consistent with achieving such an outcome, it might be attracted to
Alternative B.  With the real federal funds rate at the upper end of the range of
model-based estimates of its equilibrium value and a bit above the Greenbook-
consistent measure, policy might be viewed as applying slight restraint on economic
activity, helping to foster a reduction of inflation.  Some tentative signs suggest that
core inflation may be starting to moderate, and incoming data suggest that near-term
economic expansion may be a bit further below growth of potential output than had
previously been anticipated.  Even so, the possibility that inflation might not slow as
expected may remain the dominant concern for policy going forward.  The substantial
uncertainty regarding the dynamics of inflation implies a risk that recent rates of
inflation might persist even if output grows at only a moderate pace and energy prices
are broadly unchanged.  Moreover, the current tightness of the labor market—
evidenced both by the low unemployment rate in October and by widespread reports
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 40
Table 1: Alternative Language for the December FOMC Announcement
October FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise its 
target for the federal funds rate by 
25 basis points to 5½ percent.
Economic growth has slowed over the 
course of the year, partly reflecting a 
substantial cooling of the housing 
market.  Although that adjustment is 
ongoing and could have a more 
pronounced effect on growth in coming 
quarters than anticipated, the economy 
seems likely to expand at a moderate 
pace.
Economic growth has slowed over the 
course of the year, partly reflecting a 
substantial cooling of the housing 
market.  Although the recent pace of 
growth appears to have been somewhat 
more subdued than anticipated, the 
economy seems likely to expand at a 
moderate pace on balance over coming 
quarters.
Economic growth has slowed over 
the course of the year, partly 
reflecting a substantial cooling of 
the housing market.  The economy 
seems likely to expand at a moderate 
pace on balance over coming 
quarters.
Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly since the spring but 
remain elevated. The high level of 
resource utilization has the potential to 
sustain inflation pressures.  However, 
inflation pressures seem likely to 
moderate over time, reflecting reduced 
impetus from energy prices, contained 
inflation expectations, and the 
cumulative effects of monetary policy 
actions and other factors restraining 
aggregate demand.
Readings on core inflation have 
been elevated, and the high level of 
resource utilization has the potential 
to sustain inflation pressures.  
Inflation pressures seem likely to 
moderate over time, but the extent 
and speed of that moderation are 
uncertain.  In these circumstances, 
the Committee believed that an 
additional firming of policy was 
appropriate to foster the 
achievement of price stability.
In these circumstances, future policy 
adjustments will depend on the evolution 
of the outlook for both inflation and 
economic growth, as implied by 
incoming information.
Assessment of 
Risk
Although the Committee both seeks 
and expects a gradual reduction in 
inflation, it continues to view the 
risks to that outcome as to the 
upside.  The extent and timing of 
any additional firming that may be 
needed to address these risks will 
depend on the evolution of the 
outlook for both inflation and 
economic growth, as implied by 
incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 40
of labor shortages for a range of occupations—might be seen as posing an upside risk
to the Committee’s desired moderation in inflation.  Even if the likelihood of a
deterioration in inflation performance relative to expectations is not thought to be
significantly greater than that of a corresponding deterioration in economic growth,
the Committee might judge that an erosion in inflation outcomes would be more
costly and thus view the upside risks to inflation as the greater concern for policy.
(12) In light of the recent data and the revision to the staff’s projection for near-
term growth, the Committee may wish to make two changes to the discussion of
economic growth in the policy statement accompanying Alternative B.  First, the
extent of the decline in housing activity in recent quarters means that it may now be
more appropriate to refer to the cooling of the housing market as “substantial.”
Second, the statement could acknowledge that “the recent pace of growth appears to
have been somewhat more subdued than anticipated…”  Even so, the Committee
could note that “the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace on balance
over coming quarters.”  The inclusion of the phrase “on balance” allows for the
possibility that measured GDP growth in the current and subsequent quarter may be
notably below trend before rebounding thereafter.  With the prospects for inflation
largely unchanged, there appears to be little reason to alter the inflation paragraph
from that in the October statement.  Likewise, the statement could conclude by
repeating the risk assessment from the previous statement.
(13) An announcement along the lines of Alternative B is unlikely to prompt a
significant market reaction.  Money market futures and options indicate that investors
assign essentially no probability to a change in the target rate at the December
meeting.  And the Desk’s survey indicates that the majority of primary dealers expect
that the accompanying statement will not differ significantly from the October
announcement apart from some modest updating of the paragraph characterizing
economic growth, though a minority anticipate language that points to some
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 40
downside risks to the growth outlook while still citing upside risks to inflation.
Although the statement proposed for Alternative B does not explicitly recognize risks
to growth, it seems consistent with the broad thrust of these expectations.
(14)  If the data released over the intermeeting period have caused members to
revise their assessment of the distribution of possible outcomes for inflation and
economic growth such that the risks are now thought to be more balanced, the
Committee may prefer the policy choice and wording of Alternative A.  The sharper
adjustment in residential investment implied by the incoming data, combined with the
continuing high level of inventories in the auto sector and the softer tone of recent
spending and production indicators more generally, might be seen as increasing the
downside risks to economic growth.  Members may also see some possibility that the
recent easing of financial conditions, and the associated stimulus to economic growth,
could be short lived, as illustrated in the “Tighter financial conditions” scenario
presented in the Greenbook.  Moreover, the staff’s projection of relatively sluggish
near-term expansion might cause the Committee to worry that such downside risks, if
they materialized, could lead to a disproportionate slowdown in growth.  At the same
time, the Committee’s confidence that core inflation will decline may have been
boosted by the improvement in some measures of core inflation, the downward
revisions to data on increases in hourly compensation and unit labor costs earlier this
year, and the absence so far of substantial renewed upward pressure on oil prices.
The Committee may also place some weight on the possibility that inflation could
slow more quickly than in the staff forecast, either because the general persistence of
inflation may have declined over the past decade or because the recent pickup in core
inflation was associated importantly with increases in shelter costs, which might fall
back relatively sharply if the ongoing adjustment of the housing market leads to a
marked increase in the supply of rental accommodation.  Finally, as noted earlier,
maintaining the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent over the next few quarters would be
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 40
broadly consistent with the Committee’s past behavior as captured in the estimated
policy rules.
(15) To acknowledge the downside risks to growth, the statement accompanying
Alternative A would note that the ongoing adjustment of the housing market could
have a “more pronounced effect on growth in coming quarters than anticipated.”
The Committee may also wish to recognize the slight decline in some measures of
core inflation in recent months by noting that “Readings on core inflation have
improved modestly since the spring.”  Even so, the statement would stress that
readings on core inflation “remain elevated.”  Given the competing risks to inflation
and growth, the risk assessment would simply note that “In these circumstances,
future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.”
(16) Although market participants expect the current target for the federal funds
rate to be maintained at this meeting, they generally do not expect a statement that
suggests that the Committee views the risks to economic growth and inflation as
balanced and is no longer predisposed towards policy firming.  Market participants are
likely to interpret such a statement as boosting the likelihood that the Committee will
begin easing the stance of policy early next year.  Short- and intermediate-term yields
would probably decline moderately, but any drop in long-term yields would likely be
relatively small.  The recent slide in the foreign exchange value of the dollar could be
extended, and stock prices might rally.
(17) In contrast, the Committee may now see it as unlikely that inflation will
decline at an acceptable pace should the current stance of policy be maintained and
hence judge it necessary to take further policy action, as in the 25 basis point firming
of Alternative C.  In particular, members may believe that the tightness in labor
markets means that inflation may fail to decline, and could even rise, as illustrated in
the “Greater wage acceleration” scenario presented in the Greenbook.  In addition,
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 40
the recent easing of financial conditions could impart significant stimulus to aggregate
demand, augmenting pressure on resources.  Also, some members may judge that
long-term inflation expectations are higher than would be consistent with an
appreciable decline in inflation from recent rates and that monetary policy needs to
tighten to help foster a reduction in these expectations.  Even if members think that
the staff’s forecast for core inflation to edge gradually lower is reasonable, they may
consider the extent and pace of that expected decline, in which core PCE inflation is
projected to remain above 2 percent through 2008, to be unacceptable, and hence see
further policy firming as necessary.  In the medium-term strategies presented earlier,
the optimal policy path associated with an inflation objective of 1½ percent involves
raising the federal funds rate to about 6 percent over the next year.
(18) The description of the prospects for growth in the statement associated
with Alternative C could be identical to that suggested for Alternative B.  However, in
the inflation paragraph, rather than listing the various factors contributing to the
expected moderation in inflation, the Committee could indicate that “Inflation
pressures seem likely to moderate over time, but the extent and speed of that
moderation are uncertain.”  The discussion of inflation could conclude by stating that
“In these circumstances, the Committee believed that an additional firming of policy
was appropriate to foster the achievement of price stability.”  And if, despite the
firming in policy, the Committee remained concerned that inflation would not
moderate as desired, it could underscore its commitment to price stability by
modifying the first sentence of the risk assessment to note that “Although the
Committee both seeks and expects a gradual reduction in inflation, it continues to
view the risks to that outcome as to the upside.”
(19) The firming of the stance of policy envisaged under Alternative C and the
accompanying statement would come as a considerable surprise to the markets.
Investors would likely revise up sharply their expectations for the path of policy over
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 40
the next year or so.  Short- and intermediate-term nominal and real yields would rise
markedly.  Longer-term nominal yields would likely rise by less or could even fall if
investors concluded that the FOMC had a lower objective for inflation than they had
previously thought.  With real rates higher, the foreign exchange value of the dollar
would likely rise, and equity prices would decline.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(20) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 is projected to grow about 5 percent in
both 2007 and 2008, largely unchanged from the October forecast.  Given the flat
path assumed for the federal funds rate, the restraining effects on money demand of
previous policy tightenings will probably have run their course by early 2007.  As a
result, M2 is projected to rise broadly in line with nominal income.  Liquid deposits—
the largest share of M2—are expected to accelerate gradually as deposit rates on these
assets continue to catch up with the earlier increases in market rates.  Small time
deposits and retail money funds, which have been growing rapidly because their yields
follow market rates closely, are forecast to decelerate noticeably.  Currency is
projected to continue to expand moderately.
(21) Growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is expected to slow to an
annual rate of around 6½ percent in 2007 and 2008, down from about 7½ percent in
mortgage debt, mirroring the ongoing adjustment in the housing market.  The growth
of business debt is also expected to ease slightly, owing to some slowing in net equity
retirements.  Federal debt is projected to expand at a 6 percent pace over the next two
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 40
Directive and Balance of Risks Statement
(22) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around ________ 5¼ percent.
Risk Assessments
A. In these circumstances, future policy adjustments will depend on the
evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as
implied by incoming information.
B. Nonetheless, the Committee judges that some inflation risks remain.
The extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to
address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
C. Although the Committee both seeks and expects a gradual reduction in
inflation, it continues to view the risks to that outcome as to the upside.
The extent and timing of any additional firming that may be needed to
address these risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 40
