Content last modified 02/09/2012.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
JUNE 22, 2006
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 22, 2006
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Although the decision at the May 10 FOMC meeting to raise the target
federal funds rate 25 basis points to 5 percent was widely expected, the indication in
the accompanying statement that “some further policy firming may yet be needed”
reportedly prompted financial market participants to raise their near-term policy
expectations slightly that afternoon.1  Over the intermeeting period, data releases on
economic activity generally came in soft relative to expectations, while readings on
inflation surprised to the upside, apparently leaving investors less optimistic about
prospects for growth and more concerned about inflation.  Those inflation concerns
seemed to be assuaged by the release of the FOMC minutes and speeches by several
Federal Reserve policymakers.  The expected federal funds rate at the end of 2007
rose about 25 basis points (Chart 1).  As judged from federal funds futures quotes and
the Desk’s survey of primary dealers, market participants appear virtually certain that
the FOMC will hike the target funds rate 25 basis points at its upcoming meeting, and
place high odds on another such increase at the August meeting (see the box
“Probabilities of Alternative Trajectories of Monetary Policy”).  The expected policy
path currently peaks near 5½ percent toward the end of this year and then slopes
down gradually thereafter.  Policy uncertainty, as measured by volatilities implied by
Eurodollar options, remained low over the intermeeting period, as did the implied
volatility of longer-term Treasury rates.
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
June Sept. Dec. Mar. May July Oct.
2006 2007
June 22, 2006
May 9, 2006
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Basis points
Change in Implied One-Year Forward Treasury
Rates since Last FOMC
Years Ahead
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
Next Five Years
Five-to-Ten Years Ahead
Inflation Compensation*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves, and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
Spot WTI (left scale)
Metals Index* (right scale)
*Source. Journal of Commerce.
Oil and Commodity Prices
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 41
Probabilities of Alternative Trajectories of Monetary Policy 
 
On the assumption that at each of its next two meetings the Committee will choose either to 
leave the target federal funds rate unchanged or to increase it by 25 basis points, there are 
four possible near-term paths for monetary policy.  Quotes on federal funds futures and 
options can be used to solve for the implied probabilities of each of these possible paths.  
The time series of these probabilities since just before the last FOMC meeting are shown in 
the chart below.   
 
Around the time of the May FOMC meeting, market participants apparently placed better-
than-even odds on the target federal funds rate being left unchanged at both the June and 
August meetings.  However, the probability of this outcome subsequently fell substantially, 
especially following the Chairman’s comments at the International Monetary Conference, 
and it is now close to zero.  Early in the intermeeting period, investors had viewed a pause in 
June followed by a rate hike in August as possible, but the assessed chance of that outcome 
has dwindled to zero.  The odds of a rate hike in June followed by a pause in August rose 
over most of the intermeeting period, and now stand a bit below 40 percent.  The 
probability of rate hikes at both the June and August meetings has climbed, especially 
following the release of May CPI data, and is now over 60 percent.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 41
(2) Nominal Treasury yields showed mixed changes, on balance, over the
intermeeting period:  Two-year yields rose about 25 basis points, consistent with the
increase in near-term policy expectations.  However, forward rates at maturities of
five years and beyond were little changed, leaving ten-year coupon yields up only
about 10 basis points.  Inflation compensation calculated from yields on nominal and
indexed Treasury securities fell about 10 basis points across the maturity spectrum.
This drop, which was consistent with a decline in some survey measures of inflation
expectations and reversed most of the increase posted earlier in the spring, appears to
have been a reaction to statements by Federal Reserve officials suggesting a
willingness to tighten policy in order to contain inflation risks, as well as to soft
readings on economic activity and perhaps also to lower commodity prices.
(3) The expectation of less robust economic performance and more substantial
near-term monetary policy tightening apparently led investors to mark down their
longer-term outlook for corporate earnings and, perhaps, to require more
compensation for risk.  Major stock price indexes fell 5 to 9 percent over the
intermeeting period, and a rough measure of the equity premium—the gap between
the twelve-month forward trend earnings-price ratio and the real perpetuity Treasury
yield—widened somewhat (Chart 2).  Actual and options-implied volatilities on
equities jumped over the intermeeting period, in contrast to implied volatilities of
interest rates.  Spreads over Treasuries on investment-grade corporate bonds rose
about 15 basis points, and those on speculative-grade issues rose around 35 basis
points, but both stayed narrow by the standards of recent years.  Broad measures of
corporate credit quality generally continued to be favorable over the intermeeting
period, and expected year-ahead defaults remained very low.
(4) Investors’ confidence in the strength of the global expansion also flagged
during the intermeeting period, a shift that was associated with substantial fluctuations
in financial markets around the world.  Share prices in many industrial countries
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 41
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
Wilshire
Nasdaq
Stock Prices
Real Long-Term Treasury Yield*
*Perpetuity Treasury yield minus Philadelphia Fed 10-year expected inflation.
Note. + Denotes the latest observation using daily interest rates and stock 
prices and latest earnings data from I/B/E/S.
Equity Valuation
Nov-
Dec
Dec-
Jan
Jan-
Mar
Mar-
May
May-
Jun
Realized
Implied
* Realized volatility is constructed from five-minute returns. Implied
volatility is the period-average of daily implied volatilites calculated
from options prices
Realized and Implied S&P 500 Volatility over Recent
Intermeeting Periods*
Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr.
2004 2005 2006
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Bond Default and C&I Loan Delinquency Rates
Percent of outstandings
C&I loan delinquency rate
    (Call Report)
Bond default rate*
*6-month moving average, from Moody’s Investors Service.
Percent of liabilities
Expected Year-Ahead Defaults*
*Firm-level estimates of year-ahead defaults from KMV corporation, weighted
by firm liabilities as a percent of total liabilities, excluding defaulted firms.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 41
recorded net declines of 6 to 11 percent (Chart 3).  Yields on long-term government
securities were little changed on net in most major industrial countries, but in Japan
they dropped 15 basis points.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar varied
modestly over the period, declining in late May in reaction to the release of softer-
than-expected U.S. economic data but more than recouping that loss this month in
response to changes in relative returns associated partly with expressions of the
FOMC’s resolve against inflationary pressures.  BOJ authorities re-emphasized that
any rise in policy rates will be gradual, and the dollar rose 5 percent versus the yen.
Against the euro, the dollar gained about 1¾ percent over the period, as market
participants interpreted ECB officials’ statements associated with the 25 basis point
tightening in June as consistent with a slightly lower path for policy going forward
than had been anticipated.  The dollar appreciated 1½ percent against the Canadian
dollar.  On balance, the trade-weighted exchange value of the dollar against major
foreign currencies rose about 2¼ percent over the intermeeting period.2
(5) The cooling in equity markets in industrial countries was accompanied by a
more pronounced chill in many emerging markets.  Brazilian and Mexican stock
prices fell 17 percent over the period, and their EMBI+ spreads widened about 30 to
declined sharply during the period.  The dollar gained 2 to 7 percent against currencies
of Asian countries with flexible exchange rates.  Central banks in a large number of
emerging market economies firmed policy during the period, in some cases by
substantially more than markets had expected.  Overall, the dollar rose 2¾ percent
against an index of currencies of our other important trading partners.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 41
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Jan. May Sept. Jan. May Sept. Jan. May
2004 2005 2006
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Industrial Countries
Jan. May Sept. Jan. May Sept. Jan. May
2004 2005 2006
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields (Nominal)
Jan. May Sept. Jan. May Sept. Jan. May
2004 2005 2006
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock Price Indexes
Emerging Market Economies
Jan. May Sept. Jan. May Sept. Jan. May
2004 2005 2006
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 41
(6) Growth of the debt of domestic nonfinancial businesses is estimated to
have slowed a little in the second quarter to an 8½ percent annual rate (Chart 4).  This
deceleration largely reflected some moderation in cash-financed mergers from the
extraordinary first-quarter pace.  Commercial paper issuance has been weak so far in
the current quarter, but growth of business loans has remained brisk.  Net issuance of
corporate bonds has continued to be solid.  In the household sector, debt growth this
quarter appears to have dropped below the double-digit rate that has prevailed for
some time, as further increases in mortgage rates, the softening in housing activity,
and a more moderate pace of house price appreciation have tempered the volume of
mortgage borrowing.  Consumer credit has remained tepid in the current quarter.  In
the federal sector, higher-than-anticipated tax payments have reduced the Treasury’s
borrowing needs.  Overall, domestic nonfinancial sector debt is estimated to have
decelerated notably to a 6¼ percent rate in the second quarter.
(7) M2 growth in the second quarter, at 2¾ percent, has been weak, as nominal
income growth has apparently slowed and the lagged cumulative effects of increases
in opportunity costs have continued to sap M2 demand.  Liquid deposits have
remained particularly soft, as rates on these instruments adjust only slowly to rising
short-term rates.  Overall, M2 velocity is estimated to have increased at an annual rate
of about 3 percent in the second quarter.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 41
Chart 4
Debt and Money
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of
Nonfinancial Business Debt $Billions
Monthly rate
Growth of Household Debt
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of House Prices
Percent
OFHEO Purchase
Only Index (s.a.)
Growth of Nonfinancial Debt
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2 p
p Projected.
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
p Preliminary.
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
p Projected.
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 41
Economic Outlook
(8) The staff’s reading of incoming data over the intermeeting period implies a
less favorable starting point for the Greenbook forecast, with real GDP growth
notably lower in the current quarter and inflation higher.  In particular, the bulge in
core inflation is expected to be a bit larger and to last longer than in the May
projection.  The staff forecast is now predicated on the federal funds rate moving up
to 5¼ percent in June and staying there over the next one-and-one-half years, up
¼ percentage point from the previous Greenbook.  The assumed policy path keeps
longer-term Treasury yields at around current levels over the forecast period.  In the
staff outlook, stock prices again rise at about a 6½ percent annual rate, but from a
level that is 7 percent lower than in May, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar
is again assumed to decline 2 percent per year, albeit from a somewhat higher point.
In line with futures quotes, the price of WTI crude oil rises $2.50 by the end of this
year and then is little changed in 2007, a path $4 to $6 lower than in the last forecast.
Against this backdrop, the staff projects real GDP to increase at a 2¾ percent pace
over the next six quarters, somewhat slower than in the May Greenbook.  With
output expanding more slowly than its potential, the unemployment rate rises to
NAIRU.  This slack offsets only part of the impetus from the upside surprises in
recent inflation releases, and the staff has increased its forecast of total and core PCE
inflation to 2½ percent in 2006 and 2¼ percent in 2007.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 41
Longer-Run Scenarios
(9) Longer-run aspects of monetary policy strategies—including the selection of
an inflation goal and the relative weight placed on different stabilization objectives—
can be informed by simulations of the FRB/US model.  This analysis starts by
constructing an illustrative extension of the current Greenbook projection through
inflation close to a long-run goal; keeping unemployment close to its natural rate; and
avoiding abrupt changes in the federal funds rate.3  The optimal path of the funds rate
is determined in part by the weights assigned to these three policy objectives as well as
by the goal for long-run inflation; it also depends importantly on the characteristics of
the extended outlook and the structure of the FRB/US model.  In this analysis,
policymakers and participants in financial markets, including those in the equity, bond,
and foreign exchange markets, are assumed to understand fully the forces shaping the
economic outlook, whereas households and firms are assumed to form their
expectations using more limited information.
(10) To get a sense of the recent evolution of the economic outlook, the first set
of simulations, shown in Chart 5, compares the policy that best accomplishes the
assumed objectives and macroeconomic outcomes implied by the current outlook
(solid lines) with those implied by the extended outlook at the time of the January
Bluebook (dashed lines).  In each of these simulations, policymakers are assumed to
have a long-run inflation goal of 1½ percent and to place equal weights on the three 
                                           
3 Specifically, policy aims to minimize the weighted sum of squared deviations in four-
quarter average core PCE inflation from a long-run goal, squared deviations in 
unemployment from its natural rate, and squared changes in the federal funds rate (all 
measured in percent).  For further information regarding the specification and characteristics 
of optimal policy in the FRB/US model, see the memo to the Committee, “Optimal-Control 
Monetary Policies” by Michael Kiley, Thomas Laubach, and Robert Tetlow, June 20, 2006.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 41
Chart 5
Optimal Policy Implications of Recent Changes in the Staff Outlook
June Outlook
January Outlook
Federal Funds Rate
Five-Year Real Interest Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Four-quarter average
Core PCE Inflation
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 41
stabilization objectives.4  As shown in the upper-left panel, the current outlook
implies a funds rate path that peaks a bit above 5½ percent in mid-2007 and then
declines gradually to about 4½ percent by 2010.  This policy keeps the five-year real
Treasury rate (upper-right panel) above its equilibrium value, thereby helping to
restrain aggregate demand and pushing the unemployment rate (center panel) nearly
½ percentage point above its natural rate later in the decade.  Although core PCE
inflation (bottom panel) exhibits a near-term bulge related to transitory effects of the
increase in energy prices, the persistent mild economic slack subsequently causes
inflation to decline very slowly towards the long-run goal of 1½ percent.  Chart 5 also
illustrates the implications of recent unfavorable price developments, with the implied
funds rate path through the end of next year having shifted up about a percentage
point since January.  Furthermore, because the staff sees recent inflation surprises as
only partly transitory, the medium-run policy tradeoff is less favorable now:  In these
simulations, both the unemployment rate and core inflation beyond 2007 are higher
than in the January outlook.
(11) The next set of simulations, shown in Chart 6, explores the implications of
alternative long-run inflation goals. The solid lines replicate those of Chart 5, in which
policymakers have an inflation goal of 1½ percent, while the dashed lines depict an
alternative in which policy pursues an inflation goal of 2 percent.  Both paths are
computed using the current Greenbook projection and put equal weight on the three
policy objectives.  Under a 2 percent goal, the funds rate remains near 5 percent
throughout the remainder of the decade.  This flat trajectory largely reflects the extent
to which core inflation is already close to the specified goal of 2 percent, looking
beyond the transitory effects of recent energy price increases.  Accordingly, the stance
of policy is set to keep the unemployment rate near its natural rate.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 41
Chart 6
Alternative Long-Run Inflation Objectives
Federal Funds Rate
Five-Year Real Interest Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Four-quarter average
Core PCE Inflation
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 41
(12) Chart 7 depicts the consequences of alternative choices regarding the
relative weights assigned to the three policy objectives.  The solid lines replicate those
of Chart 5, in which policymakers have an inflation goal of 1½ percent and place
equal weights on the objectives.  A potentially unattractive implication of this
specification is that attainment of the inflation objective is a long time coming, with
actual inflation at the end of the decade still nearly ½ percentage point above the goal.
The alternative scenario (dashed lines) depicts the outcome when policymakers place
greater emphasis on the inflation objective, perhaps because of concerns—not
explicitly considered in the model—that a persistent deviation of inflation from its
goal could damage the Federal Reserve’s credibility.5  In this case, the federal funds
rate climbs more steeply to 6 percent by the end of next year.  This policy generates
higher real interest rates that damp real activity more than under the baseline policy; as
a result, the unemployment rate rises above 5½ percent late next year and remains
above that level through 2010.  With this additional economic slack, actual inflation
exhibits a more distinct downward trajectory and approaches the long-run goal by the
end of the decade.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 41
Chart 7
Placing Greater Relative Weight on the Inflation Objective
Equal Weights
More Weight on Inflation Objective
Federal Funds Rate
Five-Year Real Interest Rate
Civilian Unemployment Rate
Four-quarter average
Core PCE Inflation
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 41
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(13) This Bluebook presents three alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized by the draft statements in Table 1.  Under Alternative A,
the Committee would leave the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting and
indicate that it would likely stay its hand for at least one more meeting before deciding
whether further tightening was necessary.  Under Alternative B, the Committee would
tighten 25 basis points and signal that an additional tightening in August was possible.
Alternative C combines a 50 basis point increase in the target with a statement
suggesting that additional firming was likely.
(14) If the Committee finds the staff forecast both probable and as desirable as
can be achieved in current circumstances, it may choose to tighten policy 25 basis
points at this meeting, as in Alternative B.  A 25 basis point firming would raise the
real federal funds rate somewhat above most of the staff’s estimates of the
equilibrium federal funds rate (Chart 8), a moderately restraining stance of policy that
might be viewed as appropriate given the worsening of the inflation outlook.  Such a
firming might also be seen as necessary to contain the risk that the near-term bulge in
inflation could become entrenched in expectations.  In that regard, members might be
heartened by the fact that the building market expectation of additional policy firming
in recent weeks was associated with some apparent decline in inflation expectations—
progress that they might be loathe to surrender by surprising investors with an easier-
than-anticipated policy action.  The current configuration of asset prices, however,
might be judged as embedding too great a likelihood of policy tightening at the
August meeting.  If so, the Committee would presumably seek to craft its statement to
convey an assessment that an additional move in August was possible but perhaps not
as likely as currently anticipated in financial markets.
(15) Under Alternative B, the rationale paragraph could indicate that economic
growth appears to be moderating.  The Committee could list the developments adding
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 41
Table 1: Alternative Language for the June FOMC Announcement
May FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to leave its target for the 
federal funds rate unchanged at 5 
percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 
5¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise its 
target for the federal funds rate by 
50 basis points to 5½ percent.
Recent indicators suggest that 
economic growth is moderating 
considerably from its quite strong pace 
earlier this year.
Recent indicators suggest that 
economic growth is moderating from 
its quite strong pace earlier this year.
Recent indicators suggest that 
economic growth is moderating 
from its quite strong pace earlier 
this year, but the level of resource 
utilization remains relatively high.
The Committee views the pickup in 
core inflation this spring as 
unwelcome but likely to be transitory.  
Ongoing productivity gains, anchored 
inflation expectations, and moderate 
economic growth should reduce 
inflation in coming quarters.
Readings on core inflation have been 
elevated in recent months.  Ongoing 
productivity gains have held down the 
rise in unit labor costs, and inflation 
expectations remain contained.  
However, the high levels of resource 
utilization and of the prices of energy 
and other commodities have the 
potential to sustain inflation pressures.
Ongoing productivity gains and 
contained inflation expectations 
should restrain inflation going 
forward.  However, recent readings 
on core inflation have been 
elevated, which the Committee 
views as unwelcome.
The Committee judges that the risks to 
the attainment of price stability remain 
tilted to the upside but recognizes that 
the moderation in the growth of 
aggregate demand, along with other 
forces, should work to contain 
inflation going forward.  While the 
Committee judges that some further 
policy firming may yet be needed to 
address inflation risks, considerable 
uncertainty attends the outlook, 
making it prudent to await the 
accumulation of additional 
information.
Although the moderation in the 
growth of aggregate demand should 
help to contain inflation pressures, the 
Committee judges that the risks to the 
attainment of price stability remain 
tilted to the upside.  The extent and 
timing of any further policy action will 
depend importantly on the evolution 
of the economic outlook as implied by 
incoming information.
In order to foster price stability and 
sustainable economic growth, the 
Committee seeks a medium-term 
decline in core inflation from its 
recent elevated levels.  The 
Committee judges that some further 
policy firming may yet be needed to 
accomplish this outcome.  The 
extent and timing of any such 
firming will depend importantly on 
the evolution of the economic 
outlook as implied by incoming 
information.
Assessment of 
Risk
In any event, the Committee will 
respond to changes in economic 
prospects as needed to support the 
attainment of sustainable economic 
growth and price stability.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 41
Chart 8
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval
90 percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.3 2.2
   Small structural model 2.6 2.6
   Large model (FRB/US) 3.9 3.8
   Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.3 - 4.6(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.3 - 5.5(
Greenbook-consistent measure 2.6 2.8
Medium-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.2 2.2
   Small structural model 2.4 2.4
   Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.4 - 3.2(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.7 - 3.8(
TIPS-based factor model 2.2 2.2
Memo
   Actual real federal funds rate 2.83 2.74
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 41
Equilibrium Real Rate Chart: Explanatory Notes 
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be projected to return output to its 
potential level over time.  For the first three measures listed below, the short-run equilibrium rate is defined as the 
rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the corresponding model’s projection of the 
economy.  For the first two measures, the medium-run concept is the value of the real federal funds rate projected 
to keep output at potential in seven years under the assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual and 
potential output into line in the short run and then keeps them equal thereafter.  The TIPS-based factor model 
measure provides an estimate of market expectations for the real federal funds rate seven years ahead.  The actual 
real federal funds rate is constructed as the difference between the nominal rate and realized inflation, where the 
nominal rate is measured as the quarterly average of the observed federal funds rate, and realized inflation is 
given by the log difference between the staff’s estimate of the core PCE price index and its lagged value four 
quarters earlier.  For the current quarter, the nominal rate is specified as the target federal funds rate on the 
Bluebook publication date.
Measure Description
Single-equation 
Model
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is based on an 
estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current value of the output gap and 
its lagged values as well as the lagged values of the real federal funds rate.  In light of this 
model’s simple structure, the short-run measure of the equilibrium real rate depends only 
on the recent position of output relative to potential, and the medium-run measure is 
virtually constant.
Small Structural 
Model
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for five variables: the output 
gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus, the trend growth rate of output, and 
the real bond yield.  Unlike the estimates from the single-equation model, values of the 
equilibrium real rate also depend directly on conditions associated with output growth, 
fiscal policy, and capital markets.
Large Model 
(FRB/US)
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale econometric 
model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of economic factors, some of 
which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables.  These 
projections make use of several simple forecasting rules which are appropriate for the 
three-year horizon relevant for the short-run concept but are less sensible over longer 
horizons.  Thus, we report only the short-run measure for the FRB/US model.
Greenbook-
consistent
Measures of the equilibrium real rate cannot be directly obtained from the Greenbook 
forecast, because the Greenbook is not based on a formal model.  Rather, we use the 
FRB/US model in conjunction with an extended version of the Greenbook forecast to 
derive a Greenbook-consistent measure.  FRB/US is first add-factored so that its 
simulation matches the extended Greenbook forecast, and then a second simulation is run 
off this baseline to determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output 
gap.  The medium-run concept of the equilibrium real rate is not computed because it 
requires a relatively long extension of the Greenbook forecast.
TIPS-based 
Factor Model
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’ expectations of 
the future path of real interest rates, but also include term and liquidity premiums.  The 
TIPS-based measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven-year-ahead 
instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the Bluebook publication 
date.  This forward rate is adjusted to remove estimates of the term and liquidity 
premiums based on a three-factor arbitrage-free term-structure model applied to TIPS 
yields, nominal yields, and inflation.  Because TIPS indexation is based on the total CPI, 
this measure is also adjusted for the medium-term difference—projected at 40 basis 
points—between total CPI inflation and core PCE inflation.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 41
to inflation pressure, including taut resource markets and elevated oil and commodity
prices, and acknowledge the recent pickup in core inflation.  The rationale could also
unit labor costs and the continued containment of inflation expectations.  To indicate
that further tightening was possible but not certain, the assessment of risk could note
that, while forces that should restrain inflation were at work, the risks to inflation
continued to be on the upside.  The Committee could again note that any further
policy action will depend on the evolution of the economic outlook.
(16) Market participants are somewhat more confident that the Committee will
tighten at its August meeting than the wording of Alternative B suggests.  As a result,
investors would trim back their near-term policy expectations, and short-term interest
rates would probably decline slightly.  The policy surprise might add to expected
volatility, as market participants became a little less sure of the predictability of the
Committee’s behavior.  The downward revision to expectations would tend to lower
longer-term yields, but some of that decline might be offset by a backup in term
premiums.  Stock prices would likely rally some, and downward pressure on the
foreign exchange value of the dollar could emerge.
(17) The Committee might instead desire a more forceful policy response to the
deterioration in the inflation outlook and find some appeal in the 50 basis point
tightening of Alternative C.  Although measures of inflation expectations have edged
lower on balance in recent weeks, they have risen since earlier this year, potentially
adding momentum to actual inflation.  Moreover, resource utilization appears to be
relatively high, and some policymakers have noted that inflation is already above a
range they see as consistent with price stability.  In these circumstances, the
Committee might be concerned by the risk that the recently higher readings on
inflation could get embedded in inflation expectations along the lines of the “rising
inflation expectations” alternative simulation in the Greenbook.  The Committee may
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 41
also favor a more sizable move now so as to make more rapid progress toward
moving inflation lower.  In the alternative policy simulation presented earlier, the
pursuit of a 1½ percent inflation target requires additional tightening in the near term,
especially so if inflation deviations receive a higher relative weight in the FOMC’s
objective function.  If policymakers believed that additional firming, beyond a 50 basis
point policy move at this meeting, probably would be necessary, they may find it
appropriate to indicate a fairly high likelihood that further tightening was in train.
Such an indication may be particularly appealing if firmer financial conditions were
judged to be desirable to make satisfactory progress toward the Committee’s
(18) The rationale paragraph under Alternative C could place more emphasis on
the recent unwelcome pickup in inflation while noting that productivity gains and
contained inflation expectations are restraining inflation.  To signal that further
tightening is likely, the risk assessment could indicate that additional policy action may
be needed to reduce core inflation to a more desirable level.  So that the Committee
would not become locked into additional tightening even if there were additional
elevated monthly readings on core inflation, the assessment could specify that the
reduction in core inflation was sought in the medium term and repeat that the extent
and timing of firming would depend on the evolution of the economic outlook.
(19) The announcement of Alternative C would lead market participants to
revise upward their outlook for the path for policy, and short- and intermediate-term
interest rates would rise as a result.  Longer-term interest rates could also rise,
especially if investors concluded that the FOMC was much more worried about
underlying inflation than previously thought.  Stock prices would fall substantially, and
the foreign exchange value of the dollar would increase.
(20) If, in contrast, the Committee is particularly concerned by the soft tone to
the incoming data on spending, it might feel that the best course of action at this
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 41
meeting would be to leave the stance of policy unchanged, as in Alternative A.  With
news on spending and prices pointing in different directions, the Committee could
combine such a policy move with statement language implying that policy would likely
be on hold in the near term to await additional information, although policy firming
was likely at some point down the road.  Leaving policy unchanged at the current
meeting would be consistent with the prescriptions from a number of simple and
estimated policy rules (Charts 9 and 10).  Indeed, most of those rules call for an easier
policy than currently priced into financial markets, suggesting that the level of the
federal funds rate may have already been brought up enough to prevent an
unsustainable spurt in economic growth.  Staff estimates of equilibrium real interest
rates indicate that cumulative tightening to date has effectively removed policy
accommodation.  Given the lags in policy, the easing of pressures on resources
expected to result from this prior tightening, together with the anticipated flattening
out of energy prices, may be seen as likely to be sufficient to point inflation down
toward an acceptable range.  Moreover, the Committee may see significant downside
risk to the outlook if it views the recent marked declines of indicators of housing
activity as possible harbingers of a prolonged and sizable reduction in housing
construction and household spending along the lines of the “housing slump”
Greenbook scenario.
(21)  To explain a choice to leave policy unchanged, the rationale paragraph
could emphasize the considerable slowdown in economic activity.  That slowing,
anchored inflation expectations, and subdued advances in labor costs could be cited
as reasons why the recently elevated readings on core inflation, while unwelcome,
should prove transitory.  The risk assessment could reflect the Committee’s concerns
by indicating downside risks to growth and upside risks to inflation, which would
justify a pause in policy to await additional information bearing on the outlook.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 41
Chart 9
Information from Estimated Policy Rules and Financial Markets
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Outcome-based rule
   70 percent confidence interval
   90 percent confidence interval
Forecast-based rule
Estimated Policy Rules
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Market-based expectations
   70 percent confidence interval
   90 percent confidence interval
Market Expectations
Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 41
Chart 10
Policy Paths under Alternative Inflation Objectives
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Baseline Taylor rule
Aggressive Taylor rule
First-difference rule
Actual and Greenbook assumption
Baseline Taylor rule
Aggressive Taylor rule
First-difference rule
Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 41
Policy Rule Charts: Explanatory Notes
For the rules described below, it denotes the federal funds rate for quarter t, while the explanatory 
variables include the staff’s estimate of trailing four-quarter core PCE inflation (πt), its forecasts  
of inflation two and three quarters ahead (πt+2|t and πt+3|t), its assessment of the current output gap 
( *t ty y− ), its one-quarter-ahead forecast of the output gap ( *1| 1|t t t ty y+ +− ), its three-quarter-ahead 
forecast of annual average GDP growth relative to potential ( 4 4 *3| 3|t t t ty y+ +Δ − Δ ), and the assumed value 
of policymakers’ long-run inflation objective ( *π ).    
Rule prescriptions are computed using dynamic simulations of the FRB/US model, implemented as 
though the rule is followed starting at this FOMC meeting.  This quarter’s prescription is a weighted 
average of the actual value of the federal funds rate thus far this quarter and the value obtained from the 
FRB/US model simulations using the timing of this meeting within the quarter to determine the weights.  
Finally, for the forecast-based rule and the first-difference rule, it should be noted that prescriptions near 
the end of the Greenbook horizon also depend on an extension of the Greenbook baseline forecast. 
  
Estimated Policy Rules:  Estimation is performed using real-time quarterly data taken from the 
Greenbook and staff memoranda closest to the middle of each quarter.  The specific lag structure of the 
outcome-based rule is chosen according to the Bayesian information criterion over the sample period 
starting from 1988Q1.  The forecast-based rule differs from the outcome-based rule in that it also 
permits staff forecasts of inflation and the output gap to be among the explanatory variables.  
Confidence intervals, shown only for the outcome-based rule, are based on stochastic simulations of the 
FRB/US model, where the shocks are randomly drawn from the set of model equations residuals for the 
period 1986-2004.  The following table indicates the specification of each rule and its root mean squared 
error (RMSE) over the sample 1993:1-2005:4.  
Outcome-based Rule
it = 0.27 + 1.14it-1 – 0.36it-2 + 0.32πt
+ 0.60( *t ty y− ) – 0.40( *1 1t ty y− −− )  
.19
Forecast-based Rule
it = 0.24 + 1.14it-1 – 0.35it-2 + 0.31πt+2|t
+ 0.42( *1| 1|t t t ty y+ +− ) – 0.23( *1 1t ty y− −− )  
.18
Market Expectations:  The expected funds rate path is based on quotes from fed funds and Eurodollar 
futures, and the confidence intervals are obtained from options on those futures.  
 
Simple Policy Rules:  The following table indicates the specification of each rule and its RMSE over 
the sample 1993:1-2005:4 for two inflation objectives. 
  π*=1.5 π*=2
Baseline Taylor Rule it = 2 + πt + 0.5(πt – *π ) + 0.5( *t ty y− ) .99 .99
Aggressive Taylor Rule it = 2 + πt + 0.5(πt – *π ) + ( *t ty y− )  .62 .63
First-difference Rule it = it-1 + 0.5(πt+3|t – *π ) + 0.5( 4 4 *3| 3|t t t ty y+ +Δ − Δ ) .51 .44
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 41
(22) Markets would be surprised, to say the least, if the Committee left the stance
of policy unchanged, and short-term interest rates would drop.  Longer-term interest
rates could rise if market participants concluded that the FOMC was willing to
tolerate a higher level of inflation over time than had previously been thought and so
marked up inflation compensation.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar would
probably fall.  Stock prices likely would rise, given the lower real interest rates.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(23) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 is expected to expand just 4 percent in
past policy tightenings (Table 2).  With short-term interest rates unchanged after the
June meeting, opportunity costs gradually level out, and M2 growth picks up to
(24) Growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to drop from
reflects the contours of the staff outlook for nominal GDP and, in the near term, a
reduction in federal debt growth owing to the surprisingly strong tax receipts this
spring.  In addition, merger and acquisition activity is expected to moderate next year,
contributing to a decline in business borrowing.  Moreover, past increases in home
mortgage rates and the projected deceleration of home prices restrain household debt
growth over the forecast horizon.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 41
No Change*
Raise 25 bp/
Greenbook** Raise 50 bp***
Monthly Growth Rates
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
* No change in in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change thereafter.
** Increase of 25 basis points in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change
thereafter.  This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook
*** Increase of 50 basis points in the target federal funds rate at this meeting and no change
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
(25) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/increasing/REDUCING the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around ________________ 5 percent.
Risk Assessments
A. The Committee judges that the risks to the attainment of price stability
remain tilted to the upside but recognizes that the moderation in the
growth of aggregate demand, along with other forces, should work to
contain inflation going forward.  While the Committee judges that some
further policy firming may yet be needed to address inflation risks,
considerable uncertainty attends the outlook, making it prudent to await
the accumulation of additional information.
B. Although the moderation in the growth of aggregate demand should
help to contain inflation pressures, the Committee judges that the risks
to the attainment of price stability remain tilted to the upside.  The
extent and timing of any further policy action will depend importantly
on the evolution of the economic outlook as implied by incoming
information.  In any event, the Committee will respond to changes in
economic prospects as needed to support the attainment of sustainable
economic growth and price stability.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 41
C. In order to foster price stability and sustainable economic growth, the
Committee seeks a medium-term decline in core inflation from its recent
elevated levels.  The Committee judges that some further policy firming
may yet be needed to accomplish this outcome.  The extent and timing
of any such firming will depend importantly on the evolution of the
economic outlook as implied by incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 41
Appendix Chart 1
Treasury Yield Curve
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Spread Between Ten−year Treasury Yield and Federal Funds Rate
June 22, 2006   
May 9, 2006
Treasury Yield Curve*
Maturity in Years
*Smoothed yield curve estimated from off−the−run Treasury coupon securities.  Yields shown are those on notional par 
Treasury securities with semi−annual coupons.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 41
Appendix Chart 2
Dollar Exchange Rate Indexes
Ratio scale
March 1973=100
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Major 
Currencies
Ratio scale
March 1973=100
Major
Currencies
Other Important
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 41
Appendix Chart 3
Stock Indexes
Ratio scale
1941−43=10
* Based on trailing four−quarter earnings.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
P/E Ratio*
S&P 500
Ratio scale
1941−43=10
* Deflated by the CPI.
+ Denotes most recent weekly value.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
S&P 500*
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 41
Appendix Chart 4
One−Year Real Interest Rates
* Mean value of respondents.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Michigan Survey)*
* ASA/NBER quarterly survey until 1990:Q1; Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
thereafter.  Median value of respondents.
GDP Deflator
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less One−Year Inflation Expectations (Philadelphia Fed)*
+ Denotes most recent weekly Treasury constant maturity yield less most recent inflation expectation.
Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
One−Year Treasury Constant Maturity Yield Less Change in the Core CPI from Three Months Prior
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 41
Appendix Chart 5
Long−Term Real Interest Rates*
Real Ten−Year Treasury Yields
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
Ten−year TIPS yield
Nominal and Real Corporate Bond Rates
Nominal rate on Moody’s
A−rated corporate bonds
Real rate using
Philadelphia Fed Survey
Real rate using
Michigan Survey
* For real rates, measures using the Philadelphia Fed Survey employ the ten−year inflation expectations from the
                Blue Chip Survey until April 1991 and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Survey of Professional Forecasters
                thereafter (median value of respondents).  Measures using the Michigan Survey employ the five− to ten−year
                inflation expectations from that survey (mean value of respondents).
+ For TIPS and nominal corporate rate, denotes the most recent weekly value. For other real rate series, denotes
                the most recent weekly nominal yield less the most recent inflation expectation.
                Note. Blue shaded regions denote NBER−dated recessions.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 41
Appendix Chart 6
Commodity Price Measures
Journal of Commerce Index
Total
Metals
CRB Spot Industrials
CRB Futures
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 41
Appendix Chart 7
Growth of M2
Nominal M2
Real M2
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 37 of 41
Appendix Chart 8
Inflation Indicator Based on M2
Implicit GDP
price deflator (P) Long-run equilibrium
price level (P*)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 38 of 41
Short-term Long-term
Federal
funds
Treasury bills
secondary market
CDs
secondary
Comm.
paper Off-the-run Treasury yields Indexed yields Moody’s
Municipal
Bond
Buyer
Conventional home
mortgages
primary market
