Content last modified 02/07/2013.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
JUNE 21, 2007
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 21, 2007
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The anticipated path of the federal funds rate embedded in financial market
prices rotated up sharply over the intermeeting period (Chart 1).  Only a small portion
of this change, however, was posted on the heels of the May 9th FOMC meeting.  The
decision to leave the federal funds rate target unchanged at 5¼ percent accorded with
market expectations, but some market participants were reportedly surprised by the
retention of the assessment that inflation was “somewhat elevated.”1  There was little
market response to the publication of the minutes of the meeting.  Over the
intermeeting period, however, investors seemed to reappraise their beliefs that the
economic expansion would slow and that monetary policy easing would be
forthcoming, based in part on monetary policy communications and the release of
some more-favorable-than-expected economic data in the United States and abroad.
(2) Futures quotes indicate that market participants now expect the FOMC to
leave the target federal funds rate unchanged through the end of this year and see only
about 25 basis points of easing by the end of 2008, about 60 basis points less than at
the time of the May FOMC meeting.  As indicated in the Desk’s recent survey,
primary dealers also envision policy being on hold for some time, with a number of
firms abandoning their forecasts for rate cuts this year.  These revisions were
associated with a marked decline in the weight attached to lower interest rates in the
option-implied distributions of future federal funds rates, and measures of uncertainty
about the near-term path of policy narrowed to historical lows.
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
June 21, 2007
May 8, 2007
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Implied Distribution of Federal Funds Rate Six 
Months Ahead*
Recent:  06/21/2007 
Last FOMC:  05/08/2007
*Derived from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, with term premium 
and other adjustments to estimate expectations for the federal funds rate.
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)*
Implied Volatilities
*Width of a 90 percent confidence interval estimated from the term
structures for the expected federal funds rate and implied volatility.
May
FOMC
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
May
FOMC
Basis points
Change in Implied One-Year Forward Treasury Rates
since Last FOMC Meeting*
Years Ahead
*Forward rates are the one-year rates maturing at the end of the year shown
on the horizontal axis that are implied by the smoothed Treasury yield curve.
Next Five Years
Five-to-Ten Year Forward
Inflation Compensation*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
May
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 42
(3) Yields on nominal Treasury securities rose sharply over the intermeeting
period, with two-year rates increasing 30 basis points and ten-year rates gaining about
forward rates across the yield curve, with the most pronounced gains posted in
forward rates three to five years ahead.  Real rates accounted for the bulk of the
increase.  TIPS-based inflation compensation for the next five years edged lower on
net, but five-to-ten-year-ahead inflation compensation rose about 20 basis points.
Survey measures of inflation expectations posted mixed changes.  According to staff
models, the pickup in real yields at distant horizons owed primarily to increases in real
term premiums, while about half of the increase in inflation compensation at the long
end of the curve reflected increases in inflation expectations.  (See box entitled “More
on Recent Interest Rate Developments.”)
(4) Equity markets were volatile at times during the intermeeting period, but
broad stock price indexes gained about 1 percent, on net, as the boost from largely
favorable news on the economy and announcements of mergers and acquisitions
outweighed the drag of higher bond yields (Chart 2).  The implied volatility of the
S&P 500 edged up on net, but remained low by historical standards.  Yields on
investment-grade corporate bonds increased about in line with those on nominal
Treasury securities of comparable maturity.  In contrast, yields on speculative-grade
corporate bonds rose less, leaving risk spreads about 20 basis points narrower.
Corporate credit quality remained solid, with realized and expected default rates
staying very low.
(5) Despite the substantial declines in bond prices posted over the intermeeting
period, fixed-income markets generally functioned smoothly, with elevated Treasury
trading volumes and normal bid-asked spreads.  However, credit conditions in
markets for assets backed by subprime mortgages deteriorated notably in some cases.
For example, spreads on indexes of subprime credit default swaps rose steadily, and
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 42
More on Recent Interest Rate Developments
 
The increase in shorter-term Treasury yields over the 
intermeeting period appeared to reflect a revised outlook for 
monetary policy.  About half of the 30 basis point move in two-
year yields occurred in the narrow windows bracketing FOMC 
communications and economic data releases.  Apparently in 
response to incoming news, as well as a more general change in 
sentiment, most of the remaining primary dealers who had been 
predicting policy easing this year threw in the towel and now 
forecast policy to be on hold for some time.  Short-term yields 
around the globe also increased, as data pointed to somewhat 
stronger growth and higher inflation in a number of countries, 
and some foreign central banks either tightened policy or 
signaled increased concern about inflationary pressures. 
 
The shift in the economic outlook was likely the prime mover of 
longer-term rates as well, but mortgage convexity hedging flows 
reportedly amplified these upward movements in rates.  Swap 
spreads widened and swaption-implied volatility rose, as 
investors sought to trim longer-dated exposures when the 
effective duration of their mortgage holdings lengthened.  
However, the rise in swap rates was considerably smaller than 
during past episodes when convexity hedging likely played a 
significant role.  Moreover, the staff estimates that only a small 
amount of mortgages was economically refinanceable even 
before the rise in mortgage rates.   
 
Over this intermeeting period, changes in option-based 
measures of interest rate uncertainty have been mixed, as 
implied volatilities on short-term rates declined and those on 
longer-term rates rose.  However, the reduced skew of the 
implied distributions of expected funds rates in the near term 
may go some way in helping to explain movements in term 
premiums.  Market participants now evidently see the risks to 
the outlook for short-term interest rates as more symmetric, as 
opposed to tilted sharply to the downside, and borrowers may 
be willing to pay a higher term premium to avoid the risk of 
having to roll over debt at higher short-term rates in the future.
Ten-year swap spread
May 9
FOMC
Thirty-year fixed-rate mortgage rate
Percentage of economically refinanceable 
mortgages
June 13May 9
FOMC
June Sept. Dec. Mar. May
2006 2007
Skewness*
Term premium**
Weekly
May 9
FOMC
*Skewness of Eurodollar implied distribution, 
6 months ahead. **10-year zero-coupon term 
premium derived from an arbitrage-free model.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 42
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
May
FOMC
Wilshire 5000 Index
S&P 500 EPS
NIPA, economic
profits before tax
Corporate Earnings Growth* Percent
*Change from four quarters earlier.
Source. I/B/E/S for S&P 500 EPS.
Q2
Q1 e
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatilities
Daily May
FOMC
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
May
FOMC
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Bond Default and C&I Loan Delinquency Rates
Percent of outstandings
C&I loan delinquency rate
    (Call Report)
Bond default rate*
*Six-month moving average, from Moody’s Investors Service.
Percent of liabilities
Expected Year-Ahead Defaults*
*Firm-level estimates of year-ahead defaults from KMV corporation, weighted
by firm liabilities as a percent of total liabilities, excluding defaulted firms.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 42
some of the indexes reached new highs.  Reflecting the weakness in these markets,
and perhaps reinforcing them as well, were the well-publicized difficulties at two
medium-sized hedge funds managed by Bear Stearns Asset Management.  The funds
were positioned to gain from an improvement in subprime credit quality, and when
the market worsened instead, the resulting losses led to massive liquidity pressures on
at least one of the two funds.  Following unsuccessful negotiations to reach a
workout, some counterparties moved to take collateral and close out positions.
Actual and anticipated sales of fund assets raised concerns that the resulting
downward pressure on prices could lead to significant losses among market
participants.  These concerns were exacerbated by the high degree of uncertainty
about the valuation of subprime assets, particularly CDOs.  Spillover effects of the
funds’ difficulties have apparently been modest thus far, although spreads on some
lower-quality corporate credit derivative indexes also widened this week.  Market
participants report no other sizable hedge funds with similar problems.  Credit
exposures to the two funds are widely dispersed, and CDS spreads for the creditor
firms have generally moved up only a few basis points.  Bear Stearns’s CDS spread
has risen more, but it remains near the peak it reached during the period of volatility
in late February and early March.
(6) The foreign exchange value of the dollar was little changed on balance over
the intermeeting period against a trade-weighted index of major foreign currencies
(Chart 3).  The dollar fell 3 percent against the Canadian dollar, but rose 3 percent
against the Japanese yen and by smaller amounts against most other major currencies.
Day-to-day movements in foreign government bond yields were highly correlated
with fluctuations in U.S. longer-term rates, with yields abroad increasing 25 to 50 basis
points, on net, somewhat less than in the United States.  As in the United States, most
of the increases in foreign nominal yields reflected changes in real yields, which were
boosted by stronger-than-expected indicators of economic growth and prospects for
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 42
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
May FOMC
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields (Nominal)
May FOMC
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Industrial Countries
May FOMC
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock Price Indexes
Emerging Market Economies
May FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 42
tighter monetary policy.  Major foreign stock markets posted modest gains.  As was
widely expected, the Bank of England and the European Central Bank raised their
policy rates 25 basis points.  In contrast, the Bank of Canada and the Bank of Japan
left their policy rates unchanged during the intermeeting period.  However, strong
data releases and a hawkish policy statement by the Bank of Canada appeared to buoy
the Canadian dollar and fuel the relatively large advance in Canadian bond yields
relative to those in other foreign industrial countries.2
(7) The value of the dollar was down slightly over the intermeeting period
against an index of currencies of our other important trading partners, led by a
renminbi.  Local-currency bond yields rose 30 to 60 basis points in emerging Asia and
Eastern Europe.  Spreads on dollar-denominated issues in emerging markets, much
like those in U.S. speculative-grade markets, declined slightly.  Stock prices in most
emerging-market countries recorded solid gains over the period, including in China
despite a sharp drop at the end of May related to the increase of a tax on equity
(8) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors appears to be expanding at a
registered in the first quarter (Chart 4).  The slowdown is primarily attributable to a
decline in debt growth for the federal government, which has resulted from more-
than-seasonally strong tax receipts.  Business debt is estimated to be rising at a robust
Both bond issuance and growth in business loans have been brisk.  Bank lending
standards and terms remain quite accommodative, with information from the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 42
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Debt of Nonfinancial Sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
e Estimated.
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of Debt of
Nonfinancial Business*
Monthly rate
*Commercial paper and C&I loans are seasonally adjusted,
bonds are not.
Growth of Debt of Household Sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of House Prices
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
OFHEO Purchase-Only Index
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
e Estimated.
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 42
syndicated loan market indicating narrow spreads, high leverage, and an erosion in
loan covenants.  With house prices continuing to be soft, home sales sluggish, and
mortgage rates moving higher, growth of home mortgage debt is estimated to be
slowing slightly to a 6 percent annual rate in the second quarter, while the overall
expansion of consumer credit appears modest at a 4¼ percent rate.
(9) Smoothing through tax-related fluctuations, M2 grew at a 6 percent average
annual rate in April and May, following surprisingly strong expansion in the first
quarter.  The moderation was broad-based and led by a decline in liquid deposit
growth to a pace more in line with that of nominal income.  Retail money market
mutual funds and small time deposits also decelerated.  Currency growth continued to
be modest, likely reflecting weak foreign demand.
Economic Outlook through 2008
(10) In response to incoming data over the intermeeting period, the staff marked
up its assessment of the pace of growth in the second quarter but changed the broad
contours of the forecast thereafter relatively little from those in the May Greenbook.
Smoothing through volatile quarterly readings, real GDP is now seen as expanding at
around a 2 percent annualized rate in the first half of this year; the pace of real GDP
growth is forecast to pick up to 2¼ percent in the remainder of 2007 and 2½ percent
in 2008.  As a consequence, the labor market is expected to be slightly tighter than in
the previous Greenbook, with the unemployment rate predicted to rise slowly, but to
remain below 5 percent―the staff’s estimate of the NAIRU―throughout the forecast
period.  The staff forecast continues to be predicated on the assumption that the
federal funds rate will be held at 5¼ percent until the end of 2008.  Following the
substantial upward shift in investors’ policy expectations over the intermeeting period,
this trajectory is now very similar to that implied by money market futures quotes.
Consequently, with little expected change in term premiums, longer-term interest rates
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 42
are projected to remain near their current higher levels.  Equity prices are expected to
rise at a rate sufficient to generate risk-adjusted returns comparable to those on fixed-
income investments.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar is assumed to
depreciate 2 percent per year―a somewhat faster pace than in the May forecast.  Spot
oil prices are still expected to move somewhat higher, as informed by futures market
quotes.  Recent favorable inflation readings led the staff to lower the core inflation
forecast slightly.  The staff now expects core PCE inflation to average 2 percent both
this year and next.  Total PCE inflation is projected to be nearly 3 percent this year,
boosted by higher energy and other commodity prices, before falling back to
(11) In the survey of economic projections taken for the May meeting, the
central tendency of FOMC participants’ forecasts for real GDP growth was 2 to
forecasts for core PCE inflation was 2.1 to 2.3 percent this year and 1.8 to 2.1 percent
next year.  The May Greenbook projection was at the bottom of the central tendency
of FOMC participants’ forecasts for growth and the top of the central tendency of
their forecasts for inflation.
Medium-Term Strategies
(12) To provide a longer-term perspective on the economic outlook and possible
monetary policy strategies, optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model were
conducted using the staff’s extension of the Greenbook forecast beyond 2008.3
These simulations employ a new benchmark specification of the model equation that
determines the evolution of the long-run inflation expectations of wage and price
setters, which are now assumed to respond not only to movements in actual
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 42
inflation—as in previous Bluebooks—but also to shifts in the nominal federal funds
rate and the output gap.4  Because long-run inflation expectations in the previous
specification responded quite slowly to changes in actual inflation, disinflation came
at a relatively high cost in terms of cumulative labor market slack.  In contrast,
the new specification implies that a shift in monetary policy directly affects the
public’s perception of the central bank’s inflation goal and hence their long-run
inflation expectations.  As a result, the costs of a policy-induced disinflation in
FRB/US are lower than presented in previous Bluebooks and are now in closer
alignment with the staff’s judgmental assessment.5
(13) Chart 5 shows optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model in which
policymakers’ inflation goal is either 1½ percent or 2 percent.6  For an inflation goal
of 2 percent (the right-hand set of charts), the optimal control simulation prescribes
a federal funds rate path that remains close to 5¼ percent through early 2009 and
then declines gradually to just above 4 percent by the end of 2012; from late 2008
forward, the unemployment rate is near the 5 percent NAIRU, and core inflation
is close to the 2 percent goal (solid lines).  This optimal policy outcome is similar to
that shown in the May Bluebook (dotted lines); furthermore, the change to the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 42
model’s specification is of little consequence in this case because long-run inflation
expectations are already aligned with both actual inflation and the inflation goal, as
they were in the May extended Greenbook baseline.  By contrast, with an inflation
goal of 1½ percent (the left-hand set of charts), the optimal funds rate rises to above
by 2012.  Core inflation beyond 2008 stays lower than in the May Bluebook, but
this difference is mainly due to the revised specification of the FRB/US model.
In particular, if the May optimal-control policy is re-computed using the new model
specification reflecting more rapid adjustment in long-run inflation expectations
(dashed lines), core inflation descends more quickly toward the 1½ percent goal than
was shown in the May Bluebook, accompanied by a virtually identical path for
the unemployment rate.  Another factor influencing inflation dynamics, the degree
of global integration in product markets, is discussed in the box on “International
Dimensions of Monetary Policy.”
(14) As shown in Chart 6, the current level of the real funds rate, 3.3 percent,
is identical to the Greenbook-consistent estimate of short-run r*—the value of the
real federal funds rate that would put the level of real GDP at that of its potential
twelve quarters ahead—and 100 basis points or more higher than the three model-
based estimates of short-run r*.  The Greenbook-consistent and model-based r* differ
because the former incorporates the staff’s judgment on current-quarter data and
forces not captured in the three models—including staff projections of conditioning
factors that differ from the automated projections used by the three models.
The Greenbook-consistent measure has been marked up about 20 basis points over
the intermeeting period, largely in response to incoming data pointing to somewhat
stronger consumption, business fixed investment, and net exports.  Model-based
estimates of medium-run r*—the value of the real funds rate consistent with keeping
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 42
International Dimensions of Monetary Policy
 
A number of channels have been suggested through which the 
increased mobility of goods, capital, and labor may alter the 
economic landscape in which monetary policy operates, and the 
staff routinely takes these considerations into account in its current 
analysis and projections.  As an example of such a channel, in a 
more open economy, imports may better serve as a “release valve’’ 
for excess aggregate demand, damping its effects on output and 
inflation. 
 
This box explores these issues using SIGMA, a multi-country 
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model used for policy 
analysis developed in the Division of International Finance.   
SIGMA is sufficiently rich in behavioral and sectoral detail to 
encompass a variety of mechanisms through which increased global 
integration can alter the dynamic properties of the macroeconomy.   
Based on work by Erceg, Gust, and Lopez-Salido, this box presents 
an analysis of how greater openness in product markets can alter 
the effects of domestic and foreign aggregate demand shocks on 
the U.S. economy and highlights the implications of these changes 
for the conduct of monetary policy.1 
 
Consider the macroeconomic effects of a persistent 1 percent 
autonomous rise in domestic aggregate demand in alternative 
specifications of the model that differ only in the degree of trade 
openness.  In each of the four panels to the right, the benchmark 
specification (solid line) corresponds to a trade share—the average 
of exports and imports—calibrated in the model to 14 percent of 
output, roughly in line with current U.S. data.  In contrast, in the 
nearly closed scenario (dashed red line) trade accounts for only 5 
percent of domestic output, close to the U.S. trade share of about 
forty years ago.  Finally, under the specification with higher 
openness (dotted blue line) this share climbs to 25 percent, roughly 
around the recent experience of the United Kingdom and, 
conceivably, the degree of U.S. trade openness in a few decades if 
global integration continues its post-World War II pace.  
 
In all three specifications, increased domestic spending prompts 
monetary policy to tighten, causing real interest rates to rise (first 
panel).  The combination of higher real interest rates and an 
induced appreciation of the dollar (not shown) limits the initial 
expansion of output and helps bring it back to baseline, in part 
through a decline in the trade balance (fourth panel).  However, 
consumer price inflation rises (third panel) because the Taylor rule 
employed in these simulations does not tighten policy enough to 
keep output (second panel) from expanding above potential.  
 
                           (continued on next page) 
_________________________________________________ 
1 “The Transmission of Domestic Shocks in Open Economies,” presented  
at an NBER conference in Barcelona, June 11-13, 2007
Effects of a domestic
aggregate demand shock
(deviations from baseline)
Benchmark
Nearly Closed
Higher Openness
GDP
Percent
Consumer Price Inflation
Percentage points
Trade Balance
Percent of GDP
X-axis represents years after beginning
of persistent shock
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 42
International Dimensions of Monetary Policy 
(continued) 
 
As can been seen in the comparison of these three specifications in 
the previous page, the degree of openness affects the magnitude of 
the U.S. economy’s response to domestic shocks.  With greater 
openness, more of the increase in aggregate demand is satisfied 
through higher imports, implying a larger deterioration in the trade 
balance, a smaller increase in GDP, and less pressure on domestic 
resources.  Furthermore, the appreciation of the dollar reduces U.S. 
import prices, and with a larger share of trade in output, the 
resulting downward pressure on domestic prices is magnified.  
Accordingly, increased global integration of product markets helps 
monetary policy to stabilize the economy in the face of domestic 
spending shocks, as smaller hikes in interest rates are needed to 
keep output close to potential and to contain inflationary pressures.  
 
Increased openness, however, may also make the economy more 
vulnerable to external shocks.  The response to a 1 percent 
autonomous increase in foreign aggregate demand is shown in the 
four panels on this page.  Under all three calibrations, the 
combination of higher foreign activity and an induced depreciation 
of the dollar (as foreign interest rates rise relative to U.S. rates) 
stimulate U.S. real net exports, causing both U.S. output and 
inflation to rise.  The boost in exports is clearly more substantial 
the greater the openness of the economy, which also amplifies the 
effect of higher import prices on aggregate inflation.  Thus, not 
surprisingly, greater openness magnifies the effects on the domestic 
economy of an expansion in foreign aggregate demand, and 
requires a tighter monetary policy stance to keep inflation 
contained.   
 
Overall, these model simulations suggest that increased trade 
openness is likely to have modest, though noticeable, implications 
for how domestic shocks affect U.S. real activity and inflation. 
These simulations also highlight the extent to which openness 
increases the susceptibility of the economy to foreign 
developments.
Effects of a foreign
aggregate demand shock
(deviations from baseline)
Benchmark
Nearly Closed
Higher Openness
GDP
Percent
Consumer Price Inflation
Percentage points
Trade Balance
Percent of GDP
X-axis represents years after beginning
of persistent shock.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 42
Chart 6
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval
90 percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.3 2.3
   Small structural model 2.2 2.2
   Large model (FRB/US) 2.1 2.3
   Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (0.8 - 3.7(
      90 percent confidence interval -0.1 - 4.5(
Greenbook-consistent measure 3.3 3.1
Medium-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.4 2.3
   Small structural model 2.2 2.2
   Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.4 - 3.2(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.8 - 3.9(
TIPS-based factor model 2.1 2.1
Memo
   Actual real federal funds rate 3.3 3.2
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 42
output at potential at a seven-year horizon—are both around 2¼ percent, just above
the TIPS-based measure of about 2.1 percent.
(15) The upper panels of Chart 7 depict model- and market-based assessments
of the monetary policy outlook through the end of 2012.  In the absence of shocks,
the estimated outcome-based policy rule prescribes a funds rate path that declines
gradually to about 4 percent.  Stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model indicate
a 70 percent probability that the prescriptions of the outcome-based rule will fall
in a range between 2½ and 6½ percent during 2012.  Relative to these simulations,
information from both in- and out-of-the-money interest rate caps suggests that
investors see less uncertainty but more downside skewness regarding the prospective
path of policy at longer horizons (see box entitled “Assessing the Implied
Distribution of Funds Rates at Longer Horizons using Interest Rate Caps”).
In contrast to the outcome-based rule, Taylor rules prescribe a lower funds rate
path for the near term than in the May Bluebook, reflecting a decrease in the forecast
of the core PCE inflation rate for the current quarter.
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(16) This Bluebook presents three policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized in Table 1.  Under Alternative A, the Committee lowers
the target federal funds rate 25 basis points to 5 percent.  Alternative B maintains the
target for the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.  Alternative C envisions the
Committee tightening by 25 basis points, to bring the target rate to 5½ percent.  As
for the wording of the statement, economic growth appears to have rebounded in the
second quarter from its anemic first-quarter pace.  Accordingly, the reference in the
previous statement indicating that “economic growth slowed in the first part of the
year” is updated in all three alternatives to indicate that the economy appears to have
expanded at a moderate pace so far this year.  This assessment is intended to smooth
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 42
ExtenExad fall Assessing the Implied Distribution of Funds Rates at Longer Horizons using 
Interest Rate Caps 
 
The degree of uncertainty around the expected path of the federal funds rate can be assessed 
using implied volatilities derived from interest rate options.  Beginning with the January 
Bluebook, prices on interest rate caps, which are sequences of call options on three-month 
LIBOR, have been used to construct the confidence intervals for the funds rate shown 
through 2012 in Chart 7.1  Until this Bluebook, those estimates have been based solely on 
price quotes for at-the-money options, and following convention, it was assumed that 
interest rates were log-normally distributed.  By construction, the estimated distribution of 
interest rates was skewed somewhat toward higher rates.   
 
Recently, Board staff have analyzed in- and out-of-the-money interest rate caps to obtain 
information on the possible skew in the distribution of short-term interest rates.2  This 
analysis is broadly similar to the construction of the distribution of the expected federal 
funds rate six months ahead derived from options on Eurodollar futures that is shown in 
Chart 1.  Based on interest rate caps, the staff can now calculate risk-neutral, non-parametric 
probability density functions of future short-term rates from the near term to very distant 
horizons and monitor the width and skew of these distributions.   
 
These estimates generally suggest that the assumption that interest rates are log-normally 
distributed results in an underestimation of the weight market participants put on very low 
rates.  Over the last two years, the lower bound of the 90 percent confidence band about six 
years hence based on these density functions has been about 70 basis points below that 
derived from confidence intervals under the log-normal assumption.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 42
Table 1: Alternative Language for the June 2007 FOMC Announcement
May FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for 
the federal funds rate 25 basis points 
to 5 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market 
Committee decided today to raise its 
target for the federal funds rate 25 
basis points to 5½ percent.
So far this year, the economy appears 
to have grown at a moderate pace and 
seems likely to continue to do so over 
coming quarters.  But ongoing 
weakness in the housing sector implies 
a significant risk that economic activity 
might grow more slowly than 
anticipated.
So far this year, the economy appears 
to have grown at a moderate pace 
despite the ongoing adjustment in the 
housing sector.  The economy seems 
likely to continue to expand at a 
moderate pace over coming quarters.
Despite the ongoing adjustment in 
the housing sector, the economy 
appears to have grown at a 
moderate pace so far this year.  The 
economy seems likely to continue to 
expand at a moderate pace over 
coming quarters.
Core inflation has edged lower in 
recent months and is expected to 
remain moderate over the next year or 
so.  However, the high level of 
resource utilization has the potential to 
add to inflation pressures going 
forward.
Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly in recent months.  
However, the high level of resource 
utilization has the potential to sustain 
inflation pressures.
Although readings on core inflation 
have improved modestly in recent 
months, core inflation remains 
somewhat elevated.  Inflation 
pressures seem likely to moderate 
over time, but considerable 
uncertainty surrounds that 
judgment.  Moreover, the high level 
of resource utilization, in 
combination with earlier increases 
in the prices of energy and other 
commodities, has the potential to 
sustain those pressures.
Assessment 
of Risk
With this policy action, the Committee 
judges that the downside risk to 
economic growth now roughly 
balances the upside risk to inflation.  
Future policy adjustments will depend 
on the evolution of the outlook for 
both inflation and economic growth, 
as implied by incoming information.
In these circumstances, the 
Committee’s predominant policy 
concern is the risk that the moderation 
in inflation will fail to be sustained.  
Future policy adjustments will depend 
on the evolution of the outlook for 
both inflation and economic growth, 
as implied by incoming information.
Even after this action, the 
Committee’s predominant policy 
concern remains the risk that 
inflation will fail to moderate as 
expected.  Future policy 
adjustments will depend on the 
evolution of the outlook for both 
inflation and economic growth, as 
implied by incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 42
through the quarterly variation that has largely been driven by transitory factors.  Core
inflation data for recent months have been benign, with the twelve-month change in
the core PCE deflator dropping to 2 percent in April for the first time since March of
last year.  The draft language for all three alternatives acknowledges these favorable
readings, but the alternatives differ notably in their assessment of inflation going
forward.  As usual, the Committee could consider combining elements from more
than one alternative.
(17) If the Committee continues to view the current policy stance as likely to
foster a return of output to potential and sustain the recent moderation of inflation, as
in the staff forecast, then it may wish to choose Alternative B, under which the
federal funds rate is maintained at 5¼ percent.  In the staff analysis underlying the
Greenbook forecast, the real federal funds rate is seen as near its equilibrium value
(Chart 6), suggesting that the current stance of policy is likely to reduce pressures on
resources over time.  Additionally, the current target for the funds rate is very close to
prescriptions for near-term policy obtained from optimal policy simulations with a
While financial conditions tightened substantially over the intermeeting period,
Committee members may view this development as merely bringing forward an
adjustment they had anticipated would occur before long, suggesting that no policy
offset is necessary.  The Committee might also judge that maintaining its current
policy stance for the time being would provide a reasonable weighting of the risks that
weakness in housing could eventually have a more pronounced effect on overall
economic activity and that the recent moderation in inflation could prove temporary.
(18) The draft statement accompanying Alternative B reiterates the view that the
economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace over coming quarters.  Following
benign inflation readings, the draft language drops both the characterization of the
level of core inflation as “somewhat elevated” and the prediction that inflation seems
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 42
likely to moderate from its current level.  Instead, the statement acknowledges the
recent favorable information while expressing the view that the high level of resource
utilization has the potential to sustain price pressures.  This language would be
intended to indicate that incoming data point to a slowing in core inflation but, given
that monthly inflation readings are noisy, to suggest that the Committee is awaiting
more data before being satisfied that the moderation in inflation will be sustained.
The statement would conclude by indicating that the Committee’s predominant policy
concern remains the upside risk to inflation, with the language modified for
consistency with the inflation paragraph.
(19) Market participants do not expect a change in the funds rate at this meeting
and judging from the Desk’s survey of primary dealers, most expect only minor
modifications to the text of the accompanying statement.  The revisions to the
inflation paragraph under Alternative B would likely garner considerable attention.
Investors would not overlook the deletion of the “somewhat elevated” language and
would probably infer that the Committee believes that its prior expectation for
moderating core inflation is on track.  Particularly in light of the revisions to the risk
assessment, markets might also interpret the overall statement as signaling that the
Committee finds 2 percent to be an acceptable level of core inflation.  Market
participants would most likely mark down their expectations for the path of the
federal funds rate.  Equities would rally, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar
would depreciate.  Long-term bond yields might edge lower, but that fall could be
tempered, or even reversed, if the statement led investors to mark up their long-run
inflation expectations.
(20) The large rise in real yields and the resilience of equity markets over the
intermeeting period could be interpreted as an indication that investors have marked
up their growth expectations, anticipate greater pressures on resources, and
correspondingly expect a more restrictive stance of policy.  Indeed, judging from
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 42
options on Eurodollar futures, investors now place about one-third odds on monetary
policy tightening within the next year.  Under this interpretation, there is a risk that if
investors come to perceive resource markets as taut and do not see the Committee
adopting a more restrictive policy, then inflation expectations could continue to rise.
If the Committee is especially concerned by this risk, it might prefer to tighten
meeting might be seen as the best way to mitigate the risk of an updrift in inflation
expectations and reassure markets that the Committee will indeed tighten as necessary
to keep inflation contained.  Members may also be concerned about the possibility
that increases in energy and commodity prices could lead to greater price pressures
than currently foreseen by the staff.  Moreover, the optimal policy path shown in
Chart 5 indicates that policy would need to be tightened about 1 percentage point
over the next year should the Committee wish to bring inflation down to 1½ percent.
(21) The statement accompanying Alternative C could reiterate the assessment
that the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace while reordering the
clauses in order to underscore the view that the adjustment in the housing sector
appears unlikely to derail the economic expansion.  The inflation paragraph would de-
emphasize the recent monthly price data and retain the explicit acknowledgement that
the level of core inflation remains somewhat elevated, which many investors would
read as a signal that the Committee prefers a core inflation rate of around 1½ percent.
The Committee’s concern about the inflation outlook could be stressed by noting that
“considerable uncertainty” surrounds the assessment that inflation is likely to
moderate and also by expanding the set of factors that could sustain inflation
pressures to include the pass-through from higher prices of energy and other
commodities.  The statement could conclude by noting that, even after the increase in
the funds rate, the Committee’s predominant policy concern remains the upside risk
to inflation.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 24 of 42
(22) A tightening of monetary policy at this meeting would take financial
markets aback.  Short-term interest rates and option-implied volatility of money
market rates would surely rise.  However, inflation compensation and distant-horizon
forward yields could well fall as the announcement would likely lower long-run
inflation expectations.  The net effect on long-term yields is thus ambiguous.  The
foreign exchange value of the dollar would probably appreciate, and equity prices
would likely decline.
(23) Against the backdrop of the recent sharp rise in interest rates and an already
weak housing market and following a number of benign inflation readings, members
may feel that the risk of unacceptably sluggish economic growth is now greater than
the upside risk to inflation.  If so, the Committee might wish to lower the target
federal funds rate by 25 basis points as in Alternative A.  The Committee might view
the recent backup in long-term yields as owing mainly to an exogenous rebound in
term premiums from an abnormally low level.  A rising term premium could dampen
consumer and business spending and further weaken the housing market, a possibility
explored in the Greenbook alternative simulation “Tighter financial conditions.”  In
light of this possibility, the Committee may believe that a lower federal funds rate is
required to maintain the desired strength of aggregate demand.  Furthermore, with
low unemployment not clearly boosting labor costs, the Committee might think that
the NAIRU could well be lower than currently estimated by the staff—as in the
“lower NAIRU” Greenbook alternative scenario.  In this case, it may judge that a
slightly more accommodative stance of monetary policy would run little risk of
stoking inflationary pressures, especially since the real funds rate is now above the
range of model-based estimates of its equilibrium.
(24) The statement in Alternative A would continue to note that the economy
seems most likely to expand at a moderate pace.  But the Committee may perceive the
downside risk to that forecast emanating from the housing sector as being greater
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 42
than it was in May, owing to the backup in mortgage interest rates.  Accordingly, the
draft language highlights this risk by placing it in a separate sentence at the end of the
second paragraph and by pointing explicitly to “ongoing weakness” in the housing
sector rather than “ongoing adjustment.”  In the inflation paragraph, the reference to
core inflation being elevated would be deleted and replaced by the assessment that
core inflation has edged lower and is likely to remain moderate, implicitly placing
considerable weight on the recent inflation news.  The statement could conclude by
noting that even after the 25 basis point easing, the downside risk to the Committee’s
growth objective is roughly offset by the upside risk to its inflation objective, and that
future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth.
(25) An easing of monetary policy at this meeting would come as a complete
surprise to investors, particularly in the wake of the recent jump in policy
expectations.  Short-term interest rates would fall appreciably and option-implied
volatility in fixed-income markets would rise.  The effect on longer-term interest rates
is less clear.  Investors might interpret the announcement as signaling that the
economy is weaker than they had previously thought, driving long-term yields down.
Alternatively, the announcement might lead investors to mark up their expectations
for inflation and to demand a larger inflation risk premium, boosting long-term yields.
The effects on equity markets and the foreign-exchange value of the dollar are
likewise ambiguous, depending on how investors update their forecasts for inflation
and growth in light of the surprise decision.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(26) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 is projected to expand about
costs of holding money are expected to edge down further over the remainder of this
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 26 of 42
Table 2
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
No change/
Monthly Growth Rates
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 42
year, as deposit rates continue to catch up with earlier increases in short-term interest
rates, and accordingly M2 grows a little faster than nominal GDP.  In the forecast,
ongoing rapid growth in retail money funds offsets more sluggish expansion in small
time deposits and currency.
(27) The growth rate of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to fall
from 8 percent last year to 6¾ percent in 2007 and 5¾ percent in 2008.  Corporate
borrowing is predicted to slow later this year.  In the household sector, flat house
prices, rising interest rates, and tightening credit standards are all expected to weigh
on mortgage borrowing.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 42
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
(28) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around ________ 5¼ percent.
Risk Assessments
A.   With this policy action, the Committee judges that the downside risk to
economic growth now roughly balances the upside risk to inflation.
Future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook
for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming
B.   In these circumstances, the Committee’s predominant policy concern is
the risk that the moderation in inflation will fail to be sustained.  Future
policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
C.   Even after this action, the Committee’s predominant policy concern
remains the risk that inflation will fail to moderate as expected.  Future
policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 29 of 42
