Content last modified 02/07/2013.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
DECEMBER 6, 2007
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
CLASS I FOMC – RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)    DECEMBER 6, 2007
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) After showing some signs of improvement in late September and October,
conditions in financial markets worsened over the intermeeting period.  Despite
economic data releases that were on balance only slightly weaker than expected,
Treasury yields and the expected path for the federal funds rate fell sharply amid
reports of sizable losses at several large financial institutions and increased concerns
over the economic outlook.  Short-term Treasury instruments benefited from flight-
to-quality flows as investors reduced their exposure to risky assets.  Heightened
worries about counterparty risk, as well as the effects of balance sheet constraints and
liquidity pressures, affected interbank funding markets and commercial paper markets,
where spreads over risk-free rates rose to levels that were, in some cases, higher than
those seen in August.  Strains in those markets were no doubt exacerbated by
concerns related to year-end pressures.  In longer-term corporate markets, both
investment- and speculative-grade credit spreads widened considerably; issuance
slowed but remained strong.  Equity prices declined, on net, with financial stocks
especially hard hit.  In housing finance, subprime mortgage markets stayed virtually
shut and spreads on jumbo loans apparently widened a good bit further.  Spreads on
conforming products also increased, following reports of sizable losses and
consequent reduced capital ratios at the housing GSEs.
Monetary Policy Expectations and Treasury Yields
(2)  The FOMC’s decision at its October meeting to reduce the target federal
funds rate by 25 basis points to 4½ percent was largely expected by market
participants, although the assessment that upside risks to inflation balanced the
downside risks to growth was not fully anticipated and apparently led investors to
revise up slightly the expected path for policy.1  The release of the FOMC minutes,
including the summary of economic projections, elicited only a modest market
reaction.  Similarly, data releases—which apparently came in, on balance, only slightly
weaker than investors expected—left policy expectations little changed on net.
However, concerns about the potential adverse effects on credit availability and
economic growth of sizable losses at large financial institutions and of financial
market strains in general pushed the expected path of policy down substantially.
Market participants have priced in a total of about 150 basis points of policy easing by
early 2009 (Chart 1), about 80 basis points more than at the time of the October
meeting.  Judging from quotes on federal funds target binary options, investors are
virtually certain of a rate cut at the upcoming FOMC meeting, and assign about
easing.  Respondents to the Desk’s recent survey of primary dealers also anticipated
easing, but placed lower odds on a 50 basis point cut than suggested by market
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 2 of 43
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
December 6, 2007
October 30, 2007
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Percent Basis points
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)*
Implied Volatilities
*Width of a 90 percent confidence interval estimated from the term
structures for the expected federal funds rate and implied volatility.
Oct.
FOMC
Implied Distribution of Federal Funds Rate Six 
Months Ahead*
Recent:  12/06/2007 
Last FOMC:  10/30/2007
*Derived from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, with term premium 
and other adjustments to estimate expectations for the federal funds rate.
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Oct.
FOMC
Change in Implied One-Year Forward Treasury Rates
since Last FOMC Meeting*
*Forward rates are the one-year rates maturing at the end of the year shown
on the horizontal axis that are implied by the smoothed Treasury yield curve.
Next Five Years (left scale)
Five-to-Ten Year Forward (left scale)
Spot WTI (right scale)
Inflation Compensation and Oil Prices*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Oct.
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 3 of 43
quotes.  Most respondents predicted that the Committee will put more emphasis on
downside risks to growth than in the October statement.  In addition, some dealers
expect that the spread of the primary credit rate over the target funds rate will be
narrowed.  Uncertainty about the path for policy increased slightly, on net, from its
already high levels, and the option-implied distribution of the federal funds rate six
months ahead retained a substantial skew to the downside.
(3) Yields on two-year nominal Treasury securities fell about 80 basis points, on
net, over the intermeeting period, about in line with the revision to policy
expectations.  Ten-year Treasury yields dropped about 30 basis points.  The
steepening of the yield curve owed mostly to sharply lower short- and intermediate-
term forward rates, consistent with investors’ apparently more pessimistic outlook for
economic growth.  TIPS yields fell by less than their nominal counterparts, implying
modest declines in inflation compensation at both the five-year and longer horizons.
Money Markets
(4) After showing signs of improvement between the September and October
FOMC meetings, conditions in money markets subsequently worsened, with the
deterioration reflected partly in large premiums for funding over year-end.  (See box
“Flight-to-Quality Flows and Year-end Pressures.”)  Large financial institutions
reported an additional $35 billion in losses over the intermeeting period, and investors
appear concerned that even more writedowns may be forthcoming.  Term bank
funding markets came under considerable pressure, and spreads of term libor and
federal funds rates over those on comparable-maturity overnight index swaps widened
sharply and now exceed their September peaks.  Conditions in European interbank
money markets also deteriorated over the intermeeting period, as term spreads
expanded by about 30 basis points in euro markets and in sterling markets.  In the
United States, outstanding asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) continued to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 4 of 43
-  
Flight-to-Quality Flows and Year-end Pressures
Substantial actual and anticipated losses at financial firms increased 
pressures on institutions’ liquidity and balance sheet capacity and 
boosted investors’ concerns about counterparty credit risk over the 
intermeeting period.  These developments contributed to renewed 
flight-to-quality flows and, in money markets, generated year-end 
pressures which have largely been absent in recent years.  Investors 
have apparently shifted their demand toward safe securities such as 
Treasury bills and away from risky assets such as uncollateralized 
loans to banks.  Despite an increased supply of bills in November, 
bill yields have declined sharply over recent weeks amid heavy 
inflows to money market mutual funds that hold only Treasury and 
agency securities.  The spread of the three-month overnight indexed 
swap (OIS) rate over the comparable-maturity Treasury bill yield―a 
plausible proxy for safe-haven demands―climbed about 50 basis 
points over the intermeeting period, though it remained below the 
peak reached in August.  Meanwhile, the spread of three-month libor 
over the corresponding OIS rate―a measure of term premiums in 
short-term funding markets―widened about 60 basis points to its 
highest level during the recent period of financial market turmoil.  
Some tiering was evident in uncollateralized funding markets:  
Domestic and large European institutions were able to borrow at 
rates close to the libor fixing, but smaller European institutions faced 
a substantial premium.
While forward rates suggest that concerns about counterparty credit 
risk are expected to persist well into next year, market stress is 
particularly acute in rates that span the turn of the year.  The one-
week forward Treasury bill yield that encompasses the year-turn has 
fallen to around 1 percent, apparently reflecting financial institutions’ 
desire to show more of the safest assets on their year-end books.  
Markets expect the provision of liquidity by the Desk to be generous 
over year-end:  A comparison of futures on the effective federal 
funds rate to quotes on target funds rate options implies that 
investors expect federal funds to trade about 100 basis points below 
the target on the last day of the year.  Nevertheless, pressures on 
banks’ balance sheets and concerns about liquidity and counterparty 
credit risk have made financial institutions reluctant to lend over 
year-end and have fueled precautionary demand for such funding.  
As a result, the spread of one-month libor over the corresponding 
OIS rate jumped nearly 50 basis points as the maturity date on a one-
month deposit crossed into the new year.  The implied premium for 
funding on the last day of the year is about 700 basis points at an 
annual rate―a level that is extremely high by the standards of recent 
years, though still a little below that reached in the runup to Y2K.  
One-month libor is now 24 basis points above the primary credit 
rate, yet term borrowing at the discount window remains limited, 
likely owing in part to perceived stigma of using the primary credit 
facility.  Significant year-end pressures can be observed in the 
commercial paper market as well.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 5 of 43
contract in November (Chart 2), and spreads of ABCP yields over those on
comparable unsecured CP widened considerably.  In the unsecured sector, spreads on
lower-rated thirty-day paper also increased substantially, particularly as the term
extended over year-end, but overnight spreads widened only modestly.  The shares of
unsecured CP and ABCP issued over year-end are about in line with their year-ago
levels.  The outstanding amount of European asset-backed commercial paper
declined, as some money market funds reportedly scaled back holdings of ABCP in
advance of year-end.
(5) Money market mutual funds experienced heavy inflows over the
intermeeting period, reflecting in part safe-haven demands.  Inflows were directed
primarily toward funds that invest only in Treasury and agency obligations,
contributing to a sharp fall in Treasury bill rates.  Similarly, strong demand for
Treasury collateral drove the overnight Treasury general collateral repo rate well
below the federal funds rate.  Lending from the SOMA securities portfolio has
increased in recent weeks, and the Desk relaxed some limits on the securities lending
program in response to the reduced liquidity in Treasury markets.2
Capital Markets
(6) Yields on investment-grade corporate bonds edged up over the intermeeting
period, while those on speculative-grade bonds increased appreciably.  As a result,
spreads on both investment- and speculative-grade bonds over comparable-maturity
Treasury securities rose markedly and are now at their highest levels in several years.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 6 of 43
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov.
2007
ABCP
Unsecured
Weekly (Wed., s.a.)
Commercial Paper Outstanding
Oct. FOMC
Last weekly observation is for December 5, 2007.
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Ten-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Oct.
FOMC
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec.
2007
Series 8
Series 9
Oct. FOMCDaily
LCDX Spreads
Wilshire
Dow Jones Financial
Oct.
FOMC
Equity Prices
S&P 500 (VIX)
Implied Volatility
Daily Oct.
FOMC
FRM
1-Year ARM
Jumbo-Conforming
Oct.
FOMC
Mortgage Rate Spreads
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 7 of 43
The higher spreads appear to reflect both a reassessment of the credit quality of
nonfinancial corporations, perhaps induced by concerns about prospects for the
economic expansion, and an increase in investors’ risk aversion.  Bond issuance
slowed in November but remained strong.  In the leveraged loan market, the pipeline
of underwritten loans awaiting syndication diminished early in the period but is still
substantial.  Secondary market bid prices for leveraged loans dropped significantly in
November and are now below their levels in early August.  An index of credit default
swaps on leveraged syndicated loans (the LCDX) rose about 40 basis points, on net,
over the intermeeting period.  Broad-based equity indexes were volatile and ended the
period down 1½ to 2 percent.  Financial stocks were especially hard hit, dropping
about 5 percent.  The spread between the twelve-month forward trend-earnings-price
ratio for S&P 500 firms and a real long-run Treasury yield—a rough measure of the
equity premium—widened, consistent with investors pulling back from risk.  Option-
implied volatility on the S&P 500 remained elevated, at times rising back to near its
August peaks.  Yield ratios for the municipal bonds moved up sharply on investor
concerns about the financial health of bond insurers and possibly the fiscal outlooks
for state and local governments.
(7) Credit availability for jumbo-mortgage borrowers continued to be tight, and
the spread between the offer rates on prime jumbo fixed-rate mortgages and
comparable conforming loans rose from already high levels.  Rates on conforming
mortgages fell, although not as much as yields on comparable-maturity Treasury
securities, implying a widening of spreads.  Issuance of residential mortgage-backed
securities (RMBS) backed by nonconforming loans continued to fall, while issuance of
those backed by conforming mortgages was robust.  Secondary markets for non-
agency RMBS remained largely inactive.  ABX spreads for most tranches widened
further for most of the intermeeting period, as investor confidence in subprime
RMBS and associated credit ratings continued to wane.  However, ABX spreads
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 8 of 43
dropped sharply late in the period amid reports that a plan to freeze rates on some
subprime mortgages was close to agreement.  Spreads on agency MBS rose sharply
after Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac announced large third-quarter losses, raising
concerns about their ability to offer refinancing options to some subprime borrowers.
Subsequently, these spreads retraced a substantial part of the increase.  (See box
“Recent Developments at Housing Intermediaries.”)
Market Functioning
(8) In addition to the short-term funding impairments noted earlier, trading
conditions were strained in a range of markets over the intermeeting period.
Functioning in the Treasury bill market was notably impaired at times, and bid-asked
spreads on bills generally remained very wide.  Bid-asked spreads widened
substantially less for Treasury coupon securities, and while investors were willing to
pay significant premiums to hold on-the-run securities, overall liquidity remained
ample in that market.  Liquidity was somewhat diminished in corporate markets:
Trading volumes declined significantly in November, a proxy for bid-asked spreads
on corporate bonds widened, and trades appeared to have a larger-than-normal
impact on prices.  Bid-asked spreads for leveraged syndicated loans rose quite sharply
over the intermeeting period but remained below the peaks reached in early August.
Judging from the abnormally wide range of quotes submitted by various dealers for
the same reference entities, liquidity and price discovery were also impaired in CDS
markets, especially for financial institutions.  The subprime RMBS market remained
shut with virtually no trading taking place.  Strains were also evident at times in the
market for agency MBS, where bid-asked spreads widened noticeably following the
reports of large losses by the housing GSEs before retracing part of that move more
recently.  That market may also have been affected by year-end pressures as some
investors are reportedly reluctant to hold mortgage products in their portfolios at the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 9 of 43
Recent Developments at Housing Intermediaries
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac reported third-quarter losses of $1.4 billion and $2 billion, 
respectively, over the intermeeting period, reflecting in part an increase in actual and projected 
credit losses on the mortgages they guarantee or hold.  On the news, credit default swap (CDS) 
spreads on the two agencies spiked and spreads on Fannie’s and Freddie’s MBS also rose 
sharply, albeit against a backdrop of heavy issuance.  Both CDS and MBS spreads later retraced 
a substantial portion of their increases as market sentiment was improved, in part, by news that 
Freddie Mac was able to raise $6 billion in fresh capital and reports of an industry agreement to 
delay by several years the reset of interest rates on certain subprime mortgages.  Fannie Mae also 
began the process of raising capital this week, and investor interest was reportedly high.  While it 
is improbable that all of the recent increase in MBS spreads will be passed on to borrowers, 
particularly because part of the increase may prove transitory, conforming borrowers may face 
higher spreads of mortgage rates over Treasuries in the future than in recent years.  Potentially 
adding further to the cost of mortgage credit is the fact that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have 
increased the fees they charge to guarantee mortgages pooled into agency MBS.  That rise likely 
reflects waning competition from other securitizers as well as increased actual and projected 
credit losses.  The GSEs also appear to have imposed sizable additional fees on a variety of 
riskier loans, such as those with loan-to-value ratios greater than 70 percent extended to 
borrowers with lower credit scores.
Other large mortgage lenders were subject to even stronger market pressures over the 
intermeeting period.  For example, CDS spreads on Countrywide Financial Corporation spiked 
to very high levels—near 1000 basis points—as investors became concerned about the ability of 
the thrift to fund its operations and about its overall solvency.  Countrywide had borrowed in 
excess of $50 billion from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Atlanta by the end of the third 
quarter, putting it close to the limit of 50 percent of borrower assets beyond which Home Loan 
Banks are typically very reluctant to lend to their members.  CDS and debt spreads on the Home 
Loan Banks also spiked, as investors reportedly became uncomfortable with the concentration 
of their lending to a few large borrowers (especially Countrywide and Washington Mutual).  A 
higher cost of Home Loan Bank debt has the potential to translate into higher funding costs for 
their borrowers.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 10 of 43
close of their fiscal year.  The FX swap market remained strained; bid-asked spreads
continued to be larger than usual, the average size of trades diminished, and the
capacity for market-making was impaired as some major market makers dropped out.
Foreign Developments
(9) Concerns about financial fragility and its potential impacts on economic
growth appeared to affect many foreign financial markets during the intermeeting
period.  Headline stock price indexes dropped 3 to 5 percent in Europe, Canada, and
Japan, on net, with financial stocks registering especially large declines in many cases
(Chart 3).  Stock prices also fell sharply in many emerging market economies; in China
share prices dropped more than 15 percent, reacting in part to reports that additional
steps may be taken to cool the domestic economy.  Consistent with a pullback by
investors from risky positions, yields on long-term government securities in industrial
countries fell 10 to 40 basis points, while EMBI+ spreads on sovereign bonds of
major emerging market economies widened noticeably.  The trade-weighted foreign
exchange value of the dollar against major currencies moved up about 1¼ percent, on
balance, over the intermeeting period.3  The dollar rose more than 6½ percent against
the Canadian dollar on signs of slower growth in Canada; on December 4, the Bank
of Canada announced a 25 basis point cut in its target for the overnight interest rate,
citing lower inflation and concerns that effects on Canada from the U.S. sub-prime
crisis will last longer than previously thought.  The dollar gained about 2½ percent
versus the pound; late in the period, the Bank of England also lowered its target
policy rate 25 basis points.  In contrast, the dollar declined 3¾ percent and
versus the Australian dollar, as carry trade positions were reported to have been
unwound in reaction to heightened financial uncertainties.  The index of the dollar’s 
                                           
3
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 11 of 43
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Industrial Countries
October FOMC
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock Price Indexes
Emerging Market Economies
October FOMC
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields (Nominal)
October FOMC
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
October FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 12 of 43
value versus currencies of other important trading partners was about unchanged over
the period.
Debt and Money
(10) Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is estimated to be increasing at an annual
rate of about 7 percent in the current quarter, almost 2 percentage points less than in
the third quarter (Chart 4).  The growth of nonfinancial business debt has slowed a bit
but remains strong on robust bond issuance and a small rebound in commercial
paper.  Growth in C&I lending also remained rapid, as some previously committed
large syndicated loan deals reportedly were taken onto banks’ balance sheets.
Household mortgage debt growth is expected to slow this quarter, reflecting the
weakness in home prices, declining home sales, and tighter credit conditions for some
borrowers.  Consumer credit appears to be expanding at a moderate pace this quarter.
(11) M2 advanced at an annual rate of about 5 percent in November.  While
liquid deposits continued to grow slowly, heightened demand for safety and liquidity
appears to have boosted retail money market mutual funds.  Small time deposits
continued to expand, evidently owing in part to high rates offered by some depository
institutions to attract retail deposits.  Currency was about flat in November, probably
owing at least in part to an ongoing shift by some overseas investors from holding
dollars to holding other currencies.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 13 of 43
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Debt of Nonfinancial Sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4p
p Projected.
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of Debt of
Nonfinancial Business*
Monthly rate
*Commercial paper and C&I loans are seasonally adjusted, bonds are not.
e Estimated.
Growth of Debt of Household Sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Q4p
Q4p
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of House Prices
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
OFHEO Purchase-Only Index
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
e Estimated.
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 14 of 43
Economic Outlook through 2009
(12) In response to more restrictive financial conditions, higher oil prices, and
weaker-than-expected economic data, the staff has marked down its outlook for the
growth of aggregate demand and lowered its assumption for the path of the federal
funds rate.  The Committee is now assumed to reduce the target rate 25 basis points
at the December meeting and then another 25 basis points to 4 percent in the middle
of 2009, leaving the federal funds rate 75 basis points lower at the end of the forecast
period than in the October Greenbook.  Even so, the staff expects longer-term
Treasury yields to reverse much of their recent declines as investors’ expectations for
sharper reductions in the federal funds rate move into alignment with the staff’s
assumption for monetary policy.  As usual, stock prices are anticipated to rise at a
depreciate about 1½ percent per year.  The price of crude oil is expected to decline
gradually but remain above the path in the October Greenbook.  Against this
backdrop, the pace of economic expansion is projected to slow from about
housing correction deepens, growth of consumer spending slows further, and
business spending decelerates.  Thereafter, real GDP growth gradually picks up,
returning to around the rate of potential GDP growth in 2009, as the decline in
residential investment abates and the drag on spending from tighter credit conditions
and higher energy prices wanes.  The unemployment rate edges up through the
forecast period to 5 percent, a little above the staff’s 4¾ percent estimate of the
NAIRU.  Boosted by the rise in oil prices in recent months, total PCE inflation climbs
to nearly a 3½ percent rate in the current quarter but then drops to 2 percent next
year and to about 1¾ percent in 2009 as oil prices edge down.  Core PCE inflation,
which is projected to run about 2¼ percent in the current quarter and 2 percent for
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 15 of 43
resources ease and energy pass-through effects diminish.
Update on Medium-Term Strategies
(13) This section provides an update of the materials on medium-term strategies
for monetary policy that were presented in the October Bluebook.  As shown in
Chart 5, the Greenbook-consistent measure of short-run r*—the value that would
close the output gap over the next twelve quarters—has shifted down nearly ¾ of a
percentage point and now stands at about 2.2 percent, roughly 40 basis points below
our estimate of the current real federal funds rate.  This revision reflects the extent to
which less favorable financial conditions and higher oil prices than previously
expected are projected to restrain aggregate demand over the next three years.  The
three model-based estimates of short-run r* range from about 1½ to 2½ percent, an
interval that is essentially unchanged from October.4
(14) Chart 6 depicts optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model using
the staff’s extension of the Greenbook forecast beyond 2009.5  In these simulations,
policymakers place equal weights on keeping core PCE inflation close to a specified
goal, on keeping unemployment close to the long-run NAIRU, and on avoiding
changes in the nominal federal funds rate.6  For an inflation goal of 1½ percent
(the left-hand set of charts), the optimal path of the funds rate averages a little less 
                                           
4 The FRB/US model estimate of short-run r* has been revised downward by about 
¾ percentage point, reflecting the model’s projection that some of the near-term weakness 
in aggregate demand will persist over the next few years.   
5 This extension incorporates the same medium-term assumptions used to generate the 
illustrative extension discussed in the October Bluebook. The characteristics of the extension 
are described in the memo to the Committee by Robert Tetlow, “The Extended Greenbook 
Forecast,” December 5, 2007. 
6  In conducting these simulations, policymakers and participants in financial markets are 
assumed to understand fully the forces shaping the economic outlook (as summarized by the 
extended Greenbook projection), whereas households and firms form their expectations 
using more limited information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 16 of 43
Chart 5
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 Percent confidence interval
90 Percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
Single-equation model (2.5 (2.6
Small structural model (1.7 (1.6
Large model (FRB/US) (1.6 (2.3
Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
Greenbook-consistent measure (2.2 (2.9
Medium-Run Measures
Single-equation model (2.3 (2.4
Small structural model (1.8 (1.9
Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
TIPS-based factor model (2.0 2.1
Actual real federal funds rate (2.6 (2.9
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 17 of 43
than 4¾ percent through the end of 2009 before declining gradually to a plateau of
about 3¾ percent.  With an inflation goal of 2 percent (the right-hand set of charts),
the optimal funds rate declines to 3¾ percent by the end of 2009 and then—as the
effects of the current financial strains continue to unwind—gradually rises
to 4¼ percent by the end of 2012.  Compared with the October Bluebook, these
prescriptions are 50 to 75 basis points lower for the period to the end of 2009,
reflecting the same factors that account for the shift in the Greenbook-consistent
r* measure.  With either inflation goal, over the next couple of years the path of the
unemployment rate is slightly higher than that shown in the last Bluebook and the
path for core inflation is about ¼ percentage point higher than in October, reflecting
in part the transitory effects of higher oil prices.
(15) As shown in Chart 7, the outcome-based monetary policy rule prescribes a
funds rate path that declines to 4 percent by the middle of next year and remains
between 4 and 4½ percent throughout the forecast period, about 25 to 75 basis points
lower than in the October Bluebook.  According to financial market quotes, investors
anticipate that the funds rate will decline to 3¼ percent by the end of 2008 and then
rise to about 4 percent by the end of 2012.  Compared with the previous Bluebook,
the 70 percent confidence interval for the funds rate path is a notch lower at the end
of 2012, suggesting a modest decline in the market’s assessment of the equilibrium
real interest rate over the medium run, and is down as much as 50 basis points over
the next two years.  The near-term prescriptions from the simple policy rules
proposed by Taylor (1993, 1999) are little changed since the October Bluebook.  The
first-difference rule—which does not require estimates of the levels of the output gap
or the equilibrium real interest rate—generates a flat funds rate path if the inflation
goal is 1½ percent or a 30 basis point cut by mid-2008 if the inflation goal is
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 19 of 43
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(16) This Bluebook presents three policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized in Table 1.  Alternative A lowers the target federal funds
rate 50 basis points to 4 percent, Alternative B lowers the target 25 basis points to
rationale paragraph, all three alternatives suggest that economic growth is slowing,
reflecting the intensification of the housing correction.  (The characterization of the
economic situation will need to be reviewed in light of the employment report for
November, which will be released on December 7, the day after the publication of
this Bluebook.)  Each of the alternatives references the recent softness in indicators of
business and consumer spending and acknowledges that strains in financial markets
have increased since the last FOMC meeting.  The alternatives also note that the
stance of monetary policy should promote moderate growth over time, but
Alternatives A and C point to increased downside risks to growth.  In light of the
leveling out of non-energy commodity prices over the intermeeting period, each
alternative suggests that “elevated” energy and commodity prices, along with other
factors, may put upward pressure on inflation, instead of referring to “recent increases
in energy and commodity prices.”  The alternatives differ regarding assessments of
risks to growth and inflation.  Alternative A characterizes the downside risks to
growth as roughly balancing the upside risks to inflation, repeating the assessment of
risks from the October statement.  Alternative B avoids an explicit assessment of the
balance of risks and instead states that recent developments have increased the
uncertainty regarding the outlook.  Alternative C concludes that the risks to growth
are the predominant policy concern and notes that “future policy adjustments will
depend on the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by
incoming information.”  As usual, the Committee could combine language from
different alternatives.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 21 of 43
Table 1: Alternative Language for the December 2007 FOMC Announcement
October FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for the 
federal funds rate 50 basis points to 
4 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for the 
federal funds rate 25 basis points to 
4-1/4 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 4-1/2 percent.
Incoming information suggests that the 
housing correction has intensified and 
that growth in business and consumer 
spending is softening.  Moreover, strains 
in financial markets have increased in 
recent weeks.  Overall, the outlook for 
the economy has weakened somewhat, 
and downside risks to growth have 
increased.  Today’s action, combined 
with the policy actions taken earlier, 
should help promote moderate growth 
over time.
Incoming information suggests that 
economic growth is slowing, reflecting 
the intensification of the housing 
correction and some softening in 
business and consumer spending.  
Moreover, strains in financial markets 
have increased in recent weeks.  Today’s 
action, combined with the policy actions 
taken earlier, should help promote 
moderate growth over time.
As the Committee had anticipated, 
economic growth appears to be slowing, 
partly reflecting the intensification of the 
housing correction.  Although strains in 
financial markets have increased in 
recent weeks and now pose greater 
downside risks to growth, the monetary 
policy actions taken earlier are expected 
to help promote moderate growth over 
time.
Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly this year, but 
elevated energy and commodity prices, 
among other factors, may put upward 
pressure on inflation.  In this context, 
the Committee judges that some 
inflation risks remain, and it will 
continue to monitor inflation 
developments carefully.
Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly this year, but 
elevated energy and commodity prices, 
among other factors, may put upward 
pressure on inflation.  In this context, 
the Committee judges that some 
inflation risks remain, and it will 
continue to monitor inflation 
developments carefully.
Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly this year, but 
elevated energy and commodity prices, 
among other factors, may put upward 
pressure on inflation.  In this context, 
the Committee judges that some 
inflation risks remain, and it will 
continue to monitor inflation 
developments carefully.
Assessment 
of Risk
The Committee judges that, after this 
action, the upside risks to inflation 
roughly balance the downside risks to 
growth.  The Committee will continue to 
assess the effects of financial and other 
developments on economic prospects 
and will act as needed to foster price 
stability and sustainable economic 
growth.
Recent developments, including the 
deterioration in financial market 
conditions, have increased the 
uncertainty surrounding the outlook for 
economic growth and inflation.  The 
Committee will continue to assess the 
effects of financial and other 
developments on economic prospects 
and will act as needed to foster price 
stability and sustainable economic 
growth.
The Committee views the downside 
risks to growth as the predominant 
policy concern.  Future policy 
adjustments will depend on the outlook 
for both inflation and economic growth, 
as implied by incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 22 of 43
(17)  If the Committee judges that tighter financial conditions, higher oil prices,
and soft incoming data point to a weaker economic outlook than previously
anticipated, then it may deem a more accommodative stance of policy to be
appropriate and ease policy 25 basis points, as in Alternative B.  The real federal
funds rate is nearly half a percentage point above its downwardly revised Greenbook-
consistent equilibrium value and a touch above the upper end of the range of model-
based estimates (Chart 5), suggesting that a reduction in the target funds rate may be
required to keep output near its potential.  Several policy rules (Chart 7) also suggest
that further policy easing would be appropriate.  Moreover, members might be
concerned about the risk of possible further deterioration in financial conditions,
particularly in the run-up to year-end, or about the potential for significant spillovers
from the housing sector to the broader economy.  If so, they may judge that a policy
easing at this meeting might help insure against such developments.  At the same
time, the Committee may believe that the risks to inflation associated with a 25 basis
point reduction in the target federal funds rate are modest, given recent readings on
core inflation and the current outlook for prices.
(18) After noting that “economic growth is slowing” and that “strains in
financial markets have increased,” the statement for Alternative B suggests that the
actions, is likely to help promote moderate growth over time.  The statement notes
the modest improvement in core inflation this year but indicates that “some inflation
risks remain.”  Rather than provide an explicit assessment of the balance of risks, the
statement concludes that uncertainty around the outlook for growth and inflation has
increased and that the Committee will “continue to assess the effects of financial and
other developments” and act as needed to foster its dual objectives.
(19)   Market participants appear to place about two-thirds odds on a 25 basis
point reduction in the target at this meeting, with most of the remaining probability
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 23 of 43
assigned to a 50 basis point move.  As a result, short-term interest rates would likely
rise modestly in response to Alternative B.  However, judging from the Desk’s survey
of dealers, the statement under Alternative B would likely be read as broadly
consistent with market expectations for additional policy easing.  Consequently,
longer-term interest rates, equity prices, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar
probably would be little changed.
(20) If the Committee views the renewed deterioration in financial markets and
the sharper contraction in the housing sector as presenting a particularly severe threat
to the economic expansion, it might want to lower the target funds rate 50 basis
points, as in Alternative A.  A 50 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate
would put the real funds rate close to the Greenbook-consistent measure of its
equilibrium value (Chart 5) and thus, under the baseline projection, would be
consistent with output returning to its potential in the medium term.  A reduction of
this size would also be broadly compatible with the optimal policy simulations with a
goal (Chart 7).  Moreover, given the deterioration in term funding markets and
increased concerns about balance sheet capacity and counterparty credit risk, the
Committee might worry about the potential for substantial additional tightening of
banks’ lending terms and standards, particularly if it viewed the arrangement of swap
lines with foreign central banks and implementation of a Term Auction Facility as
unlikely to provide significant relief to funding markets.  Members might also see
incoming evidence of a deepening contraction in the housing sector, as well as the
apparent softening in business and consumer spending, as presenting unacceptably
large downside risks to overall economic activity.  By contrast, incoming core inflation
data have continued to be moderate, and the Committee may see the inflation
outlook, and the associated risks, as essentially unchanged.  In these circumstances,
members might conclude that the weaker modal outlook for growth and significantly
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 24 of 43
increased downside risks warrant a 50 basis point policy move at this meeting.
Members may believe that the Committee would be able to reverse the easing quickly
if appropriate.
(21) The draft statement for Alternative A begins with a reference to the further
intensification of the housing correction and recent weakening in business and
consumer expenditures, and it also mentions increased strains in financial markets.  It
then notes that the outlook for economic growth has weakened somewhat and, unlike
Alternative B, adds that the downside risks to growth have increased.  But as in the
other alternatives, the statement suggests that the easing in policy should help foster
moderate expansion over time.  The paragraph regarding inflation is little changed
from October.  The risk assessment would indicate that the 50 basis point easing
brings the risks to inflation and growth roughly into balance.  But if the Committee
believes that, even after such a move, recent developments in financial markets have
increased the uncertainty around the outlook for growth and inflation to such an
extent that an assessment is not meaningful, it may wish instead to employ the risk
assessment language used in Alternative B.
(22) Investors attach significant odds to both a 50 basis point easing and a
move would push very short-term interest rates lower.  However, while the magnitude
of the surprise with respect to the target funds rate would be similar to that
experienced in September, the assessment that the risks to growth and inflation are
balanced, which differs notably from the language in the September statement, might
temper the reaction in rates further out the term structure.  Indeed, if investors find
that assessment somewhat persuasive, intermediate- and longer-term interest rates
might increase as market participants revised up their outlook for the economy.  The
equity market might rally modestly in reaction to lower interest rates and an improved
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 25 of 43
outlook for earnings, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar could even firm a
bit if market participants revised up their outlook for the U.S. economy.
(23) If the Committee judges that the current stance of policy is likely to foster
sustainable growth and acceptable inflation over time, then it might be inclined to
choose Alternative C.  Members might read the incoming macroeconomic data as
broadly consistent with the outlook underlying its October policy decision, including
the expectation for a period of relatively slow growth late this year and early next year.
Conditions in short-term funding markets have deteriorated notably over the
intermeeting period and credit has tightened further for some households and
businesses, increasing the downside risks to growth.  However, the Committee might
feel that the adverse effects of such developments are likely to be limited and that its
earlier easing actions—and perhaps arrangement of swap lines with foreign central
banks and implementation of a Term Auction Facility—provide ample insurance.
Moreover, members may be concerned that the unsettled state of financial markets
may make it difficult for Committee to quickly reverse further policy easing, even if
the prospects for economic growth improve.  And, although core inflation has stayed
moderate and the baseline outlook for inflation may be viewed as acceptable,
members may view elevated oil and other commodity prices and a weaker dollar as
posing large enough upside risks to inflation to make an immediate reduction in the
target funds rate problematic.  Under these circumstances, the Committee might see
maintenance of the current stance of policy for now as appropriate but judge that
downside risks to growth have become the dominant concern.  Such an approach
would leave the Committee well placed to see whether financial market strains
diminish significantly after year-end and to accumulate additional information on the
outlook for growth and inflation before deciding whether further policy easing should
be implemented.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 26 of 43
(24) The proposed statement for Alternative C acknowledges that economic
growth appears to be slowing but indicates explicitly that the softening is broadly in
line with what the Committee had anticipated.  It then notes the increase in financial
market strains and acknowledges that they pose greater downside risk to growth, but
suggests that the monetary policy easing already in place is likely to promote moderate
expansion over time.  The wording on inflation closely follows the October
statement.  The draft statement then suggests that downside risks to growth are the
predominant concern and concludes with the language used in the August and earlier
statements that “future policy adjustments will depend on the outlook for both
inflation and economic growth, as implied by incoming information.”
(25) Market participants would be very surprised if the Committee kept the
target at 4½ percent at this meeting.  Despite the assessment that downside risks to
growth predominate, the absence of action at this meeting and the overall tone of the
policy statement would likely suggest to investors that the Committee does not expect
to lower rates to the extent currently implied by money market futures quotes, so
short-term interest rates would increase notably on the announcement.  However, the
rise in longer-term rates might be tempered if investors revised down their outlook
for economic activity and inflation.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar would
likely appreciate somewhat with the backup in interest rates.  Equity prices probably
would fall.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(26) Under the Greenbook projection, M2 is forecast to grow at about a
from the previous forecast, reflecting in part weaker nominal GDP in the fourth
quarter.  Over 2008, M2 is projected to expand at about a 4½ percent pace, a bit
above the rate of growth of nominal GDP and slightly faster than the forecast in the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 27 of 43
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
Table 2
(percent, annual rate)
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 28 of 43
October Bluebook.  The upward revision reflects lower opportunity costs, given the
reduction in the federal funds rate assumed in this Greenbook, as well as somewhat
greater demand for monetary assets in view of the turbulence in financial markets.
M2 is expected to continue to advance at around 4½ percent pace in 2009, a bit above
nominal GDP growth, supported by the additional policy easing assumed in that year.
(27)   After having expanded at an annual rate of 7½ percent in the first half of
the year, domestic nonfinancial debt is expected to increase at about an 8 percent pace
in the second half of 2007 before slowing sharply to a 4¾ percent rate in 2008 and
in borrowing across all major sectors except the federal government.  The staff
expects household debt growth to fall to 6 percent at an annual rate in the second half
of this year and to 3½ percent in 2008 and to 3¼ percent in 2009, which would be the
slowest annual rate of growth in real terms since 1991.  The slowdown reflects a
moderation in mortgage debt in response to declining home prices and a reduction in
home sales.  Consumer credit is expected to advance at a modest pace.  Nonfinancial
business debt, which expanded robustly in the third quarter, is projected to decelerate
somewhat over the forecast period, as the demand for funds to finance LBOs and
share repurchases continues to abate.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 29 of 43
(28) Draft language for the directive is provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/INCREASING/reducing the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around ________ 4 ½percent.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 30 of 43
