Content last modified 02/07/2013.
Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
JANUARY 25, 2007
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) January 25, 2007
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) The Committee’s decision at its December meeting to leave the target
federal funds rate unchanged conformed to investor expectations, as did the retention
of the tilt and risk assessment from the previous statement. 1  The language in the
rationale portion of the statement, in contrast, was apparently read as suggesting a
slight softening in the Committee’s outlook for economic growth, and the expected
path for monetary policy beyond the near term edged down in response.  Over the
intermeeting period, the release of the minutes of the December FOMC meeting and
speeches by FOMC officials had little net effect on market perceptions.  However,
stronger-than-expected reports on the economy, significant declines in oil prices, and
generally benign inflation readings seemed to prompt investors to boost their
expectations of growth and to mark down their assessment of near-term inflation
pressures.  In terms of the implications for investors’ expectations for the path of the
federal funds rate, the revisions to the growth outlook apparently predominated:  The
expected trajectory of the federal funds rate over the next two years rotated up, with
futures markets putting the federal funds rate at around 4.75 percent at the end of
(Chart 1).  Market participants—including respondents to the Desk’s survey of
primary dealers—now appear to believe that the federal funds rate will probably
remain unchanged through the first half of this year.  Option-implied measures of
uncertainty about the path of policy more than reversed their increases over the
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2007 2008
January 25, 2007
December 11, 2006
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Implied Distribution of Federal Funds Rate about 
Six Months Ahead*
Recent:  01/25/2007 
Last FOMC:  12/11/2006
*Estimates from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, adjusted to 
estimate expectations for the federal funds rate.
Ten-Year Treasury (left scale)
Six-Month Eurodollar (right scale)*
Implied Volatilities
*Width of a 90 percent confidence interval computed from the term
structures for the expected federal funds rate and implied volatility.
Apr. Sept. Feb. July Dec. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Change in Implied One-Year Forward Treasury Rates
since Last FOMC Meeting*
Years Ahead
*Forward rates are the one-year rates maturing at the end of the year shown
on the horizontal axis that are implied by the smoothed Treasury yield curve.
Apr. Sept. Feb. July Dec. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Next Five Years (left axis)
Five-to-Ten Year Forward (left axis)
Spot WTI (right axis)
Inflation Compensation and Oil Prices*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
Treasury yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 38
previous intermeeting period, and the implied distribution of the funds rate about six
months ahead now shows less of a skew toward significantly lower rates.
(2) Yields on Treasury securities shifted up in a parallel fashion across the term
structure, with two- through ten-year nominal Treasury rates increasing about 35 basis
points over the intermeeting period.  Increases in forward rates at longer horizons
appeared to reflect both the expectation of higher future short rates and wider term
premiums.  TIPS-based inflation compensation was little changed at medium- and
long-term maturities.  Inflation expectations as measured by the Reuters-Michigan
survey were also about unchanged.
(3) Broad equity indexes were little changed over the intermeeting period
(Chart 2), as higher bond yields evidently countered the effects of favorable economic
news and generally upbeat early readings on fourth-quarter earnings.  Implied
volatility of the S&P 500 remained near historical lows.  The equity risk premium, as
gauged by the difference between the twelve-month forward trend earnings-price ratio
and the real long-term Treasury yield, declined a bit.  Spreads of yields on investment-
grade bonds over those on comparable-maturity nominal Treasuries held steady, while
those on speculative-grade corporate bonds narrowed.  Corporate credit quality
remained solid, with realized and expected default rates staying very low.
(4) Indications of stronger U.S. economic growth helped lift the trade-weighted
value of the dollar about 2 percent, on balance, versus major foreign currencies over
the intermeeting period (Chart 3).2  The dollar’s largest gain—3¼ percent—came
against the yen as investors reportedly came to expect the Japanese economy to
recover more slowly and Japanese monetary authorities to tighten less in the near term
than had been anticipated.  The dollar rose about 2 percent against the Canadian
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 3 of 38
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Apr. Sept. Feb. July Dec. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Wilshire 5000 Index
S&P 500 EPS
NIPA, economic
profits before tax
Corporate Earnings Growth Percent
*Change from four quarters earlier.
    Source. I/B/E/S for S&P 500 EPS.
Apr. Sept. Feb. July Dec. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
S&P 500
Nasdaq
Implied Volatilities
Daily
FOMC
Apr. Sept. Feb. July Dec. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Five-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Bond Default and C&I Loan Delinquency Rates
Percent of outstandings
C&I loan delinquency rate
    (Call Report)
Bond default rate*
*Six-month moving average, from Moody’s Investors Service.
Percent of liabilities
Expected Year-Ahead Defaults*
*Firm-level estimates of year-ahead defaults from KMV corporation, weighted
by firm liabilities as a percent of total liabilities, excluding defaulted firms.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 38
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
Jan. May Oct. Mar. Aug. Jan. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
Jan. May Oct. Mar. Aug. Jan. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields (Nominal)
Jan. May Oct. Mar. Aug. Jan. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Stock Price Indexes
Industrial Countries
Jan. May Oct. Mar. Aug. Jan. May Oct.
2004 2005 2006
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock Price Indexes
Emerging Market Economies
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 38
dollar and the euro.  By contrast, the dollar fell slightly on net against sterling as the
Bank of England, citing concerns about inflation pressures, wrong-footed markets on
January 11 by increasing its policy rate 25 basis points.  Yields on long-term
government securities in most major foreign industrial countries rose 30 to 35 basis
points, roughly matching the increases on comparable U.S. issues.  As in the United
States, most of the increases abroad appeared to be in the real component of yields, as
market participants seemed to be factoring in expectations of greater strength in the
global economy, including expected support to growth from the recent drop in oil
prices.  A notable exception to this pattern was Japan, where nominal yields were
roughly unchanged on net over the intermeeting period.  Stock markets in the major
industrial countries recorded gains of 1 to 6 percent.
(5) The foreign exchange value of the dollar was about unchanged on net
against an index of currencies of our other important trading partners.  In Thailand,
financial markets continued to be volatile, reacting in part to authorities’ efforts to
deter capital inflows; share prices fell more than 10 percent.  The Thai turmoil did not
appear to spill over to other Asian financial markets, and most Asian currencies
moved in fairly narrow ranges.  The dollar declined ¾ percent versus the Chinese
renminbi over the intermeeting period.  The dollar edged lower versus the Brazilian
real, and the Brazilian EMBI+ spread narrowed to a record low of about 185 basis
(6) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is estimated to have expanded at
an annual rate of 7½ percent in the fourth quarter of last year, close to the pace
registered over 2006 as a whole (Chart 4).  Business debt grew more quickly last
quarter, boosted in large part by a pickup in merger-related borrowing.  Among the
major components of business debt, a sharp rise in the issuance of corporate bonds
and commercial paper more than offset a moderation in the growth of C&I loans.  In
the household sector, home mortgage debt is thought to have decelerated further in
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 6 of 38
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Debt of Nonfinancial Sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4e
e Estimated.
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of Debt of
Nonfinancial Business
Monthly rate
Growth of Debt of Household Sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of House Prices
Percent
OFHEO Purchase-Only Index (s.a.)
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 38
the fourth quarter, reflecting in part the ongoing slowing in house price appreciation.
Respondents to the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey reported weaker
demand for mortgage loans, and some indicated that they had tightened standards for
such loans.  The growth of consumer credit appears to have remained moderate last
(7) M2 expanded briskly in December, bringing fourth-quarter growth to
in opportunity cost since midyear.  In January, the aggregate appears to have
accelerated to a 9 percent rate, as growth of liquid deposits has picked up further.
Retail money funds have continued to increase at a robust rate, while small time
deposits appear to be decelerating.  Currency growth has been restrained as solid
domestic demand has partially offset weak international demand.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 8 of 38
Economic Outlook through 2008
(8) The incoming data over the intermeeting period led the staff to mark up its
assessment of real GDP in the fourth quarter of 2006.  The contours of the
Greenbook forecast are otherwise little changed:  Real GDP is again projected to
grow about 2¼ percent this year and 2½ percent in 2008.  With output expanding
somewhat more slowly than the staff’s estimate of potential GDP this year and about
at potential next year, the unemployment rate rises to almost 5 percent early next year
and then levels off.  The path of core inflation is slightly below the December
projection, mainly owing to new inflation data, lower energy and other commodity
prices, and lower core import prices.  The staff now expects core PCE inflation to
average 2¼ percent this year and 2 percent in 2008, while total PCE prices are
projected to rise a bit faster than 2 percent in both years.  The forecast assumes that
the Committee holds policy unchanged over the next two years, rather than easing
slightly in mid-2008, as in the previous round.  Long-term Treasury yields are
projected to edge up a bit over the forecast horizon as market participants come to
realize that policy will not be eased as they had anticipated.  Stock prices are again
assumed to rise at about a 6½ percent annual rate.  The real trade-weighted foreign
exchange value of the dollar is projected to depreciate gradually, but from a higher
level.  Reflecting the sharp decline in both spot and futures quotes, oil prices
throughout the forecast period are about $9 per barrel lower than in the December
Medium-Term Strategies
(9) To shed additional light on the economic outlook and possible policy
strategies, the FRB/US model was used to construct an illustrative extension of
the Greenbook forecast beyond 2008 based on a set of medium-term assumptions
together with some judgmental adjustments.  Important influences on the outlook
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 38
include trend multifactor productivity growth of about 1¾ percent per year,
approximately flat energy prices, and a pickup in the pace of real dollar depreciation
to an average rate of 3 percent per year.  Given the impetus to inflation from the
declining foreign exchange value of the dollar, the unemployment rate would need
to be a bit above the staff’s assumed long-run NAIRU of 5 percent to keep core
PCE inflation stable.  The contours of aggregate demand are influenced by the
unified federal budget deficit, which rises from 2 percent of GDP next year to about
Further assuming that term, credit, and equity risk premiums gradually revert back
to their historical norms, the real federal funds rate would need to decline about a
percentage point from its current level, to around 2 percent, by 2012 to keep output
expanding along the path of its potential.
(10) As shown in Chart 5, the Greenbook-consistent estimate of short-run
r*—the value of the real federal funds rate that would put the level of real GDP at its
potential twelve quarters ahead—has shifted up about 50 basis points since the
previous Bluebook.  This increase owes mainly to the upward revision to the staff’s
assessment of aggregate demand implied by lower energy prices and recent robust
readings on consumer spending.  The Greenbook-consistent measure of short-run r*
now stands at about 3¼ percent, a bit above the actual real funds rate, while all three
model-based estimates are considerably lower, at around 2½ percent.  The model-
based estimates of medium-run r*—the value of the real funds rate consistent with
keeping output at potential at a seven-year horizon—are close to 2¼ percent, just
above the TIPS-based measure of about 2 percent.
(11) Chart 6 depicts optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model in which
policymakers are assumed to place equal weight on three stabilization objectives:
keeping core PCE inflation close to a specified goal of either 1½ or 2 percent, keeping
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 38
Chart 5
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval
90 percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.4 2.1
   Small structural model 2.4 2.2
   Large model (FRB/US) 2.6 2.7
   Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.0 - 3.9(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.1 - 4.8(
Greenbook-consistent measure 3.3 2.8
Medium-Run Measures
   Single-equation model 2.3 2.2
   Small structural model 2.3 2.1
   Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
      70 percent confidence interval (1.4 - 3.2(
      90 percent confidence interval (0.8 - 3.8(
TIPS-based factor model 2.1 2.1
Memo
   Actual real federal funds rate 3.0 2.9
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 38
unemployment close to the long-run NAIRU, and avoiding changes in the nominal
funds rate.4  In principle, because the decisions of the private sector depend in part
on expectations regarding the future path of policy, and because policymakers are
assumed to place somewhat greater weight on near-term outcomes relative to those
at distant horizons, a policymaker might be tempted to reoptimize the path of policy
at a later date, even in the absence of any new information.  However, given the
structure of the FRB/US model, the magnitude of those readjustments in current
circumstances would be very small (see box on “Dynamic Inconsistency and Optimal
Control Policies”).  For an inflation goal of 2 percent (the right-hand set of charts),
the optimal path of the nominal federal funds rate is somewhat higher than that
presented in the October and December Bluebooks, remaining close to 5¼ percent
over the next two years and then gradually declining to about 4 percent by the end
of 2012.  With a lower near-term outlook for core inflation, this path for the nominal
rate implies a somewhat higher real interest rate, which tempers the increased strength
of aggregate demand.  Output remains close to its potential; the unemployment rate
returns to the NAIRU by the end of next year and remains near that rate in
subsequent years.  However, the cumulative decline in energy prices helps nudge
inflation lower, and core inflation settles around its 2 percent goal without the need
for any substantial economic slack.  By contrast, with an inflation goal of 1½ percent
(left-hand set of charts), the optimal funds rate peaks at just above 6 percent in early
about 3½ percent by 2012.  Furthermore, it is evident from this scenario that the
latest revision to the staff’s outlook has not significantly affected the medium-term
policy tradeoff:  The optimal policy generates outcomes in 2012 for both
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 38
Dynamic Inconsistency and Optimal Control Policies 
 
The optimal control policies shown in the Bluebook assume that the policymaker specifies  
a particular funds rate path starting from that date and then follows that path.  In principle,  
a policymaker might be tempted to reoptimize the path of policy at some later date, even in  
the absence of new information; that is, the prescriptions from these simulations might exhibit 
dynamic inconsistency.  The academic literature has emphasized two possible sources of this temptation.  
First, policymakers might desire to keep the unemployment rate below its sustainable rate and hence 
be inclined towards inflation surprises; however, because such surprises cannot be systematic if the 
private sector’s expectations are rationally determined, this inclination toward stimulative policies 
only raises inflation.  Second, if current decisions of the private sector depend on expected future 
monetary policy actions and if policymakers discount the future, then the central bank may be 
tempted to view private-sector expectations of future policy actions as a separate instrument from 
actual actions.  In the optimal control scenarios shown in the Bluebook, the first source of dynamic 
inconsistency does not arise because, along with other goals, policymakers are always assumed to 
have the objective of keeping unemployment close to its natural rate.  However, the second source 
could be relevant for the optimal control simulations that have become a staple of the Bluebook. 
  
The magnitude of this dynamic inconsistency can be gauged, for example, by considering the 
optimal control scenario shown in the left column of Chart 6, in which the policymaker has an 
inflation goal of 1½ percent.  As shown in the chart below, in the absence of any new information, 
reoptimizing the policy path in either 2009 (the dashed line) or 2010 (the dash-dotted line) yields 
funds rate prescriptions that differ by less than ¼ percentage point from those of the optimal policy 
in the benchmark scenario (the solid line).  Additional simulations (not shown) indicate that the 
small magnitude of these deviations is robust to alternative values of the policymaker’s discount rate 
and to the relative weight placed on the objective of avoiding interest rate changes.
Optimized from 2007Q1
Optimized from 2009Q1
Optimized from 2010Q1
Federal funds rate
The small magnitude of dynamic inconsistency provides some reassurance that the optimal control 
simulations shown in each Bluebook can serve as useful benchmarks in assessing medium-term 
policy strategies.  Of course, this issue might well loom larger under different macroeconomic 
circumstances or under alternative assumptions about policymaker preferences and private-sector 
expectations formation.1 
_______________________________ 
1 For further discussion on the sensitivity of the optimal control simulations, see the memo to the Committee  
by Michael Kiley, Thomas Laubach, and Robert Tetlow, “Optimal-Control Monetary Policies,” June 20, 2006.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 38
unemployment and core inflation that are quite close to those presented in October
and December.
(12) The upper panels of Chart 7 depict model- and market-based assessments
of the policy outlook through the end of 2012.  In the absence of shocks, the
outcome-based rule prescribes a funds rate path that declines gradually to about
the next two years and a leveling off at about 4½ percent after that.  Stochastic
simulations of the FRB/US model indicate a 70 percent probability that the
prescriptions of the outcome-based rule will fall in a range of 2 to 6½ percent during
uncertainty in financial markets regarding the prospective path of policy at longer
horizons (see box on “Assessing Medium-Term Policy Uncertainty using Interest Rate
(13) The lower portion of Chart 7 reports the near-term prescriptions of simple
policy rules for inflation goals of 1½ or 2 percent.  For example, the rule proposed
by Taylor (1999) prescribes a funds rate of about 4¾ to 5 percent for the current
quarter, whereas a funds rate of 5½ to 5¾ percent is stipulated by a variant of that
rule incorporating a higher value of r*.  In each of these cases, the rule is consistent
with a cut next quarter of about 25 basis points.  In contrast to the Taylor rules, the
first-difference rule—which does not require estimates of the levels of the output gap
or the equilibrium real interest rate—generates a funds rate that rises to 5¾ percent
next quarter if the inflation goal is 1½ percent, or a flat funds rate if the inflation goal
is 2 percent.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 15 of 38
Assessing Medium-Term Policy Uncertainty using Interest Rate Caps 
 
Uncertainty around the prospective path of the federal funds rate can be assessed using 
implied volatilities derived from interest rate derivatives.  In previous Bluebooks, options  
on Eurodollar futures were used to construct confidence intervals at relatively short 
horizons, but these derivatives only trade out to two years.  By contrast, interest rate caps, 
which are among the most liquid over-the-counter fixed income derivatives, provide 
information about uncertainty at much longer horizons; hence, starting with this Bluebook, 
these derivatives are used to construct confidence intervals for the funds rate at horizons 
extending out six years.1 
 
An interest rate cap is a sequence of call options—referred to as caplets—that insures the 
holder against increases in short-term interest rates above a certain level over the horizon  
of the cap.  For example, a standard ten-year cap comprises thirty-nine quarterly caplets  
on three-month LIBOR, where the first caplet is linked to the realized three-month rate 
three months ahead, and the final caplet is linked to the realized rate 9¾ years ahead.   
Given prices of interest rate caps at several distinct maturities, it is feasible to compute an 
entire term structure of implied volatilities.  Translating these estimates from three-month 
LIBOR to overnight federal funds requires some assumptions regarding the magnitudes  
of term premiums and the relative volatility of overnight versus three-month interest rates.   
 
While interest rate caps are useful for assessing market uncertainty about policy at relatively 
long horizons, the confidence intervals presented in Chart 7 rest on two important 
assumptions that are commonly employed by options traders:  Short-term interest rates are 
assumed to be log-normally distributed and to follow a simple autoregressive process over 
the life of the contract.2  Furthermore, these confidence intervals are based solely on the 
prices of at-the-money options, whereas using the prices of both in- and out-of-the-money 
options could reveal significant information about market perceptions of skewness or heavy 
tails in the distribution of short-term interest rates; indeed, such information might well 
indicate more substantial downside risks than depicted in Chart 7.  These issues are the 
subject of ongoing research by Board staff. 
_____________________ 
1 For further information regarding methodology, see the January 9, 2007 memo by Benson Durham, “Federal Funds 
Confidence Intervals Derived from Interest Rate Caps.” 
2 Note that the log-normal assumption by construction implies that the distribution of rates is skewed somewhat  
toward higher rates.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 38
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(14) This Bluebook presents three policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized by the draft statements in Table 1.  Under Alternatives A
and B, the Committee would leave the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting,
while under Alternative C it would tighten policy by 25 basis points.  Alternative A
would reflect a judgment that the risks to economic growth and inflation are now
roughly balanced.  In Alternatives B and C, the accompanying statement would
continue to indicate that inflation is the predominant risk, suggesting that additional
firming is still more likely than policy easing in the near term.  The rationale portion
of all three alternatives has been trimmed some, given that the references in the
December statement to prior monetary policy actions and the impetus to inflation
from rising energy prices seemed stale.
(15) The implications for monetary policy of better-than-expected news on both
inflation and economic growth may be seen as roughly offsetting, suggesting that the
Committee has little reason to alter its current policy stance and risk assessment.  If
so, the Committee may be attracted to Alternative B, under which the federal funds
rate would remain unchanged at 5¼ percent and the statement would continue to
highlight concern about inflation.  The Committee may see the contours of the staff
projection—output running close to its potential and core inflation edging down to
current circumstances.  In the staff’s analysis, the real federal funds rate is near the
Greenbook-consistent measure of its equilibrium value (Chart 5), suggesting that the
current policy stance is likely to be consistent with fostering output near potential
over time.  Maintaining the current policy stance would be consistent with
prescriptions from both the optimal policy path simulations of the FRB/US model
(Chart 6) and the first-difference rule (Chart 7), based on an assumed 2 percent
inflation objective.  Although the Committee may view inflation running at or above
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 18 of 38
Table 1: Alternative Language for the January FOMC Announcement
December FOMC Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for 
the federal funds rate at 5¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to raise its target for the 
federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 
5½ percent.
The economy seems likely to continue 
to expand at a moderate pace on 
balance over coming quarters.  
However, the substantial cooling of the 
housing market remains a drag on 
economic growth.
Although some tentative signs of 
stabilization have appeared in the 
housing market, weakness in 
residential construction remains a 
drag on economic growth. 
Nevertheless, supported in part by 
recent gains in incomes and declines 
in energy prices, the economy seems 
likely to expand at a moderate pace 
over coming quarters.
Economic growth seems to be 
rebounding and some tentative signs of 
stabilization have appeared in the 
housing market.  Going forward, the 
economy seems likely to expand at a 
moderate pace over coming quarters.
Rationale 3.  Readings on core inflation have 
been elevated, and the high level of 
resource utilization has the potential 
to sustain inflation pressures.  
However, inflation pressures seem 
likely to moderate over time, 
reflecting reduced impetus from 
energy prices, contained inflation 
expectations, and the cumulative 
effects of monetary policy actions and 
other factors restraining aggregate 
demand.
Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly in recent months, 
and inflation pressures seem likely to 
moderate over time, partly reflecting 
the recent decline in energy prices.
Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly in recent months, 
and inflation pressures seem likely to 
moderate over time. However, the 
high level of resource utilization has 
the potential to sustain inflation 
pressures.
Readings on core inflation have 
improved modestly in recent months 
but remain elevated.  Inflation 
pressures seem likely to moderate over 
time, but the extent and speed of that 
moderation remain uncertain.
Assessment of 
Risk
In these circumstances, future policy 
adjustments will depend on the 
evolution of the outlook for both 
inflation and economic growth, as 
implied by incoming information.
The Committee judges that some 
inflation risks remain.  The extent and 
timing of any additional firming that 
may be needed to address these risks 
will depend on the evolution of the 
outlook for both inflation and 
economic growth, as implied by 
incoming information.
The Committee judges that inflation 
remains the predominant concern, and 
consequently that in the near term 
policy firming is more likely than policy 
easing.  Future policy adjustments will 
depend on the evolution of the outlook 
for both inflation and economic 
growth, as implied by incoming 
information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 38
especially given the potentially delicate state of the housing sector, may persuade the
Committee to refrain from tightening at this time.  If so, the Committee may continue
to indicate that inflation is the predominant risk to the outlook, especially given the
high rate of utilization in the labor market.
(16) In light of the flurry of stronger-than-expected economic data over the
intermeeting period, the rationale paragraph in the statement under Alternative B
could indicate that the economy seems likely to expand at a moderate pace.  It could
drop the reference to “a substantial cooling of the housing market” and note, instead,
that “although some tentative signs of stabilization have appeared in the housing
market, weakness in residential construction remains a drag on economic growth.”
With regard to inflation, the statement could acknowledge that readings on core
inflation “have improved modestly in recent months,” but reiterate the Committee’s
concern that inflation pressures remain.  In its assessment of risks, the Committee
could essentially repeat the language from its statement in December.
(17) Investors see virtually no chance of a policy change at this meeting, and the
Desk’s survey suggests that primary dealers unanimously expect that the
accompanying statement will note that the Committee continues to see inflation as the
dominant risk.  Consequently, implementation of Alternative B is unlikely to elicit
significant market reaction.
(18) In light of the improvement in the outlook for inflation during the
intermeeting period and the persistence of downside risks arising from the substantial
cooling of the housing market, the Committee may now judge that the risks to the
attainment of its dual objectives are roughly balanced, as in Alternative A.  Removing
the bias toward further tightening would leave the Committee better positioned to
respond to the adverse effects of a possible further deterioration in residential
construction or spillovers to consumer spending, along the lines of the “more
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 38
extensive housing correction” alternative Greenbook scenario.  Even absent such
concerns, the expected path for inflation is somewhat lower than in December,
implying that the real federal funds rate is poised to edge higher—a development that
the Committee may view as reducing the likelihood of policy tightening in the near
term.  Furthermore, the Committee might see core inflation as declining faster than in
the staff forecast because, for instance, it perceives less tightness in labor markets than
the staff (a possibility suggested by the “lower NAIRU” alternative Greenbook
scenario), or because it is more optimistic about the disinflationary impetus from
lower energy and other commodity prices and the stronger foreign exchange value of
the dollar.
(19) The rationale portion of Alternative A reflects the improved readings on
economic growth but notes that the substantial cooling of the housing market remains
a drag on the expansion.  The paragraph on inflation observes that “inflation
pressures seem likely to moderate over time, partly reflecting the recent decline in
energy prices.”  To indicate the Committee’s overall assessment of balanced risks, the
statement then simply points to the dependence of future policy adjustments on the
evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by
incoming information.
(20) Shorter-term interest rates would likely fall in response to an announcement
along the lines of Alternative A, and longer-term yields might follow suit.  However, if
investors read the statement as suggesting that the Committee was willing to tolerate
somewhat higher rates of inflation over the long haul, longer-term yields could be
pushed higher and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely weaken.
(21) In contrast, the surprisingly strong economic performance in the fourth
quarter and continued tightness in labor markets might heighten the concern of some
members that the current stance of policy is likely to produce insufficient progress on
inflation.  If so, the Committee might judge that an additional 25 basis point increase
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 38
in the federal funds rate at this meeting, as in Alternative C, is warranted.  Both the
optimal policy path simulations of the FRB/US model (Chart 6) and the first-
difference rule (Chart 7) suggest that additional firming of policy should be
undertaken if the Committee wishes to achieve a long-term inflation objective of
downside risk to the outlook appears to be less pressing.  In light of the economy’s
resilience over the past several quarters, the Committee may also be concerned that
the recent rebound in personal consumption expenditures may prove more persistent
than in the staff projection (as in the “buoyant consumer spending” alternative
Greenbook scenario), suggesting that the current stance of policy may not prevent the
economy from stretching its resource use tighter.  In these circumstances, and with
core inflation uncomfortably high, a slight policy firming at this meeting may be seen
as both appropriate to ensure that the modest improvement in core inflation in recent
months is not reversed and as desirable to signal the Committee’s resolve to foster a
further decline.
(22) Under Alternative C, the paragraph on economic activity in the rationale
section notes the improvement in economic growth and observes that the housing
market may be stabilizing.  The announcement also points out that, despite modest
improvements, readings on core inflation remain elevated and that the extent and
speed of further moderation in inflation remains uncertain.  In its assessment of risks,
the Committee would once again indicate that inflation risks are the predominant
concern, but could omit the clause referring to “the extent and timing of any
additional firming” in the last sentence.  Instead, the statement would note that “in
the near term policy firming is more likely than policy easing,” which may better
reflect the Committee’s views regarding the range of likely outcomes about the
direction of policy, especially following a firming at this meeting and the change in
other forward-looking language.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 38
(23) The choice of Alternative C would stun market participants, leading to an
upward revision of their short-term outlook for the path of policy and a significant
rise in short- and intermediate-term interest rates.  Longer-term rates would likely step
up, especially if market participants became concerned that the inflation outlook is
less benign than they had thought.  That said, by reaffirming the Committee’s
determination to reduce inflation, this policy action might also lead market
participants to expect a more rapid decline in inflation and possibly even to revise
downward their perceptions of the Committee’s long-term inflation objective.  If this
is the case, long-term forward rates might decline and the foreign exchange value of
the dollar could strengthen.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(24) Under the Greenbook forecast, M2 is expected to grow about 5½ percent
in 2007 and 5 percent in 2008, close to the rates projected in December. Opportunity
costs edge down this year, as deposit rates continue to catch up to earlier increases in
short-term interest rates.  As a result, M2 grows faster than nominal income in 2007.
In 2008, opportunity costs are about flat and M2 grows broadly in line with nominal
income.  In the forecast, continuing rapid growth in retail money funds offsets more
sluggish growth in small time deposits, while liquid deposits expand moderately, on
net.  Currency growth continues to be restrained by weak foreign demand.
(25) The growth of domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to fall from
about 7¾ percent last year to 6½ percent in 2007 and to about 6 percent in 2008.  In
the household sector, the weakness in housing prices continues to dampen mortgage
borrowing over the forecast horizon.  Corporate debt is also projected to slow
appreciably, as the strong merger-related debt issuance seen last year wanes.  With the
unified budget deficit expected to widen, federal debt growth is projected to pick up
this year and next.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 38
No Change/
Greenbook Forecast* 25 bp Tightening
Monthly Growth Rates
Oct-06 8.7 8.7
Nov-06 7.1 7.1
Dec-06 7.6 7.6
Jan-07 9.0 9.0
Feb-07 6.0 5.6
Mar-07 4.5 3.7
Apr-07 5.5 4.7
May-07 4.3 3.6
Jun-07 3.5 3.0
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
Jan-07 Mar-07 5.3 4.7
Jan-07 Jun-07 4.8 4.1
Directive and Balance of  Risks Statement
(26) Draft language for the directive and draft risk assessments identical to those
presented in Table 1 are provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining/INCREASING/REDUCING the federal funds rate at/TO
an average of around ________________ 5¼ percent.
Risk Assessments
A. In these circumstances, future policy adjustments will depend on the
evolution of the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as
implied by incoming information.
B. The Committee judges that some inflation risks remain.  The extent and
timing of any additional firming that may be needed to address these
risks will depend on the evolution of the outlook for both inflation and
economic growth, as implied by incoming information.
C. The Committee judges that inflation remains the predominant concern,
and consequently that in the near term policy firming is more likely than
policy easing.  Future policy adjustments will depend on the evolution of
the outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by
incoming information.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 25 of 38
