Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Content last modified 03/07/2014.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
JANUARY 24, 2008
CLASS I FOMC – RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR) JANUARY 24, 2008
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Heightened concerns about credit losses and the global economic outlook
together with the anticipation and subsequent realization of substantial near-term
policy easing have dominated financial market developments since the December
FOMC meeting.  Although pressures in short-term funding markets abated
significantly after year-end, broader financial market conditions deteriorated sharply
amid increased concerns about the economic outlook and additional write-downs of
mortgage-related assets by large financial firms.  Even after the 75 basis point rate cut
on January 22, market participants see substantial odds of at least 50 basis points of
additional easing on January 30.  Moreover, the expected path of policy now bottoms
out at around 2¼ percent in early 2009, about 90 basis points lower than at the time
of the December meeting.  Shorter-term nominal Treasury yields fell in line with
policy expectations; longer-dated Treasury yields also fell steeply.  Corporate bond
spreads rose to their highest levels in about five years, with speculative-grade spreads
jumping almost 130 basis points over the period since the December FOMC meeting.
Broad equity price indexes dropped about 11 percent, on net, with financial stocks
especially hard hit.  Respondents to the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey
reported tightening standards and terms over the past three months for a wide range
of business and household loan categories; they also noted a broad softening of loan
Monetary Policy Expectations and Treasury Yields
(2) The FOMC’s decision at its December meeting to lower the target federal
funds rate by 25 basis points to 4¼ percent was largely anticipated by market
participants.1  However, investors were surprised that policymakers did not
simultaneously announce other measures to address strains in term funding markets.
Near-term Eurodollar futures rates rose about 20 basis points, but Treasury coupon
yields fell 10 to 20 basis points as investors’ concerns about the macroeconomic
effects of funding market strains intensified.  These moves were largely reversed the
next day, following the announcement of the establishment of the Term Auction
Facility and reciprocal currency arrangements with two foreign central banks.
Economic data—particularly the ISM and employment reports for December—came
in softer than expected and prompted sharp reductions in money market futures rates.
Although the release of the minutes of the December meeting elicited only a limited
response in financial markets, interest rates moved down further in response to the
Chairman’s January 10 speech and to speeches by other Federal Reserve officials that
were read as suggesting that signs of broader economic weakness and additional
financial strains would likely require an easier stance of policy.  Although investors
had speculated about the possibility of an intermeeting move, the 75 basis point
reduction in the target on January 22 came as a considerable surprise, and rates on
money market futures contracts declined notably on the announcement.   On net,
market participants now expect the funds rate to fall to around 2¼ percent by early
place 34 percent odds on a quarter-point cut in the target at the upcoming FOMC
meeting and 65 percent probability on a policy easing of 50 basis points or more.  As
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 2 of 38
Chart 1
Interest Rate Developments
January 24, 2008
December 10, 2007
Expected Federal Funds Rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Probability Density for Target Funds Rate after
January 30, 2008 FOMC Meeting
Target Funds Rate
Note. Derived on January 24, 2008 from options on federal
funds futures expiring on February 29, 2008.
Recent:  January 24, 2008
Day Before Last FOMC: December 10, 2007
Implied Distribution of Federal Funds Rate Six 
Months Ahead*
Recent: 1/24/2008
Last FOMC: 12/10/2007
*Derived from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, with term premium 
 and other adjustments to estimate expectations for the federal funds rate.
Ten-Year
Two-Year
Nominal Treasury Yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Dec.
FOMC
Change in Implied One-Year Forward Treasury Rates
since Last FOMC Meeting*
*Forward rates are the one-year rates maturing at the end of the year shown
 on the horizontal axis that are implied by the smoothed Treasury yield curve.
Next Five Years (left scale)
Five-to-Ten Year Forward (left scale)
Spot WTI (right scale)
Inflation Compensation and Oil Prices*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
 Treasury yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Dec.
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 3 of 38
of earlier this week, respondents to the Desk’s recent survey of primary dealers
assigned around 60 percent probability to a 50 basis point rate cut, and most
respondents anticipated no substantial changes from the January 22 statement.  On
balance, market uncertainty about the course of monetary policy over the next year
rose somewhat, and the negative skewness in option-implied distributions of the
federal funds rate six months ahead seemed to have disappeared.
(3) Consistent with the reduction in the federal funds rate target and
expectations of additional substantial policy easing, yields on two-year nominal
Treasury securities fell about 94 basis points, on net, and ten-year nominal Treasury
yields declined about 46 basis points.  Yields on ten-year TIPS fell nearly as much as
their nominal counterparts.  According to the staff’s term structure models, the
substantial decline in TIPS yields since the December FOMC meeting owed roughly
equally to lower expected real short rates, consistent with the downward revision to
the outlook for the economy, and to a reduction in real term premiums.  TIPS-based
inflation compensation at a five-year horizon moved roughly in line with oil prices
and is now 12 basis points lower, on net, than at the time of the December meeting.
Amid volatile trading conditions, five-year-forward inflation compensation five years
ahead rose 23 basis points over the period since the December FOMC meeting, on
balance, including a 10 basis point increase on the day of the rate cut on January 22.
However, according to the desk’s survey of primary dealers, expected CPI inflation
between five and ten years ahead increased only slightly from the December survey
results, and the Michigan survey of households indicates that expected inflation over
the next five to ten years edged down 10 basis points to 3 percent in January.  Term
structure models as well as back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest the rise in TIPS-
based inflation compensation owes to modestly higher inflation risk premiums rather
than higher inflation expectations.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 4 of 38
Money Markets
(4) Conditions in short-term funding markets have improved notably since the
December FOMC meeting.  Spreads of term federal fund rates and libor over
comparable-maturity OIS rates narrowed somewhat following the announcement and
subsequent implementation of the Term Auction Facility (See box “The Term
Auction Facility and the Federal Funds Market”), and they fell considerably further
after year-end.  Financial institutions’ evident ability to raise capital may also have had
beneficial effects on bank funding markets.  Conditions in European interbank money
markets also improved noticeably over the intermeeting period, as spreads on both
overnight and term euro and sterling borrowing narrowed substantially.  In mid-
December, the European Central Bank, Swiss National Bank, Bank of England, and
Bank of Canada all announced special operations aimed at calming term money
markets as part of a concerted effort with the Federal Reserve.  The European Central
Bank and the Swiss National Bank auctioned $20 billion and $4 billion, respectively,
of term funds they obtained in currency swaps with the Federal Reserve.  The
European Central Bank also auctioned an unusually large amount of term funds in
euros, while the Bank of England and Bank of Canada auctioned smaller amounts of
funds in sterling and Canadian dollars, respectively.  Market participants reported that
the coordinated central bank measures contributed to the improvement in money
market conditions.  In the United States, spreads on asset-backed commercial paper
over AA financial paper have dropped considerably from their very high levels in mid-
to late December.  Spreads on lower-rated nonfinancial unsecured paper over AA
nonfinancial paper have also fallen from their year-end highs but remain above the
levels in late October when year-end pressures became apparent.  Asset-backed
commercial paper outstanding increased during the first half of January, the first rise
since last summer (Chart 2); the volume of unsecured paper was little changed over
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 5 of 38
The Term Auction Facility and the Federal Funds Market
In response to strains in term funding markets, the Federal Reserve established in December a 
Term Auction Facility (TAF)—a temporary program in which the Federal Reserve auctions 
funds for fixed terms of approximately one month to depository institutions that are judged to 
be in generally sound financial condition.  The TAF was established in coordination with the 
arrangement of swap lines to fund similar dollar liquidity facilities at other central banks.  
Judging from the first three auctions held in December and January, the TAF appears to have 
largely overcome the main drawback of the primary credit program: the perceived stigma 
associated with borrowing from the discount window.  All of the auctions were 
oversubscribed, with a substantial number of bidders, ample bid-to-cover ratios, and stop-out 
rates that were below prevailing term market rates.  Funds were awarded to a sizable and 
diverse group of depository institutions.  To maintain the overnight federal funds rate close to 
the target, the Desk offset the extra provision of reserve balances through the TAF and the 
swap lines with other central banks by redeeming $56 billion in Treasury bills and by reducing 
the level of long-term repurchase agreements outstanding by $9 billion.
While it is not possible to isolate the impact of the TAF on financial markets from the effects 
of other recent market developments and the uneventful turn of the year, market participants 
attributed some of the narrowing in the spread between libor rates and overnight index swap 
rates of comparable maturities since mid-December to the TAF auctions and the 
accompanying auctions of term dollar funding from the European Central Bank and the Swiss 
National Bank.  The TAF may also have contributed to a reduction in volatility in the federal 
funds market, but, according to market commentary, the passing of the year end without 
serious disruption was likely at least as important to the stabilization in that market.  From the 
December FOMC meeting through the end of 2007, the intraday standard deviation of the 
funds rate was 40 basis points, on average; it has fallen to 13 basis points so far this year.  An 
important cause of the volatility in the funds rate late last year—a significant spread between 
rates paid by foreign banks over those paid by domestic banks and the associated tendency for 
the funds rate to be firm to the target in the morning and then soften after the close of 
business in Europe—has moderated significantly, perhaps in part because the TAF and other 
central bank auctions reduced foreign banks’ concern about their access to liquidity.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 6 of 38
Chart 2
Asset Market Developments
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov. Jan.
2007
ABCP
Unsecured
Weekly (Wed., s.a.)
Commercial Paper Outstanding
Last weekly observation is for January 23, 2008.
Dec.
FOMC
Wilshire
Dow Jones Financial
Equity Prices
Daily Dec.
FOMC
S&P 500 (VIX)
Implied Volatility
Daily Dec.
FOMC
Basis points Basis points
Ten-Year BBB (left scale)
Ten-Year High-Yield (right scale)
Corporate Bond Spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Dec.
FOMC
May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan.
2007
Series 8
Series 9
LCDX Spreads
Dec.
FOMC
FRM
1-Year ARM
Jumbo-Conforming
Mortgage Rate Spreads
Dec.
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 7 of 38
the entire period since the December FOMC meeting.  The outstanding amount of
European asset-backed commercial paper continued to decline.
Capital Markets
(5) Broad-based U.S. equity price indexes were highly volatile and fell 11
percent over the period since the December FOMC meeting in response to concerns
about global economic outlook and substantial additional write-downs at large
financial institutions.  Financial stocks notably underperformed the broad indexes,
although declines were widespread across sectors.  The spread between the twelve-
month forward trend earnings-price ratio for S&P 500 firms and a real long-run
Treasury yield—a rough gauge of the equity risk premium—widened further.  Option-
implied volatility on the S&P 500 index has moved higher on net since the December
FOMC meeting, at times rising back to near its August peaks.  Yields on investment-
grade corporate bonds fell less than those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities
over the period since the last FOMC meeting, while yields on speculative-grade bonds
rose markedly.  As a result, spreads of both investment- and speculative-grade bond
yields over comparable-maturity Treasury yields increased to their highest levels in
about five years.  The sharp rise in speculative-grade spreads primarily reflects higher
spreads in near-term forward rates, suggesting increased concerns on the part of
investors about corporate credit quality over the next few years.  Gross bond issuance
by nonfinancial firms was robust in December but has slowed this month.  The
pipeline of leveraged loans awaiting syndication remains substantial, and secondary
market bid prices for liquid leveraged loans declined further from levels already below
those observed in early August.  An index of credit default swaps on leveraged
syndicated loans (the LCDX) has risen about 90 basis points, on net, since the
December FOMC meeting.  The ratio of municipal bond yields to those on Treasuries
remains elevated, reflecting concerns about the strength of financial guarantors.  CDS
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 8 of 38
spreads on major financial guarantors have widened sharply since the December
FOMC meeting, spurred by mounting worries about their exposure to subprime
mortgage securities and fears about the possible effects of actual and potential
downgrades by major rating agencies.  These spreads narrowed a good bit on January
working on a plan to support financial guarantors, but remained very high.
(6) Over the period since the December meeting, interest rates on thirty-year
fixed-rate conforming mortgages and one-year adjustable-rate conforming loans fell
thirty-year jumbo mortgages have also decreased since the December FOMC meeting,
but the availability of such credit continued to be tight.  Issuance of residential
mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) backed by nonconforming loans was extremely
weak in the fourth quarter.  ABX spreads for all tranches continued to widen.  In
contrast, issuance of agency MBS backed by conforming mortgages remained robust
and spreads on such securities retreated further from their recent highs as year-end
pressures eased.
Market Functioning Outside of Money Markets
(7) Trading conditions in a number of financial markets were strained at times.
Liquidity in the market for Treasury coupon securities was somewhat impaired in
December, amid concerns about year-end, and again in late January, reflecting flight-
to-quality flows.  Spreads between on- and off-the-run ten-year Treasury notes
remained at multi-year highs throughout the period.  Bid-asked spreads on both on-
the-run and off-the-run Treasury notes had retreated to near-normal levels after year-
end, but they rose again on January 22 and remain elevated, on net.  Treasury bill
yields initially rose after the turn of the year, as market participants reported
significantly improved trading conditions; however, more recently, renewed safe-
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 9 of 38
haven flows pushed three-month Treasury bill yields 68 basis points lower, on net.
Similarly, overnight general collateral repo rate continued to trade well below the
overnight federal funds rate for most of the period since the December FOMC
meeting.  Lending from the SOMA securities portfolio reached record levels in
December, led by strong demand for Treasury collateral ahead of year-end, and were
again elevated in late January.  Several measures of liquidity in corporate markets
showed signs of deterioration before the turn of the year—trading volumes declined
significantly, a proxy for bid-asked spreads on corporate bonds widened, and trades
appeared to have a larger-than-normal impact on prices—but these trends largely
reversed in January.  Bid-asked spreads for leveraged syndicated loans have widened a
good bit since December and are now a few basis points above the peaks reached in
August.  Judging from the abnormally wide range of quotes submitted by various
dealers for the same reference entities, liquidity and price discovery remain impaired
in CDS markets.  The FX swap market also shows signs of improvement, although
trading conditions remained somewhat strained.
Foreign Developments
(8) Foreign financial markets were unsettled over the period since the
December FOMC meeting, reflecting growing concerns about further financial
distress and global spillovers from slower U.S. growth.  Late in the period, broad
equity price indexes in major foreign equity markets dropped sharply.  Stock prices
rebounded somewhat following the FOMC’s announcement on January 22 of the 75
basis point cut in its federal funds target, but equity markets have remained jittery.
Stock prices in many emerging market economies in Asia, Latin America, and Eastern
Europe—which previously had not been much affected by the turmoil in other
markets—experienced severe declines over this period.  Since the December FOMC
meeting, foreign stock prices have fallen on net by amounts that range from 10 to
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 10 of 38
nearly 20 percent, with financial stocks leading the way down (Chart 3).  Yields on
long-term government securities in major foreign industrial countries declined 15 to
emerging market sovereign debt widened noticeably, as investors attempted to reduce
risk.  The trade-weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar against major currencies
has moved down ¾ percent on balance since the December FOMC meeting.2  The
dollar depreciated more than 4½ percent against the yen and nearly as much against
the Swiss franc, driven in part by the unwinding of carry-trade positions by
increasingly risk-shy investors.  The dollar declined slightly on balance against an
index of currencies of our other important trading partners.  On January 22, the Bank
of Canada cut its policy rate 25 basis points, citing lower Canadian inflation and a
weaker outlook for the U.S. economy.
Debt and Money
(9) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is estimated to have expanded at
an annual rate of 7¼ percent in the fourth quarter of last year, almost 2 percentage
points less than in the previous quarter (Chart 4).  Growth of nonfinancial business
debt decelerated in the fourth quarter from its rapid third-quarter pace, as growth in
C&I loans slowed and despite robust bond issuance.  The limited data on financing
activity since year-end suggest that business borrowing has slowed further this month.
In the household sector, home mortgage debt is projected to have decelerated further
in the fourth quarter, reflecting the weakness in home prices, declining home sales,
and tighter credit conditions for some borrowers.  Consumer credit continued to
expand at a moderate pace last quarter.  Banks indicated on the most recent Senior
Loan Officer Opinion Survey that they had tightened standards and terms on many
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 11 of 38
Chart 3
International Financial Indicators
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock Price Indexes
Industrial Countries
December FOMC
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock Price Indexes
Emerging Market Economies
December FOMC
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-Year Government Bond Yields (Nominal)
December FOMC
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal Trade-Weighted Dollar Indexes
December FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 12 of 38
Chart 4
Debt and Money
Growth of Debt of Nonfinancial Sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4p
p Projected.
C&I Loans
Commercial Paper
Bonds
Changes in Selected Components of Debt of
Nonfinancial Business*
Monthly rate
*Commercial paper and C&I loans are seasonally adjusted, bonds are not.
Growth of Debt of Household Sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
Credit
Home
Mortgage
Growth of House Prices
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
OFHEO Purchase-Only Index
Growth of M2
s.a.a.r.
Percent
M2 Velocity and Opportunity Cost
VelocityPercent
Opportunity Cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 13 of 38
types of household and business loans and that they expected a further deterioration
in loan quality in 2008.
(10) M2 grew 6 percent at an annual rate in December, boosted primarily by
flows to the relative safety and liquidity of retail money funds.3  Growth in small time
deposits edged down but remained elevated, as several thrift institutions offered
attractive deposit rates to secure funding.  A deceleration in liquid deposits amid
subdued economic activity in the fourth quarter as well as a sizable contraction in
currency partially offset the expansion of other components of M2.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 14 of 38
Economic Outlook
(11) The staff has marked down substantially its projection for aggregate
demand relative to aggregate supply since the December Greenbook, in response to
a sharp drop in equity prices, tighter conditions in some credit markets, and
surprisingly weak indicators of real activity.  As a consequence, the staff forecast takes
on board the 75 basis point reduction on January 22 and assumes another 50 basis
point cut at this meeting; from that point on, the funds rate is assumed to remain
steady at 3 percent through the end of 2009.  Longer-term Treasury yields are
projected to edge up as investors’ expectations about the path of monetary policy—
which currently embed further easing in coming months—gradually converge to the
staff’s assumption.  Stock prices are assumed to climb at an annual rate of 13 percent
over the next two years, as the equity premium declines toward more normal levels
in response to the gradual waning of macroeconomic risks.  The real foreign exchange
value of the dollar is assumed to depreciate about 2½ percent annually in 2008 and
is expected to decline gradually.  The staff forecast assumes that the adoption of
a fiscal stimulus package—comprising individual income tax rebates and a bonus
depreciation allowance for investment in 2008—will boost growth this year but
subtract from it next year, leaving the level of GDP at the end of 2009 only a bit
higher than in the absence of the assumed fiscal package.  Nonetheless, with a leveling
off of residential investment and a gradual easing of credit conditions, the pace of real
GDP growth is projected to pick up from about 1½ percent this year to around
NAIRU.  Both the level and the growth rate of potential output, in history and going
forward, have been revised upward since December, causing the output gap to show
more slack than in December.  While recent monthly readings on inflation have been
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 15 of 38
elevated, the public’s expectations of future inflation appear to have remained
reasonably well contained.  With oil prices assumed to edge down and slack in labor
and product markets rising, total PCE inflation is projected to decline from
from just above 2 percent this year to just below 2 percent next year.
(12) The staff’s forecast has been extended beyond 2009 using the FRB/US
model with adjustments to ensure consistency with the staff’s assessment of
longer-run trends.  The extended forecast embeds several key assumptions:  Monetary
policy aims to stabilize core PCE inflation, in the long run, at a level of 1¾ percent
(the midpoint of the range of FOMC participants’ October projections for the rate of
inflation in 2010); trend multifactor productivity growth slows gradually towards
an annual rate of 1 percent; the real price of energy remains approximately flat;
the real value of the dollar depreciates steadily at about 1¼ percent per year; and fiscal
policy is essentially neutral.  The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative,
with the federal funds rate staying at 3 percent through 2010, before moving back up
into the neighborhood of 4 percent.  As a result, the unemployment rate gradually
declines to 4¾ percent—the staff’s assessment of the NAIRU—by 2012, while PCE
inflation converges to 1¾ percent.  The real federal funds rate increases from about
Monetary Policy Strategies
(13) As indicated in Chart 5, the Greenbook-consistent measure of short-run
r*—the value that would close the output gap over the next twelve quarters—now
stands at 0.8 percent, 1½ percentage points lower than in the December Bluebook
and about 60 basis points below the current value of the real federal funds rate.
The downward revision reflects the drop in equity prices, the tightening of credit
markets, and the receipt of weaker-than-expected economic data since early
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 16 of 38
Chart 5
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
Actual real federal funds rate
Range of model-based estimates
70 Percent confidence interval
90 Percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
Single-equation model (2.3 (2.5
Small structural model (0.7 (1.7
Large model (FRB/US) (0.9 (1.6
Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
Greenbook-consistent measure (0.8 (2.2
Medium-Run Measures
Single-equation model (2.3 (2.3
Small structural model (1.9 (1.8
Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
TIPS-based factor model (2.0 2.0
Actual real federal funds rate (1.4 (2.6
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 17 of 38
December, as well as the staff’s reassessment of the supply-side dimensions of
the forecast.  Such factors, most importantly the decline in equity prices since
the December Greenbook, also induced sharp declines in the estimates of short-run
r* obtained from the small structural model and the FRB/US model.  These two
estimates are now virtually identical to the Greenbook-consistent measure.  In
contrast, the estimate obtained from the single equation model has been marked
down much less—from 2½ percent to about 2¼ percent—because this measure
depends on current and lagged values of the output gap but not on financial
conditions or other leading indicators of aggregate demand.
(14) Chart 6 depicts FRB/US optimal control simulations in which policymakers
place equal weights on keeping core PCE inflation close to a specified goal, on
keeping unemployment close to the long-run NAIRU, and on avoiding changes in
the nominal federal funds rate.4  For an inflation goal of 1½ percent (the left-hand set
of charts), the optimal control simulation prescribes a nominal federal funds rate that
declines slowly to near 3 percent over the next three years or so and then rises
modestly to about 3½ percent by 2012.  With an inflation goal of 2 percent (the right-
hand set of charts), the optimal funds rate falls more sharply to below 2½ percent by
the end of next year before rising to about 4 percent by 2012.  Under either inflation
goal, these prescriptions are substantially lower than those shown in the December
Bluebook, largely reflecting the weaker outlook for aggregate demand relative to
aggregate supply in the current forecast.  The unemployment rates over the next
several years are noticeably higher than in the previous Bluebook.  The trajectories for
core inflation for this year are above those shown in December but roughly
unchanged thereafter.  
                                           
4 In these simulations, policymakers are assumed to have a distaste for changing the current-
quarter federal funds rate from its previous-quarter level; this inertia is the primary reason 
why the optimal policy path under either inflation goal prescribes a rate that remains above  
4 percent in the current quarter—close to its 2007Q4 average of 4.5 percent—and declines 
only gradually over subsequent quarters.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 18 of 38
(15) As shown in Chart 7, the outcome-based monetary policy rule (the left
panel) prescribes a funds rate path that declines to 3¼ percent in 2010; on average,
this trajectory is more than a percentage point lower than in the December Bluebook.
Financial market participants anticipate an even steeper downward slope to the path
of policy in coming quarters, with the funds rate declining to 2 percent by the end
of this year; indeed, forward contracts indicate that the funds rate is now expected
to remain below 4 percent through the end of 2012 (the right panel).  The confidence
intervals obtained from stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model and from
options on interest rate caps each indicate a significant probability that the funds rate
falls below 2 percent within the next few quarters and is below 2 percent through
the end of 2012.  The near-term prescriptions from the Taylor (1993) rule are higher
than in December because of recent elevated readings on core inflation, while those
from the Taylor (1999) rule are more sensitive to aggregate demand and hence
somewhat lower than in the previous Bluebook.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 20 of 38
Short-Run Policy Alternatives
(16) This Bluebook presents four policy alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized in Table 1.  The text shown in red indicates the changes
from the January 22 statement, which appears along with the December 11
statement on the page following the table.  Alternative A cuts the federal funds
rate target by 75 basis points to 2¾ percent, Alternative B cuts the target 50 basis
points to 3 percent, Alternative C cuts the target 25 basis points to 3¼ percent,
and Alternative D leaves the target unchanged at 3½ percent.  For each of the four
alternatives, the rationale paragraph refers to considerable stress in financial markets,
tightening of credit conditions, and the deepening of the housing contraction;
the three easing alternatives also mention the recent softening in labor markets.
Each alternative states that policymakers expect inflation to moderate this year
while emphasizing the need for careful monitoring of inflation developments.
All four alternatives note that the current stance of policy should help promote
moderate growth over time; Alternatives A and B also indicate that these policy
actions should help mitigate the risks to economic activity.  Alternative A states
that downside risks “may well remain” and that incoming information will determine
“whether further action is needed to address those risks.”  Alternative B states
that “downside risks to growth remain” whereas Alternatives C and D reiterate the
January 22 assessment that “appreciable” downside risks remain; all three of these
alternatives indicate—as in the January 22 statement—that policymakers “will act
in a timely manner as needed to address those risks.”  As usual, the Committee could
formulate its statement using language from more than one alternative.
(17) If incoming information in recent weeks has led policymakers to mark
down their assessment of the modal outlook for aggregate demand relative to
aggregate supply by an amount similar to that of the staff, then the Committee may
prefer to reduce the target funds rate by 50 basis points at this meeting, as in
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 22 of 38
Table 1: Alternative Language for the January 30, 2008 FOMC Announcement
Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C Alternative D
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for  
the federal funds rate 50 basis points  
to 3 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for  
the federal funds rate 25 basis points  
to 3-1/4 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 3-1/2 percent.
Financial markets remain under 
considerable stress, and credit has 
tightened further for some businesses 
and households.  Moreover, recent 
information indicates a deepening of 
the housing contraction as well as 
some softening in labor markets.
Financial markets remain under  
considerable stress, and credit has  
tightened further for some businesses 
and households.  Moreover, recent 
information indicates a deepening of 
the housing contraction as well as 
some softening in labor markets.
Financial markets remain under 
considerable stress, and the tightening of 
credit and the deepening of the housing 
contraction could weigh further on 
economic growth.  However, recent 
policy actions should promote moderate 
growth over time.
The Committee expects inflation to 
moderate in coming quarters, but it 
will be necessary to continue to 
monitor inflation developments 
carefully.
The Committee expects inflation to  
moderate in coming quarters. 
However, upward pressure on 
inflation could result from several 
factors, including further increases in 
energy, commodity, and other import 
prices.  Therefore, it will be necessary 
to continue to monitor inflation 
developments carefully.
The Committee expects inflation to  
moderate in coming quarters.  However, 
upward pressure on inflation could result 
from several factors, including further 
increases in energy, commodity, and 
other import prices.  Therefore, it will be 
necessary to continue to monitor 
inflation developments carefully.
Assessment 
of Risk
Today’s policy action, combined with 
those taken earlier, should help to 
promote moderate growth over time 
and to mitigate the risks to economic 
activity.  However, downside risks to 
growth remain.  The Committee will 
continue to assess the effects of 
financial and other developments on 
economic prospects and will act in a 
timely manner as needed to address 
those risks.
Today’s policy action, combined with 
those taken earlier, should help 
promote moderate growth over time.  
However, appreciable downside risks 
to growth remain.  The Committee 
will continue to assess the effects of 
financial and other developments on 
economic prospects and will act in a 
timely manner as needed to address 
those risks.
Appreciable downside risks to growth 
remain.  The Committee will continue to 
assess the effects of financial and other 
developments on economic prospects 
and will act in a timely manner as needed 
to address those risks.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 23 of 38
January 22, 2008 Statement
December 11, 2007 Statement
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 24 of 38
Alternative B.  The staff forecast’s assumes that the funds rate is cut to 3 percent
at this meeting and then maintained at that rate through 2009; with that stance of
policy, the unemployment rate remains about ½ percentage point above the staff’s
estimate of the NAIRU while core inflation edges just below 2 percent at the end of
next year.  Members might consider this combination of outcomes to be about the
best feasible under current circumstances, reflecting the extent to which recent data
have pointed towards a noticeable worsening of the short-run tradeoff between
economic activity and inflation.  Even if Committee members are somewhat more
optimistic than the staff regarding the modal outlook for economic activity, they may
view this policy action as appropriate for mitigating the downside risks to growth
that were emphasized in the January 22 FOMC statement.  Indeed, since investors’
uncertainty about the economic outlook is apparently contributing to elevated credit
spreads and dampened consumer and business spending, a substantial easing move
at this meeting could bolster confidence that policymakers will act as needed to foster
sustained growth and reduce the likelihood of adverse macroeconomic developments
such as the Greenbook’s “Recession” scenario.  However, policymakers may prefer
at this stage not to take out further insurance by easing more than 50 basis points,
given the possibility that such a move could induce an upward shift in the distribution
of inflation outcomes over coming quarters, as illustrated by the “Gradual Reversal”
scenario in the box on “Risk Management Strategies.”  Nonetheless, by explicitly
noting that downside risks remain, the Committee would suggest the possibility that
substantial further easing could be needed in response to incoming information.
(18) The statement under Alternative B largely reiterates the rationale portion
of the January 22 statement, including references to “considerable stress” in financial
markets, tightening of credit conditions, deepening of the housing contraction, and
some softening of labor markets, as well as restating the Committee’s assessment of
the prospects for inflation.  The final paragraph of the statement indicates that
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 25 of 38
Federal funds rate
Recession Scenario
Taylor Rule
Full Preemption
Risk Management
Civilian unemployment rate
Core PCE inflation
Federal funds rate
Benefits of
Risk Management
Risk Management
Outcome-Based Rule
Civilian unemployment rate
Core PCE inflation
Four-quarter moving average
Risk Management Strategies
Simple policy rules can serve as useful benchmarks  
 for monetary policy.  However, such rules are generally  
 specified in terms of the modal forecast and hence  
 abstract from risk management considerations.  In this  
 box, we gauge the benefits and costs of alternative  
 policy strategies using the version of the FRB/US model
 in which expectations of the private sector are formed  
 based on past economic data.  As a point of reference, 
suppose that the Greenbook outlook is the best feasible  under current circumstances, at least in the absence of  uncertainty.
Now consider the “Recession” scenario presented in  
 the Greenbook alternative simulations.  When monetary 
 policy is determined by the Bluebook’s Outcome-Based  
 Rule (dotted lines), the federal funds rate declines  
 gradually in response to incoming data, reaching a trough 
 of about ¾ percent in late 2009 before returning to the 
 Greenbook baseline a few years later.  With this policy, 
 the unemployment rate rises a bit above 6 percent next 
 year and takes about five years to return to the NAIRU, 
 while core PCE inflation falls well below the assumed  
long-run inflation goal of 1¾ percent.
If policymakers could instantly be sure that such a   recession was already in train, they might well cut the  
 funds rate target immediately to a rate below 1 percent 
in order to reduce the severity of the downturn.  In reality, 
 of course, economic turning points are notoriously difficult 
 to predict or even to identify contemporaneously.  Thus, 
 policymakers might prefer to take out some insurance by 
 easing the stance of policy even before the onset of 
 recession was fully evident.
Such an approach is illustrated by the Risk Management  
path (solid lines), in which the funds rate target is   
reduced to 1½ percent for two quarters and thereafter  follows the prescriptions of the outcome-based rule.    This policy has visible effects in stabilizing economic   activity and inflation:  The unemployment rate at the peak 
 of the recession is about ¼ percentage point lower than 
 in the absence of insurance, and the inflation rate stays 
 noticeably closer to the assumed long-run inflation goal  
 of 1¾ percent.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 26 of 38
Risk Management Strategies (continued)
Federal funds rate
Costs of
Risk Management
Gradual Reversal
Prompt Reversal
Greenbook Baseline
Civilian unemployment rate
Core PCE inflation
Four-quarter moving average
It is also important to gauge the costs that would be  
incurred in following such a risk management strategy  
if in fact no recession occurs.  For this purpose, suppose 
that economic conditions unfold as in the Greenbook 
baseline (dotted lines) but that policymakers have  
taken out some insurance against the risk of recession  
by lowering the target funds rate to 1½ percent for  
two quarters.
In the Prompt Reversal case (solid lines), the strength  
of economic activity is assumed to be recognized  
quickly and the policy insurance is then removed;  
indeed, policy is tightened somewhat further to offset  
the effects of the initial policy stimulus, and thereafter 
follows the prescriptions of the outcome-based rule.   
In this case, the funds rate target rises almost a percentage 
point above the Greenbook baseline path by the end  
of this year.  With this policy path, core inflation  
remains very close to the Greenbook baseline while  
the unemployment rate only deviates temporarily.
In contrast, in the case of Gradual Reversal (dashed lines), 
the strength of economic activity is assumed to become 
evident only over a longer period, and hence the policy  
insurance is removed over the course of a year rather  
than in a single quarter; that is, after the first two  
quarters, the funds rate is adjusted according to the  
empirical outcome-based rule, which responds only 
gradually to incoming data.  This path of policy  
generates persistent deviations of unemployment and 
inflation from the Greenbook baseline; even at the end  
of 2012, core inflation remains nearly a quarter point  
above the assumed long-run inflation goal of 1¾ percent.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 27 of 38
this policy action, combined with those taken earlier, “should help to promote
moderate growth over time and mitigate the risks to economic activity” but notes
that “downside risks to growth remain” and emphasizes—as in the January 22
statement—that the Committee “will act in a timely manner as needed to address
those risks.”
(19) Alternative B would likely be seen by market participants as broadly
consistent with their current expectations for the funds rate, because a 50 basis point
easing of the target funds rate at this meeting appears to be their modal expectation
and because the risk assessment would probably be read as indicating a substantial
probability of further easing.  Since investors assign most of the remaining probability
to a smaller easing, the adoption of this alternative might cause a modest decrease in
interest rates, a rally in equity prices, and perhaps some depreciation of the foreign
exchange value of the dollar.
(20) If policymakers would prefer to move more aggressively to promote growth
and mitigate downside risks, then they might choose to reduce the funds rate target
by 75 basis points at this meeting, as in Alternative A.  Even after the funds rate cut
on January 22, the real federal funds rate exceeds the Greenbook-consistent estimate
of short-run r* by about 60 basis points; thus, this degree of easing would be desirable
if policymakers share the staff’s outlook but would prefer to bring the unemployment
rate back to the NAIRU more quickly than in that outlook, an approach that might
leave inflation close to 2 percent at the end of the decade.  Following the January 22
move with another aggressive easing at this meeting might also be attractive from a
risk management point of view—that is, Committee members may see benefits in
moving more than they would perceive as needed merely to offset the weakening in
the modal outlook.  With the housing contraction steepening and financial stresses
continuing to intensify, policymakers may be particularly concerned about reducing
the likelihood of a nonlinear feedback cycle in which deteriorating macroeconomic
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 28 of 38
conditions generate further strains in financial markets and augment pressures on
banks’ balance sheets, further constricting the supply of credit and hence leading to a
fairly deep and long-lasting recession.  This policy approach might be particularly
appealing if members anticipated that the Committee would be equally flexible and
decisive in reversing the course of policy once downside risks to growth start to
wane—as in the “Prompt Reversal” scenario in the box on “Risk Management
Strategies”—or upside risks to inflation start to loom larger.  Members might also
be attracted to this alternative if they believe that a larger easing move at this meeting
would diminish the probability that another rate cut would be needed over the
subsequent intermeeting period.
(21) The first portion of the rationale for Alternative A is identical to that of
Alternative B, but this alternative elaborates further about the prospects for inflation,
pointing out that the projected moderation of inflation reflects “well-anchored
inflation expectations, a projected leveling out of energy prices, and easing pressures
on resource utilization,” and noting that “further increases in energy and commodity
prices, as well as other factors, could put upward pressure on inflation.”  Of course,
the Committee could choose simply to repeat the inflation rationale given in the
January 22 statement.  As in Alternative B, the risk assessment states that the stance
of policy should help promote moderate growth and mitigate the downside risks to
economic activity.  In light of the stronger policy action, however, this alternative
is somewhat less definitive regarding the magnitude of downside risks to growth,
indicating that such risks “may well remain” and that the Committee will assess
incoming information to determine “whether further action is needed to address
those risks.”
(22) Although market participants appear to see only about one-tenth odds
that the funds rate target will be reduced by 75 basis points at this meeting, the risk
assessment in this alternative would likely be read as indicating a somewhat lower
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 29 of 38
probability of further easing over the next few months.  Thus, this policy action might
be viewed largely as a timing surprise, especially since futures contracts indicate that
investors expect the funds rate to decline to about 2¾ percent by the March FOMC
meeting.  Consequently, the impact on Treasury coupon yields could be rather limited.
Of course, this policy move might bolster market confidence and help alleviate
perceptions of tail risks to the macroeconomy, causing equity prices to rise and credit
spreads on corporate debt to narrow.  However, this alternative could also heighten
concerns about the longer-term inflation outlook, in which case forward inflation
compensation might rise noticeably further and the foreign exchange value of the
dollar could depreciate.
(23) If members are concerned that the stance of policy remains somewhat
restrictive but would prefer a more incremental approach in responding to incoming
information, then the Committee could choose to reduce the funds rate target by
viewed as most consistent with the typical pattern of gradual funds rate adjustment
in response to changes in resource utilization and core inflation.  Such gradualism
reflects the usual pace of incoming information regarding the appropriate policy
stance and reduces the odds of sudden reversals in the path of policy.  Members
may also be concerned that more substantial policy accommodation could spark
an increase in longer-term inflation expectations, as in the Greenbook’s “Unanchored
Inflation Expectations” scenario.  Moreover, given the challenges in monitoring
underlying inflation expectations, such a development might not become apparent
very quickly and could then be quite costly to reverse.
(24) The first portion of the rationale for Alternative C is identical to that of
Alternatives A and B, but this alternative notes that upward pressure on inflation
could result from “further increases in energy, commodity, and other import prices.”
Moreover, in contrast to those two alternatives, the risk assessment in Alternative C
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 30 of 38
makes no reference to mitigating the risks to economic activity.  The remainder of
the risk assessment paragraph for this alternative is the same as in the January 22
FOMC statement, reiterating that “appreciable downside risks to growth remain”
and that the Committee “will act in a timely manner as needed to address those risks.”
(25) Market participants would be somewhat surprised by a 25 basis point
reduction in the target federal funds rate at this meeting, because the Desk’s survey
and market data suggest that market participants are placing only about one-third
odds on a 25 basis point easing, with virtually all of the remaining probability
assigned to larger moves of 50 or 75 basis points.  To be sure, the reference in the
risk assessment to acting in a “timely manner” may be read as pointing to a possible
intermeeting easing of policy.  But, given the smaller-than-anticipated policy action
at this meeting, financial markets might well conclude that further easing moves
would be incremental.  Thus, Alternative C would probably induce a rise in short-
term interest rates; however, intermediate-term yields might rise less or perhaps even
decline if investors concluded that a sluggish near-term pace of policy adjustment
implied that even more easing would be needed down the road.  Equity prices would
likely fall while credit spreads on corporate debt would widen.  At the same time,
five-to-ten-year forward TIPS-based inflation compensation might retrace some of
its recent increase, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar could appreciate a bit.
Moreover, given the highly skittish attitudes of investors and relatively illiquid trading
conditions in some markets, policy surprises might well generate unusually large
reactions in financial markets.
(26) In view of policy actions to date, policymakers might prefer to wait
for additional economic and financial information before taking any further policy
action, as in Alternative D.  Some policymakers may judge that the current softness
in the economy is likely to be transitory and that ongoing financial developments are
likely to have less effect on aggregate demand than anticipated by the staff and other
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 31 of 38
forecasters.  In addition, monetary policy has already been eased considerably, and
significant fiscal stimulus seems likely to be enacted, perhaps reducing the need for
further monetary accommodation.  Moreover, policymakers might be concerned
about the extent to which recent elevated levels of inflation and forward inflation
compensation might be pointing to a higher trajectory of prices going forward.
This approach might also be appealing to policymakers who prefer a more distinct
downward tilt of the trajectory for inflation over the next few years than in the staff
forecast, as in the optimal-control simulation with an inflation goal of 1½ percent.
(27) The statement under Alternative D reiterates several elements of the
rationale portion of the January 22 statement—including references to considerable
stress in financial markets, tightened credit conditions, and deepening of the
housing contraction—but does not cite recent developments in labor markets.
Because this alternative leaves the stance of policy unchanged, the statement simply
indicates that “recent policy actions should promote moderate growth over time.”
This alternative reaffirms the Committee’s expectation that inflation will moderate
in coming quarters, but adds the same explanation as in Alternative C regarding
the factors that could put upward pressure on inflation.  Moreover, with no change
in policy and few economic data releases on the calendar between January 22
and January 30, the assessment of risks in Alternative D is identical to that of
the January 22 statement.
(28) Alternative D could surprise and confuse market participants, who
are virtually certain that the funds rate target will be cut at least 25 basis points
at this meeting.  The absence of any policy action would be particularly difficult to
understand in light of the January 22 FOMC statement, which noted “appreciable
downside risks to growth” and emphasized that the Committee “will act in a timely
manner as needed to address those risks.”  While shorter-term interest rates
would rise noticeably, investors would probably become more concerned about the
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 32 of 38
economic outlook, leading to a further drop in longer-term Treasury yields, a marked
widening of credit spreads on corporate debt, and sharp declines in equity prices.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(29) Under the Greenbook projection, M2 is expected to grow at about a
rate forecasted in December.  This pace would significantly exceed the 3¼ percent
forecast for nominal GDP growth this quarter.  The decline in velocity reflects
the boost to money demand from the sharp decline in the opportunity cost resulting
from monetary policy easing as well as the unusually strong flows into money market
mutual funds that have likely been prompted by the financial turmoil.  For 2008
as a whole, M2 is forecast to expand at a 6 percent annual rate, considerably above
the 3¾ percent expansion projected for nominal GDP.  With opportunity cost
leveling off later this year and financial markets presumably becoming less volatile,
M2 is projected to expand at a 4¼ percent rate in 2009, in line with growth in
nominal GDP.
(30) After advancing at an estimated 8¼ percent pace in 2007, domestic
nonfinancial sector debt is projected to slow to a 5 percent rate this year and to
moderate further to an average rate of 4¾ percent in 2009.  The deceleration reflects
a broad-based slowdown in borrowing by households, nonfinancial businesses, and
state and local governments.  Household debt is projected to increase only modestly
over the forecast period, restrained by the dampening effects on mortgage borrowing
of falling house prices and weak home sales.  In addition, sluggish gains in household
spending on durable goods and tighter standards and terms on consumer loans are
expected to weigh on growth in consumer credit.  Business borrowing is expected to
slow sharply as M&A and share repurchase activity abates significantly.  The
expansion of debt in the state and local government sector is also projected to
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 33 of 38
Greenbook Forecast*
25 bp Easing No Change
Monthly Growth Rates
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Table 2
Alternative Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 34 of 38
decelerate considerably, reflecting an anticipated drop in issuance for both long-term
capital projects and advance refundings.  The difficulties of major bond insurers are
expected to restrain municipal bond issuance somewhat in 2008.   By contrast, the
growth of federal debt is expected to pick up in 2008, boosted in part by borrowing to
fund the proposed economic stimulus package, and then to hold about steady in 2009.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 35 of 38
(31) Draft language for the directive is provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/INCREASING/reducing the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around ________ 3 ½percent.
Class I FOMC - Restricted-Controlled (FR) 36 of 38
