Prefatory Note 
 
 
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.   
 
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Content last modified 03/07/2014.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
OCTOBER 23, 2008
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) October 23, 2008
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1)   Financial markets came under extraordinary stress over the intermeeting
period.  Markets were roiled by the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers (which occurred
just before the September FOMC meeting), the difficulties at AIG, the closing of
Washington Mutual, and the forced sale of Wachovia.  Those events intensified
already heightened concerns about the condition of other U.S. financial institutions
and about the impact of financial developments on the broader economy.  Against
this backdrop, investors pulled back further from risk taking; as a consequence,
funding markets for terms beyond overnight essentially ceased to function for a time
and still remain severely impaired, yields and spreads on money market instruments
and corporate bonds shot up, secondary market prices for leveraged syndicated loans
plunged, and equity prices registered steep declines amid extremely high volatility.
Financial markets abroad experienced similar swings.
(2) In response, the Federal Reserve, the Department of the Treasury, the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Securities and Exchange
Commission, and many foreign central banks and governments took an
unprecedented series of policy initiatives over the intermeeting period.  Sentiment in
credit markets seemed to improve somewhat late in the period, and there was a
modest recovery in liquidity in bank funding markets after the U.S. and foreign
governments announced they would inject capital into their banking systems and
guarantee selected liabilities of banking organizations in their jurisdictions.  However,
markets generally remain extremely illiquid and volatile, and investors are still quite
(3) On net over the intermeeting period, market participants marked down
substantially the expected path of monetary policy, with some of the decline occurring
after the intermeeting cut in the target federal funds rate on October 8, and they now
foresee an additional rate cut at the October 28-29 meeting.  Short-term nominal
Treasury yields fell amid heavy flight-to-quality flows, while longer-term yields rose,
reportedly in response to expectations of increased Treasury issuance to finance
various government initiatives.  Issuance of corporate debt slowed further amid the
unfavorable market conditions, and nonfinancial businesses drew heavily on existing
lines of credit at banks.  The dollar appreciated against all major foreign currencies
except the yen.
Financial Institutions
(4) Investor sentiment deteriorated early in the intermeeting period in reaction
to the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers and the rapid deterioration in the financial
condition of AIG.1  These developments precipitated losses at other financial entities,
including prime money market mutual funds (MMMFs).  Prominently, one of these—
the Reserve Primary Fund—“broke the buck” on September 16, triggering rapid and
widespread outflows from other prime MMMFs and inflows into those holding
predominantly Treasury securities (Chart 1).  Prime funds responded to the surge in
redemptions by reducing their purchases of commercial paper and other short-term
assets, causing significant strains in these markets.  Meanwhile short-term Treasury
bill yields plummeted amid sharp inflows into Treasury-only MMMFs.  Intense
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 2 of 45
Chart 1
Financial Institutions
Sept. Oct.
2008
Government funds
  Prime funds
Treasury and Fed
announcements
Reserve
 Fund
 breaks
 the buck
Net flows of taxable money market funds
Source. iMoneyNet.
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2007 2008
Jan 03, 2007 = 1000
Banks
Insurance
Bank and insurance ETFs
Sept.
FOMC
Oct. 
 23
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2007 2008
Morgan Stanley
Goldman Sachs
CDS spreads for selected institutions
Source. Markit.
Sept.
FOMC
Oct. 
 22
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2007 2008
Basis points
Regional bank index
Large bank index
Oct. 
 22
Senior CDS spreads for commercial banks
Sept.
FOMC
Jan. Mar. May June Aug. Oct.
2008
Basis points
Fannie Mae 2- and 10-year debt spreads
Sept.
FOMC
Oct. 
 22
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2007 2008
Basis points
CDS spreads for insurance companies*
*Median spreads for 58 insurance companies.
  Source. Markit.
Sept.
FOMC
Oct. 
 22
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 3 of 45
demands among investors to hold Treasury securities and increased counterparty
concerns reportedly led to a substantial scaling back of activity among traditional
securities lenders in the Treasury market, contributing to strains in the Treasury repo
and cash markets that were evidenced by a very high volume of fails-to-deliver.
Redemptions from prime MMMFs slowed after the Treasury established a temporary
guarantee program for balances held in MMMFs and the Federal Reserve announced
its Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Lending Facility
(AMLF) on September 19, although outflows continued until early October.2  Use of
the AMLF to finance purchases of asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) ramped
up quickly to about $150 billion by early October but has diminished substantially of
late.  Further, to support a private-sector initiative designed to provide liquidity to
MMMFs, on October 21 the Federal Reserve announced the creation of the Money
Market Investor Funding Facility (MMIFF).3
(5) Difficulties also intensified at a number of depository institutions.  The
FDIC’s decision to resolve the failure of Washington Mutual (WaMu) on September
holders led investors to mark down their expectations of government support for
unsecured non-deposit liabilities, undermining the ability of some other banking
organizations—including Wachovia, at the time the fourth-largest U.S. bank by assets
—to obtain funding.  On September 29, to avoid serious adverse effects on economic
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 4 of 45
conditions and financial stability, the Secretary of the Treasury, on the
recommendation of the FDIC and the Federal Reserve and in consultation with the
President, invoked the systemic risk exception to facilitate the sale of Wachovia’s
banking operations to Citigroup.  Under this arrangement, the FDIC committed to
absorb losses beyond a certain level on a portion of Wachovia’s loans.  However, this
agreement was subsequently voided when Wells Fargo and Wachovia signed a merger
agreement in a transaction that required no financial assistance from the FDIC.
(6) Other financial institutions experienced heightened stress during the
intermeeting period, most notably Morgan Stanley and several major hedge funds.
Morgan Stanley was buffeted by uncertainty about whether Mitsubishi UFJ Financial
Group would close its $9 billion purchase of a 21 percent interest in the firm, a
transaction that was finally confirmed on October 13.  More recently, investor
concerns about hedge funds intensified after news surfaced of poor performance at
Citadel and after Highland Capital Management announced that it was closing two
funds that had experienced asset value declines in excess of 30 percent this year.
(7) The equity prices of banks and insurance companies were extremely volatile
and posted steep declines on net over the intermeeting period, in part reflecting a
marked deterioration in the outlook for profits.  CDS spreads of Goldman Sachs and
Morgan Stanley soared in the wake of Lehman Brothers’ collapse.  Those spreads
narrowed sharply after the two firms converted their nonblank depository institutions
into commercial banks and were granted bank holding company status by the Federal
Reserve and following news of capital investments by Berkshire Hathaway and
Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group in Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley, respectively.
CDS spreads for commercial banks were also volatile but moved down substantially
in response to news of the Treasury’s Capital Purchase Program and the FDIC’s
guarantee of selected bank liabilities, ending the intermeeting period about 85 basis
points lower.  Meanwhile, short-term agency debt spreads widened to well above pre-
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 5 of 45
conservatorship levels, reportedly because investors perceived the guarantee of agency
debt to be weaker than the FDIC’s guarantee of senior unsecured bank debt.  In
addition, some market participants registered concerns that the credit quality of the
GSEs could be impaired if they were required to purchase large volumes of subprime
mortgage assets.  CDS spreads for insurance companies also surged over the
intermeeting period.
Market Functioning
(8) Short-term funding markets came under considerable stress amid
heightened concerns about counterparty credit risk.  Conditions in unsecured
interbank funding markets worsened, with spreads of Libor over comparable-maturity
overnight index swap (OIS) rates rising to unprecedented levels and with very little
trading taking place at terms beyond overnight (Chart 2).  Strains increased even in
overnight funding markets, as overnight Libor rose to about 340 basis points above
the federal funds rate target in early October and overnight federal funds traded
within an unusually wide range, partly reflecting tiering across institutions.  Conditions
in very short-term funding markets improved significantly after the European Central
Bank (ECB), the Bank of England (BoE), and the Swiss National Bank (SNB)
initiated a series of unlimited fixed-rate dollar auctions, and governments in a number
of countries, including the United States, announced plans to inject capital into
banking institutions and to guarantee some bank liabilities.  Libor fixings declined
about 415, 230, and 100 basis points for overnight, one-week, and one-month
maturities, respectively, starting on October 9.  Conditions in markets for unsecured
funding for longer terms also improved, but trading reportedly remains very sparse.
(9) Conditions in secured funding markets were also quite poor.  The overnight
general collateral repo rate and short-dated Treasury bill yields traded near zero for
most of the period amid heavy demand for safe investments.  Those low rates
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 6 of 45
Chart 2
Market Functioning
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2007 2008
Spreads of Libor over OIS
Daily Sept.
FOMC
Oct. 
 23
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov.
2008
Effective Overnight FF
1-month agency repo*
1-month MBS repo*
Sept.
FOMC
Spreads over Treasury GC repos
*Spread over 1-month Treasury GC repo.
Source. Bloomberg, New York Fed.
Oct. 
 23
Treasury
Agency
MBS
Fails to deliver
Weekly (Wed.)
Source. FR2004.
Oct. 
 15
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct.
2007 2008
AA ABCP
A2/P2 nonfinancial
AA financial
AA nonfinancial
Oct. 
 17
Weekly (Fri.)
Overnight new issue spreads
to Fed Funds target
Source. DTCC.
Level
(Oct. 22)
Change from
Sept. 15
Primary Credit 108 85
TAF 263 113
PDCF 102 61
AMLF 108 108
Loans to AIG 90 76
Selected other Assets* 518 417
Deposits of D.I.s 227 123
Supplementary Financing
Account
Selected items from Federal Reserve balance sheet
Billions of dollars
*Includes assets denominated in foreign currencies, including foreign
currency holdings that are part of reciprocal swap arrangements with foreign
central banks.
Jan. Mar. May June Aug. Oct.
2008
Total assets on Federal Reserve balance sheet
Sept.
FOMC
Oct. 
 22
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 7 of 45
occurred despite issuance by the Treasury of over $500 billion in new bills under the
Supplementary Financing Program (SFP).  Overnight lending of securities from the
System Open Market Account (SOMA) portfolio and fails-to-deliver soared to record
highs.  To address strains in the Treasury market, the Federal Reserve introduced
temporary changes in its securities lending program, including a reduction in the fee
structure and an increase in per-dealer borrowing limits.  In addition, the Treasury
increased its issuance by reopening several notes that were experiencing severe
demand imbalances in the market.  These measures, however, had only a modest
effect on Treasury market trading conditions.  Heightened strains were also evident in
the markets for repo transactions backed by collateral other than Treasury securities.
Rates on agency mortgage-backed security (MBS) repos were especially volatile, and
haircuts applied to a wide range of repo collateral reportedly increased over the past
few weeks from already elevated levels.  Trading in these non-Treasury repo markets
remained essentially confined to overnight maturities.
(10) Conditions in the commercial paper (CP) market continued to be strained,
as net redemptions of shares in prime MMMFs and concerns among money managers
about credit quality and liquidity cut into the demand for CP, making issuance
difficult.  As a result, spreads of ABCP and lower-rated CP rates to the target federal
funds rate widened sharply, and amounts outstanding in the financial sector continued
to trend down.  In response to these developments, the Federal Reserve announced
the establishment of the AMLF, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF), and
the MMIFF.4  Reportedly, some improvements in CP market functioning started to
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 8 of 45
surface in recent days, perhaps because investors gained comfort from the FDIC
guarantee of some CP issued by banking organizations and also from the
announcement of details of the CPFF, which will become operational on October 27.
(11) The functioning of the CDS market remained far from normal.  Judging
from the wide range and declining frequency of dealer quotes, both liquidity and price
discovery was impaired over recent weeks, especially for contracts involving financial
firms.  The bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers created another significant credit event in
the CDS market and added to stress generated by the placement of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac into conservatorship.  Nonetheless, auctions held to determine the
settlement prices for CDS contracts written on the two GSEs and on Lehman
Brothers, which were conducted on October 6 and October 10, respectively, were
successful in facilitating the settlement of a significant number of credit derivative
trades on these institutions.  The functioning of longer-term corporate debt markets
also deteriorated over the intermeeting period.  Staff estimates of bid-asked spreads in
the bond market rose sharply, and in the secondary market for leveraged syndicated
loans, the average bid-asked spread surged nearly 200 basis points to an
unprecedented level of 373 basis points in mid-October.
(12) Depository institutions’ use of the primary credit facility was elevated over
the intermeeting period, with primary credit outstanding totaling $108 billion as of
October 22.  The 28-day Term Auction Facility (TAF) auction held on September 22
was heavily bid, with a stop-out rate of 3.75 percent, more than 50 basis points above
one-month Libor.  The first 84-day TAF auction that offered $150 billion was
announced and conducted on October 6; the auction was undersubscribed and
stopped out at the minimum bid rate of 1.39 percent, perhaps because banks did not
have sufficient time to post additional collateral ahead of the auction.  The 28-day
accumulate in the SPV.  Additional details regarding the CPFF were provided on October 
14.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 9 of 45
TAF auction held on October 20, however, also was not fully subscribed and stopped
out at the minimum bid rate.5  The ten Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF)
auctions conducted over the intermeeting period—three for Schedule 1 and seven for
Schedule 2 collateral—saw very high demand and stop-out rates that were well above
the corresponding minimum fee rates.  Dealers mentioned challenging repo market
conditions and elevated spreads in collateralized markets as possible explanations for
the strong participation.  On September 24, dealers exercised about $47 billion of the
nearly $50 billion of TOP options for TSLF loans spanning the September quarter-
end.  The use of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) also surged over the
intermeeting period, and PDCF outstandings were $102 billion as of October 22—
nearly three times the level observed in March and April in the wake of the Bear
Stearns collapse.  As of October 22, credit extensions under the AMLF totaled $108
billion, but little new net credit has been extended since October 1.  Credit
outstanding to AIG stands at about $90 billion.  All told, the sharp increase in
liquidity provision had a marked impact on the size and the composition of the
Federal Reserve balance sheet.
(13) Beginning with the reserve maintenance periods starting October 9, the
Federal Reserve has paid interest on required reserve and excess balances.
Nevertheless, partly because of the extremely high provision of liquidity through the
Federal Reserve’s liquidity facilities, the effective federal funds rate has been well
below the FOMC’s target, with a substantial amount of trading at rates below the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 10 of 45
interest rate paid on excess balances.6  However, federal funds futures rates rose
following the announcement on October 22 that the Federal Reserve had increased
the rate it would pay on excess balances beginning the following day.7 (See the box
“Early Experience with Interest on Reserves.”)
Monetary Policy Expectations and Treasury Yields
(14) The intensification of the financial turmoil, the further impairment of the
functioning of funding markets, and a much weaker economic outlook led investors
to revise down their expected path for the federal funds rate in the near term and to
place considerable odds on at least a 25 basis point rate cut at the October 28-29
FOMC meeting  (Chart 3).  The FOMC’s decision to leave its policy rate unchanged
at 2 percent at the September meeting took some market participants by surprise and
led them to scale back their expectations of policy easing over the next year.
However, policy expectations shifted down in response to the 50 basis point
intermeeting cut by the FOMC in coordination with other foreign central banks on
October 8, as market participants were reportedly somewhat surprised by the decision
and interpreted the language of the accompanying statement as suggesting that further
easing was likely.  The reaction to both policy actions was soon overshadowed,
however, by market concerns about the financial sector and the economic outlook.
(15) Options on federal funds futures suggest that investors currently place high
odds on the FOMC lowering the federal funds target at the October 28-29 meeting,
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 11 of 45
Early Experience with Interest on Reserves 
 
The Emergency Economic Stabilization Act accelerated the Federal Reserve’s 
authority to pay interest on balances held by or on behalf of depository institutions at 
Reserve Banks.  This interest began accruing on October 9.  The payment of interest 
on excess balances should reduce depository institutions’ incentives to sell federal 
funds at rates below the rate paid on excess.  To date, the results of this policy change 
have been mixed, although some evidence suggests that interest on reserves might 
become a more effective tool over time.  
 
The rate paid on excess balances has not established a hard floor to the federal funds 
rate.  Initially, this rate was set equal to the lowest targeted federal funds rate for the 
maintenance period less 75 basis points, resulting in a rate of 75 basis points.  From 
October 9 to October 22, an average of 35 percent of brokered federal funds trades 
transacted at rates below 75 basis points.  However, the share of brokered trades at 
rates near zero has declined substantially.  Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, two large net 
sellers of funds in the market, are not eligible to receive interest on the balances they 
hold and are reportedly selling funds at rates below 75 basis points.  In addition, some 
small depository institutions have also been selling funds at rates below 75 basis 
points.  Some of these institutions may believe that their correspondent banks will not 
pass on interest earned on excess balances and thus are willing to sell federal funds at 
rates below the rate paid on excess balances.  To foster trading at rates closer to the 
target rate, the Board narrowed the spread between the target federal funds rate and 
the rate paid on excess balances to 35 basis points effective October 23.  
 
Market participants may still be adapting to the new system.  In principle, arbitrage 
should keep market rates close to the rate paid on excess balances if enough 
institutions that are eligible to receive interest were to bid for the funds of ineligible 
institutions.  Indeed, a couple of large banks are apparently doing so now and in some 
volume, and this pattern may strengthen over time.  In addition, correspondent 
banking agreements may be restructured in light of the payment of interest to 
respondent banks.  Some respondent institutions are reportedly considering 
terminating their correspondent relationships and holding balances directly with the 
Reserve Banks.  
 
One potentially related development is a significant decline in the volume of brokered 
transactions in the federal funds market.  With the extraordinary level of balances in 
the system, and the ability to earn significant interest on an essentially risk-free asset, 
the incentive for institutions to trade in the overnight market may have diminished.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 12 of 45
Chart 3
Interest Rate Developments
October 23, 2008
September 15, 2008
Expected federal funds rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
 for term premiums and other adjustments.
Futures market*
  Desk’s survey**
Probability density for target funds rate
after the October FOMC meeting
*Derived from options on federal funds futures.
**Survey of primary dealer economists on Oct 21, 2008.
Implied distribution of federal funds rate six 
months ahead*
Recent: 10/23/2008
Last FOMC: 9/15/2008
*Derived from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, with term premium 
 and other adjustments to estimate expectations for the federal funds rate.
Nominal Treasury yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Sept.
FOMC
Oct. 
 23
Spot WTI (left scale)
Next 5 years (right scale)
5-to-10 year forward (right scale)
Oil prices and inflation compensation*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed
 Treasury yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Sept.
FOMC
Oct. 
 23
Inflation swaps yield curve
Maturity in Years
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 13 of 45
assigning odds of roughly 25, 40, and 20 percent, respectively to a 25, 50, and 75 basis
point rate cut, and about 10 percent odds to no change in the policy rate.  However,
these probabilities may be distorted to some extent by expectations that the effective
funds rate will continue to trade below the target for a while.  Responses to the Desk’s
primary dealer survey on October 20—which were not affected by this factor
although they may now be somewhat stale—indicate that dealers place 38 percent
probabilities on a 25 and 50 basis point rate cut, a 3 percent probability on a 75 basis
point rate cut, and a 20 percent probability on no change.  Further ahead, futures
quotes suggest that investors expect the FOMC to begin tightening by the spring of
of 2009 and 2.75 percent by the end of 2010.  However, these estimates may also be
distorted; term premiums resulting from heightened market volatility and poor
functioning in other financial markets may be substantially higher than currently
assumed by the staff, which would imply a lower long-term trajectory for the expected
funds rate.  Uncertainty about the federal funds rate six months ahead increased over
the intermeeting period, as indicated by the widening of the option-implied
probability distribution at this horizon.
(16) Two-year nominal Treasury yields declined 36 basis points on net over the
intermeeting period amid heavy safe-haven demand and in response to the downward
shift in policy expectations and the economic outlook.  In contrast, ten-year nominal
yields rose 50 basis points, likely reflecting expectations for increased Treasury
issuance to finance federal government asset purchases and other activities, and
perhaps also increased uncertainty about the future course of interest rates, which may
have boosted term premiums.  Standard measures of inflation compensation based on
differences between nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury yields were extremely
volatile over the intermeeting period.  On net, inflation compensation over the next
five years fell about 147 basis points, while it rose 41 basis points five to ten years
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 14 of 45
ahead.  Inferences about inflation expectations from these figures should be made
cautiously, however, as market yields were likely heavily affected by large increases in
liquidity premiums in TIPS yields and by supply effects on nominal Treasury yields.
Measures of inflation compensation obtained from inflation swaps, by contrast,
posted modest declines across the term structure and appeared more consistent with
the mixed changes in inflation expectations in the Reuters/Michigan survey and the
roughly $25 per barrel decrease in the price of crude oil over the intermeeting period.
In addition, respondents to the Desk’s survey expect a lower rate of CPI inflation
from five to ten years ahead.
Capital Markets
(17) As the financial turmoil intensified and the economic outlook deteriorated
over the intermeeting period, broad equity price indexes dropped substantially on net
amid very high volatility (Chart 4).  Stock price declines were widespread across
sectors.  Financial firms notably underperformed for most of the period, although
they recently moved back more closely in line with broad indexes.  With the earnings
reporting season just getting under way, analysts currently expect earnings per share
for the S&P 500 to be about 3 percent lower than year-ago levels, pulled down mostly
by decreases at financial firms.  For the roughly 75 percent of publicly traded banking
organizations that have reported earnings to date (excluding three financial
institutions that will be acquired in the near term—Merrill Lynch, Wachovia, and
Sovereign), third-quarter earnings were slightly negative.  Weak third-quarter results
were attributed to write-downs on security holdings and to continued loan loss
provisioning to offset increased credit losses on a variety of loans.  In contrast,
earnings at nonfinancial firms are expected to come in about 12 percent above year-
ago levels, with gains largely accounted for by the oil and gas sectors.  Looking ahead,
analysts marked down their projections for earnings over the coming year significantly
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 15 of 45
Chart 4
Asset Market Developments
Wilshire 5000
Dow Jones Financial
Equity prices
Source. Bloomberg.
Sept.
FOMC
Oct. 
 23
Implied volatility on S&P 500 (VIX)
Weekly (Fri.*)
*Latest observation is for most recent business day.
  Source. Chicago Board of Exchange.
Sept.
FOMC
Oct. 
 23
Basis points Basis points
Corporate bond spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
  Source. Merrill Lynch.
Sept.
FOMC
Oct. 
 23
Basis points Percent of par value
Source. LSTA/LPC Mark-to-Market Pricing.
Pricing in the secondary market for leveraged loans
Sept.
FOMC
Bid price
(right scale)
Bid-ask spread
(left scale)
Oct. 
 22
Fannie Mae
Ginnie Mae
Option-adjusted spreads on Agency MBS
Sept.
FOMC
Oct. 
 23
FRM
1-year ARM
Residential mortgage rate spreads
Sept.
FOMC
Oct. 
 22
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 16 of 45
for both financial and nonfinancial firms.  Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500
surged to a record level, well above its previous high in 1998, and the spread between
the twelve-month forward trend earnings-price ratio for S&P 500 firms and the real
long-term Treasury yield—a rough gauge of the equity premium—reached the highest
level since the start of the series in 1982.
(18) Conditions in corporate debt markets tightened further over the
intermeeting period.  Risk spreads on investment- and speculative-grade bonds soared
to historically high levels.  The increases appeared to reflect upward revisions to
expected losses as well as a further widening of already elevated risk premiums.  Gross
bond issuance by investment-grade nonfinancial firms has been moderate, and
issuance of speculative-grade bonds has been nil.  Conditions in the leveraged
syndicated loan market also deteriorated sharply over the period.  In particular, the
secondary market average bid price plunged an unprecedented 15 points, to nearly 70,
reportedly due to heavy sales by hedge funds and unwinds of total return swaps and
market-value collateralized loan obligations.  The implied spread on an index of loan
credit default swaps (the LCDX) almost doubled, on net, to about 800 basis points
over the period.  Finally, hedge fund performance continued to deteriorate over the
past few weeks, with the Global Hedge Fund Index tumbling more than 10 percent.
(19) The interest rate on 30-year fixed-rate conforming mortgages increased, on
net, about 50 basis points to almost 6.5 percent in mid-October.   The mortgage rate
had nearly returned to the very elevated levels seen just before Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac were taken into conservatorship in early September, but has reversed
most of that rise over the past week.  MBS spreads were extremely volatile amid
reportedly poor trading conditions.  Meanwhile, interest rates on nonconforming
jumbo mortgages remained extremely high.  Delinquency rates for prime and
subprime mortgages increased further.  Issuance of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
MBS in September increased slightly but remained below the pace seen in the first
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 17 of 45
half of the year, while issuance by Ginnie Mae has stayed elevated; the Federal
Reserve purchased $14.5 billion in agency discount notes over the intermeeting
period.  Issuance of asset-backed securities (ABS) collateralized by consumer credit
declined notably in the third quarter, at least partly as a result of historically high
(20) Conditions in the municipal bond market deteriorated substantially in recent
weeks, although there appears to have been some improvement recently.  Variable-
rate demand notes and tender option bonds reportedly were put back to liquidity
providers, who in turn sold the underlying long-term bonds in the secondary market,
putting pressure on prices and market functioning.  Amid the resulting unfavorable
climate, issuance of longer-term municipal bonds slowed markedly in September and
early October.  The credit quality of municipal bonds also deteriorated in the third
quarter, and the number of downgrades far outpaced the number of upgrades.  Yield
ratios on municipal bonds spiked to record levels, although the short-term ratio
retraced somewhat in the last few days of the period.
Foreign Developments
(21) The unfolding financial crisis affected financial markets across the globe
over the intermeeting period, intensifying in Europe and spreading to markets in the
emerging market economies as well.  Spreads over OIS rates of term sterling and term
euro rates rose sharply from their already elevated levels following the collapse of
Lehman Brothers and difficulties at AIG, although the increase was less pronounced
than in comparable dollar markets.  To address the growing global strain in dollar
funding markets, the Federal Reserve progressively increased the sizes of its reciprocal
currency swap lines with foreign central banks and boosted the number of central
bank counterparties (Australia, Japan, Canada, United Kingdom, Sweden, Norway,
and Denmark were added).  Late in the period, in connection with these swap
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 18 of 45
arrangements, the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, the Swiss National
Bank, and the Bank of Japan began to conduct auctions of dollar liquidity with 7-day,
being made available to fully meet the quantities demanded by borrowers in
possession of eligible collateral.  Additionally, the Swiss National Bank announced
plans to draw on its swap line to help finance up to $60 billion in purchases of assets
from a major Swiss bank.
(22) In early October, amid declines in confidence and increasingly constricted
access to funding, several high-profile banks in Europe were on the verge of failure,
prompting nationalizations and capital injections by their respective governments.  A
pullback from risk in virtually all advanced and emerging market economies had
induced plunges in stock prices, sharp swings in exchange rates, large increases in risk
spreads, and an almost complete seizing-up of credit markets (Chart 5).  Subsequently,
authorities in many foreign industrial countries, as well as in the United States,
announced a series of measures of unprecedented scale and scope designed to support
the banking system and restore the functioning of credit markets.  Since these
announcements, conditions in short-term funding markets, as evidenced by Libor to
OIS spreads, have improved somewhat.  Equity prices initially moved up in most
markets, but they continued to swing wildly thereafter as investors focused on the
risks of global recession.  On net, over the intermeeting period, equity indexes in most
advanced and developing countries declined 20 percent or more.  Interest rates on
sovereign bonds in industrial countries exhibited substantial volatility, and nominal
yield curves steepened as two-year yields declined while ten-year yields were mixed.
In developing countries, sovereign credit spreads rose sharply, leading several
countries to postpone scheduled sales of debt.
(23) The major currencies index of the dollar rose sharply over the period,
increasing 9 percent on net, as the dollar appeared to benefit from the global decrease
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 19 of 45
Chart 5
International Financial Indicators
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock price indexes
Industrial countries
Sept.
FOMC
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock price indexes
Emerging market economies
Sept.
FOMC
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-year government bond yields (nominal)
Sept.
FOMC
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal trade-weighted dollar indexes
Sept.
FOMC
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 20 of 45
in risk appetite.  An exception was the dollar’s 7 percent depreciation versus the yen,
which apparently reflected a rapid unwinding of yen carry-trade positions.  Implied
volatilities in most currency pairs rose to multi-year highs, making hedging currency
risk far more costly.  The dollar appreciated 9 percent against the currencies of our
other important trading partners over the period.  Most notably, the dollar rose about
Korean won, despite reports of heavy intervention sales of dollars by the monetary
authorities of these countries.  The dollar’s especially sharp increase against the
currencies of emerging market economies likely reflected investors’ pulling back from
risk, although in some cases sharp declines in commodity prices likely also contributed
to the weakening of those currencies.
Debt and Money
(24) The debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors is projected to have expanded at
a 9 percent annual rate in the third quarter, almost twice as fast as the average pace in
the first half of the year and 5 percentage points greater than the pace reported in the
previous Bluebook (Chart 6).  The pickup was attributable almost entirely to increased
borrowing by the federal government related to the Supplemental Financing Program
and the TARP.  In contrast, the rate of debt growth in the business and household
sectors is estimated to have slowed.  As already noted, in the nonfinancial business
sector, investment-grade bond issuance was moderate and speculative-grade bond
issuance was nil, perhaps due to extremely high interest rates and risk spreads.  By
contrast, commercial paper outstanding rose despite the extremely impaired market
conditions.  In the leveraged loan market, institutional issuance reportedly continued
to be very weak.  Household debt continued to slow as falling house prices weighed
on mortgage borrowing and the weakness in consumption spending trimmed
consumer credit growth.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 21 of 45
Chart 6
Debt and Money
Growth of debt of nonfinancial sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3 p
p Projected.
C&I loans
Commercial paper
Bonds
Changes in selected components of debt of
nonfinancial business sector*
Monthly rate
*Commercial paper and C&I loans are seasonally adjusted, bonds are not.
Growth of debt of household sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
credit
Home
mortgage
OFHEO purchase-only index
S&P Case-Shiller national index
Growth of house prices
Annual rate, s.a.
Source. Office of Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO),
Standard & Poor’s
Growth of M2
p Preliminary.
M2 velocity and opportunity cost
VelocityPercentage points
Opportunity cost*
(left axis)
Velocity
(right axis)
p Projected.
*Two-quarter moving average.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 22 of 45
(25) Commercial bank credit surged in mid-September, boosted by increases in
“other loans,” banks’ holdings of securities, and commercial and industrial (C&I)
loans.  The “other loans” category saw a marked increase in unplanned overdrafts by
a wide range of customers, including money fund complexes, as well as draws on lines
of credit by financial firms, consistent with the stress in funding markets.  Commercial
banks’ acquisition of a large volume of non-agency and non-Treasury securities likely
reflected in part purchases of CP stimulated by the AMLF program.  The increase in
C&I loans was reportedly due mostly to draw downs on pre-existing lines of credit;
however, some respondents to the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey indicated that
they had also increased loans not made under previous commitment.  Very large
fractions of the surveyed banks reported having tightened terms and standards on a
broad range of loan types for both businesses and households.
(26)  M2 expanded at a rapid 15½ percent annual rate in September and is
estimated to have accelerated further to a 17 percent pace in October.  Liquid
deposits surged in September reflecting, in part, robust expansions in the deposits of
broker-dealers, trusts, and corporate customers at a few large banks.  Small time
deposits increased sharply in September and are set to post dramatic gains in October,
as banks and thrifts reportedly continued to bid aggressively for these deposits.  By
contrast, liquid deposits slowed almost to a halt this month.  Retail money funds were
about flat in September but appear to be expanding briskly in October.  Currency
growth picked up in September and has risen further in October, apparently reflecting
increased domestic and foreign demand.  Overall, money growth may be being
boosted by some reallocation of household assets toward safer instruments; stock and
bond mutual funds, for example, have registered substantial runoffs over recent
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 23 of 45
Economic Outlook
(27) The staff has marked down sharply its outlook for economic growth in the
second half of 2008 and in 2009.  Consumer outlays, housing starts, and business
investment in equipment and structures all have been weaker than we projected in
September.  Moreover, financial turmoil has intensified, and banks further tightened
credit terms and standards for households and businesses in the third quarter.  As a
consequence, the forecast now assumes that the Committee will lower the target
federal funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting, 25 basis points at the December
meeting, and another 25 basis points at the January meeting.  The target funds rate is
assumed to remain at ½ percent through mid-2010 and then begin a gradual ascent.
Long-term Treasury yields are projected to be flat over the next two years.  Although
yields would tend to rise over time as the maturity window moves through the period
of low short-term rates prevailing over the next few years, we assume that this effect
will be offset as market participants revise down their policy expectations toward the
path incorporated in our baseline forecast.  Fixed mortgage rates and corporate bond
yields are projected to decline as economic conditions gradually improve and the
extreme aversion to risk-taking recedes.  Stock prices rise at a 12 percent annual rate
in 2009 and 2010 from a starting point that is 23 percent lower than in the previous
forecast; this path implies that the equity premium narrows significantly but remains
at historically high levels over the next two years.  The real trade-weighted dollar is
projected to depreciate nearly 3 percent in 2009 and almost 4 percent in 2010.  In line
with futures quotes, the price of West Texas intermediate crude oil is expected to rise
slowly from $74 per barrel in the current quarter to $83 per barrel by the end of 2010,
a level that is almost $25 per barrel lower than in the September forecast.
(28) Against this backdrop, the projected path for output follows a notably lower
trajectory than in the last forecast; real GDP is now estimated to have contracted at an
annual rate of 1 percent in the third quarter of 2008 and is projected to decline at
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 24 of 45
average annual rates of about 1¼ percent in the current quarter and 1½ percent in the
first quarter of 2009.  Over the remainder of 2009, GDP is projected to grow at an
annual rate of only ¼ percent, held down by tight lending standards and strained
financial conditions that improve only slowly.  In 2010, as financial strains continue to
ebb, GDP expands at its potential growth rate of 2¼ percent.  As a consequence of
the economic weakness through the end of next year, the unemployment rate rises to
of the NAIRU.  This substantial amount of slack, coupled with a lower path for
energy prices, leads to a marked deceleration in prices.  Core PCE inflation, which is
projected at an annual rate of 2¼ percent in the current quarter, moderates to 1½
percent in 2009 and 1¼ percent in 2010.  The recent drop in energy prices should
cause overall consumer prices to fall at an annual rate of 2¼ percent in the current
quarter; overall prices increase about 1½ percent on average.
Monetary Policy Strategies
(29) As shown in Chart 7, the Greenbook-consistent measure of short-run r* has
been revised down about 2¾ percentage points since the September Bluebook.  It
now stands at about -3 percent, several percentage points below its value at the
previous cyclical trough in mid-2003.  The magnitude of the downward shift since the
last Bluebook reflects the sharp deterioration in the staff’s outlook for aggregate
demand: The severity of strains in domestic financial markets has translated into a
marked fall in equity prices, higher corporate bonds rates, and tighter credit
conditions for households and businesses; and the intensification of global financial
market turmoil, a higher dollar and weaker foreign activity have led to less favorable
prospects for the demand for U.S. exports.  The estimate of short-run r* from the
small structural model—which incorporates these financial pressures only through the
effects of a wider equity premium—has moved down about 110 basis points since the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 25 of 45
Chart 7
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
The actual real funds rate based on lagged core inflation
Range of model-based estimates
70 Percent confidence interval
90 Percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
Single-equation model (1.6 (2.0
Small structural model -2.9 -1.8
Large model (FRB/US) -5.4 -1.7
Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
Greenbook-consistent measure -3.1 -0.3
Medium-Run Measures
Single-equation model (2.0 (2.1
Small structural model (1.0 (1.7
Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
TIPS-based factor model (2.0 2.0
Actual real federal funds rate -1.0 -0.4
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 26 of 45
last Bluebook to around -3 percent.  By comparison, the estimate of short-run r* from
the FRB/US model—which incorporates shifts in other risk premiums as well as the
effects of shocks to foreign demand—has fallen about 375 basis points since the
September Bluebook and is now at -5.4 percent.  The actual real federal funds rate has
declined about ½ percentage point since the last meeting, reflecting the Committee’s
policy action on October 8, and now stands at -1 percent.
(30) Chart 8 depicts optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model using the
long-run Greenbook forecast beyond 2010.8  These simulations impose a lower
bound of zero on the nominal funds rate and abstract from any potential stimulus
from non-standard policy tools (see box on “Possible Constraints on Monetary Policy
at Very Low Nominal Interest Rates”).  For an inflation goal of either 1½ percent or
control simulations prescribe a trajectory for the federal funds rate that declines to the
zero lower bound by mid-2009 and remains at that rate through mid-2012.  Optimal
policy is significantly constrained by the zero lower bound in these simulations;
indeed, the funds rate would fall much further if the zero lower bound were not
imposed on the optimal control policy.9  Because monetary policy is unable to provide
adequate stimulus over the next several years, the unemployment rate rises to around
persistence of this slack, core PCE inflation troughs near 1¼ percent in early 2012.
Under either inflation objective, the economy is still not in equilibrium after five years,
and further adjustments in policy are needed to ensure that inflation ultimately settles
down at the desired rate and output returns to its balanced-growth path.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 27 of 45
Federal funds rate
Recession Scenario
Taylor Rule
Full Preemption
Risk Management
Civilian unemployment rate
Core PCE inflation
Possible Constraints on Monetary Policy at Very Low Nominal Interest Rates
Given the recent sharp deterioration in the economic outlook, the Committee may see  
a real possibility of substantial further easing of monetary policy in coming quarters,  
with the federal funds rate falling to record lows.1  For example, under the staff’s baseline  
outlook, optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model bring the funds rate to zero  
and maintain that rate into 2012 (Chart 8), while the empirical outcome-based rule prescribes 
a zero funds rate from mid-2009 to late 2010 (Chart 9); indeed, the funds rate would become 
negative in those simulations if a lower bound of zero were not imposed.
The lower bound on short-term nominal interest rates arises from the fact that investors  
can always choose to hold currency, which pays a zero interest rate, instead of other  
financial assets.  In principle, this lower bound could be slightly negative, because holding 
large amounts of cash incurs storage and security costs that reduce its effective rate of  
return below zero.  In practice, however, a target of zero percent for the federal funds rate 
might well be associated with slightly positive effective rates, reflecting compensation for 
risk in interbank lending.  In Japan, for example, the one-week interbank rate was typically  
at a few basis points from March 2001 to July 2006—a period when the Bank of Japan  
kept the overnight call rate at zero—while the magnitude of occasional spikes was limited  
by the discount rate, which was maintained a notch higher at 10 basis points.
Reducing the funds rate to very low levels could have significant effects on the functioning 
of various financial markets and institutions and might well trigger substantial structural 
changes, especially if very low rates were maintained for a substantial period.  Transactions 
volumes in money markets likely would diminish significantly.  Yields on assets held  
in money market mutual funds might not be high enough to cover the overhead costs  
of managing those funds.  In the short run, funds might have to waive those management 
fees, and over time the industry might need to move to an explicit fee structure analogous to 
that already in effect for some types of deposits at commercial banks.  Given that overnight 
interest charges would not provide any incentive to deliver on promised Treasury securities, 
fails-to-deliver in the Treasury market would likely become increasingly pervasive. Such 
developments could initially prove disruptive but might eventually lead market participants 
to incorporate explicit penalties for failures to deliver.
Even when the setting of the nominal interest rate is constrained by the zero lower bound,  
a central bank can use other tools to provide monetary stimulus.  One such approach, 
known as quantitative easing, involves the injection of additional liquidity into the banking 
system beyond that required for keeping the overnight interbank rate at zero.  However,  
the evidence from the Japanese experience with quantitative easing—in which excess 
reserves expanded from a negligible quantity in early 2001 to about five times the level  
of required reserves by late 2003—suggests that this approach may have little or no effect  
on bank lending, although it may have provided some stimulus by exerting downward 
pressure on the yen.  A more promising approach might be to aim at reducing term and  
risk premiums on various financial assets by purchasing those assets in sufficiently large 
quantities.  Event studies suggest that large changes in the relative supply of securities have 
had economically significant effects on their yields. 
1 The effective federal funds rate was about ¾ percent for a few months in 1954 and again in 1958.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 29 of 45
(31) As depicted in Chart 9, given the staff’s forecast the outcome-based policy
rule prescribes a funds rate that drops to the zero bound by mid-2009 and stays there
through 2010 before steadily rising to about 4¾ percent by the end of 2013.  Over
much of the period, this trajectory is substantially lower than the one currently
embedded in financial market quotes, under which the funds rate declines to 0.75
percent in 2009Q1 before rising to a plateau of about 4 percent starting in 2011.
Stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model using the staff’s baseline outlook and
the outcome-based rule indicate a very high probability that the funds rate hits and
stays at the zero bound between mid-2009 and the end of 2010.10  In contrast,
information from interest rate caps indicates that investors see a relatively high
likelihood of substantial monetary policy tightening starting in the second half of
(32) As shown in the bottom panel of Chart 9, the near-term prescriptions from
the Taylor (1993, 1999) rules are markedly lower than in the previous Bluebook,
reflecting the pronounced widening of the output gap and improved readings on core
inflation.  While these rules depend solely on the current output gap and the rate of
core inflation that has occurred over the past year, the first-difference rule depends on
three-quarter-ahead forecasts for output growth and core inflation; hence, for either
inflation goal, this rule prescribes a declining funds rates trajectory that reaches the
zero bound by the first quarter of 2009.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 30 of 45
Policy Alternatives
(33) This Bluebook presents three alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized by the draft statements in Table 1.  Under Alternative A
the federal funds rate target is cut 50 basis points to 1 percent; under Alternative B the
federal funds rate target is cut 25 basis points to 1¼ percent; and under Alternative C
the federal funds rate target is left unchanged at 1½ percent.  All three alternatives
begin by noting the deterioration in financial conditions and the weakened economic
outlook.  Alternatives B and C note the plethora of recent policy actions around the
world, suggesting that these actions will help to promote a return to moderate
economic growth; Alternative A includes no language to soften its negative view of
the outlook for economic activity.  With respect to inflation, Alternatives A and B
express confidence that inflation will moderate in coming quarters to levels consistent
with price stability, whereas Alternative C retains the phrasing from the statement
following the intermeeting cut on October 8, which acknowledges reduced upside
risks to inflation without commenting on its likely future path.
(34) If the Committee believes that further monetary policy accommodation is
appropriate given the deterioration in the economic outlook, but wishes to adjust
policy relatively gradually, it may want to reduce the target federal funds rate 25 basis
points at this meeting as in Alternative B.  Even if members have not revised down
their forecast for economic activity as much as the staff, they may still believe that
easing is called for.  In view of the negative tone of the recent economic data, the
worsening of financial conditions since mid-September, and the reduction of
inflationary pressures implied by the large drop in energy prices and the outlook for
significant economic slack, members may view the 50 basis point intermeeting move
in early October as only a partial step toward suitably balancing the risks to the
outlook and think that that action should be augmented with a further policy
adjustment at this meeting.  At the same time, members may be less pessimistic about
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 32 of 45
Table 1: Alternative Language for the October 29 FOMC Announcement
October 8 Statement Alternative A Alternative B Alternative C
Policy 
Decision
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for 
the federal funds rate 50 basis points 
to 1 percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to lower its target for 
the federal funds rate 25 basis points 
to 1¼ percent.
The Federal Open Market Committee 
decided today to keep its target for the 
federal funds rate at 1½ percent.
The outlook for economic activity has 
weakened, and downside risks to 
growth appear to have increased.  
Consumer spending and industrial 
production have declined in recent 
months, and slowing economic activity 
in many foreign economies is damping 
the prospects for U.S. exports.  
Moreover, the intensification of 
financial market turmoil is likely to 
exert additional restraint on spending, 
partly by further reducing the ability of 
households and businesses to obtain 
credit.
The pace of economic activity appears 
to have slowed markedly, owing 
importantly to a decline in consumer 
expenditures.  Moreover, the 
intensification of financial market 
turmoil is likely to exert additional 
restraint on spending, partly by further 
reducing the ability of households and 
businesses to obtain credit.
Reflecting in part the intensification of 
financial market turmoil, the outlook for 
economic activity has weakened.  
Consumer spending and industrial 
production have declined in recent 
months.  However, policy actions taken 
in recent weeks, including coordinated 
interest rate cuts by central banks, 
extraordinary liquidity measures, and 
official steps to strengthen financial 
systems, should help over time to 
improve credit conditions and promote a 
return to moderate economic growth.
In light of the declines in the prices of 
energy and other commodities and the 
weaker prospects for economic 
activity, the Committee expects 
inflation to moderate in coming 
quarters to levels consistent with price 
stability.
In light of the declines in the prices of 
energy and other commodities and the 
weaker prospects for economic 
activity, the Committee expects 
inflation to moderate in coming 
quarters to levels consistent with price 
stability.
Inflation has been high, but the 
Committee believes that the declines in 
the prices of energy and other 
commodities and the weaker prospects 
for economic activity have reduced the 
upside risks to inflation.
Assessment 
of Risk
The Committee will monitor 
economic and financial developments 
carefully and will act as needed to 
promote sustainable economic growth 
and price stability.
Policy actions taken in recent weeks, 
including coordinated interest rate cuts 
by central banks, extraordinary 
liquidity measures, and official steps to 
strengthen financial systems, should 
help over time to improve credit 
conditions and promote a return to 
moderate economic growth.  
Nevertheless, significant downside 
risks to growth remain.  The 
Committee will monitor economic and 
financial developments carefully and 
will act as needed to promote 
sustainable economic growth and price 
stability.
In these circumstances, the Committee’s 
primary concern is the downside risks to 
growth.  The Committee will monitor 
economic and financial developments 
carefully in light of the recent policy 
actions and will act as needed to 
promote sustainable economic growth 
and price stability.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 33 of 45
the outlook than the staff for several reasons and hence believe that more limited
policy action than assumed in the Greenbook is appropriate.  For example, they may
believe that financial conditions will improve sooner than assumed by the staff, as in
the Greenbook’s “More Rapid Financial Recovery” scenario.  Or, they may think that
passage of a second fiscal stimulus package is likely and perhaps that such a package
could be larger or more potent than those presented in the Greenbook’s “Fiscal
Stimulus” scenarios.  Although these Greenbook alternative scenarios indicate that
more policy easing would still be desirable, they might suggest less urgency to take
further large steps.  Alternatively, should the Committee share the staff’s downbeat
economic outlook but see a near-term reversal of policy as costly, members might
view a series of gradual steps as more prudent than one or two large moves because
there is considerable uncertainty surrounding the outlook, particularly concerning the
effects of the many official actions recently implemented.
(35) The rationale section of the statement accompanying Alternative B would
begin by noting the deterioration in the outlook for economic activity, pointing
specifically to the softening in consumer spending.  The statement would also point
out that financial market strains have intensified and that the resulting tightening of
credit conditions is likely to impose additional restraint on spending.  The paragraph
on inflation would note that recent declines in the prices of energy and other
commodities, along with greater prospective economic slack, should cause inflation to
moderate to levels consistent with price stability.  (See the box “Likely Market
Interpretation of Price Stability Language.”)  The change in wording, from reduced
upside risks in the October 8 statement to an expected moderation of inflation in the
language for Alternative B, suggests that Committee members have become much
more confident that inflation will decline.  The final paragraph would note the
numerous policy steps already taken in recent weeks to increase liquidity in financial
markets, strengthen financial systems around the world, and promote economic
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 34 of 45
growth.  While indicating that these actions should support economic activity going
forward, the statement also notes that they have not eliminated downside risks.  The
statement concludes with the final sentence of the October 8 statement, highlighting
the Committee’s intention to act as needed in support of its objectives.
(36) According to the Desk’s survey on October 20, primary dealers assigned
roughly 40 percent probabilities to both 25 basis point and 50 basis point cuts in the
federal funds target at this meeting, with a 20 percent probability of no change.  The
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 35 of 45
mean of dealers’ expectations for the target funds rate was 1.2 percent, which is
slightly above the rate of 1.1 percent implied by federal funds futures contracts at the
time of the Desk’s survey.  Because futures contracts refer to the effective funds rate
rather than the target rate, the difference between the dealer expectations and the
futures rate may reflect the possibility that federal funds will continue to trade below
the target in coming weeks; 12 it is likely that at the time of the Desk’s survey, both
dealers and futures market participants expected a cut in the target funds rate of about
contracts closing after the October meeting have declined another 10 basis points
amid investor concerns about the economic outlook, and they now suggest
expectations of about 40 basis points of easing at the upcoming meeting.  Thus, a 25
basis point cut to 1¼ percent would leave the target federal funds rate somewhat
above current market expectations.  Nevertheless, the clear shift in the statement
language away from concern about inflation risks and toward an emphasis on growth
risks would likely lead investors to anticipate further rate cuts, and this alternative
appears broadly consistent with readings for the funds rate at the end of the year that
are implied by futures markets.  As a result, our best estimate is that adoption of
Alternative B would have only small effects on prices of financial assets.
(37)  If the Committee, like the staff, has marked down significantly its
assessment of economic prospects and now sees an immediate and substantial policy
response as appropriate, it may want to reduce the target federal funds rate 50 basis
points at this meeting, as in Alternative A.  Recent economic data releases have been
almost all weaker than anticipated, with consumer outlays down sharply.  Moreover,
financial conditions have deteriorated substantially since the September meeting:
Equity prices fell sharply over the intermeeting period; mortgage rates moved higher; 
                                           
12 The October 22 announcement of a decrease in the spread between the target federal 
funds rate and the rate of interest paid on excess reserve balances had little apparent effect 
on futures rates.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 36 of 45
corporate bond yields jumped; and the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey
shows that extraordinarily high percentages of banks tightened standards and terms
on loans to businesses and households over the past three months.  With regard to
inflation, the latest news on commodity prices and inflation expectations, in
conjunction with the appreciation of the dollar in recent months and the likelihood of
a marked increase in economic slack, provides substantial assurance that inflation will
moderate.  Even if the Committee has not marked down its outlook for the economy
as much as the staff, it may view the downside risks as having increased.  Moreover,
with the Greenbook-consistent measure of the equilibrium real funds rate having
dropped about 2 percentage points below the level of the current real rate, even a less
pessimistic outlook than the Greenbook’s could be consistent with a considerable
further reduction in the target federal funds rate.
(38) The rationale section of the statement for Alternative A highlights the
recent deterioration in financial and economic conditions, with specific references to
weak consumer spending and industrial production and to the slowdown in foreign
economic growth.  As under Alternative B, the section also points out the likely future
spending restraint implied by the further tightening of financial conditions.  The
discussion of inflation would be identical to that under Alternative B, noting the
reasons to expect a moderation of inflation to levels consistent with price stability.
The assessment of risk would emphasize the Committee’s readiness to act as needed
to promote growth.
(39) A 50 basis point cut is near the high end of market expectations for policy
easing at this meeting.  Moreover, the statement language suggests that the Committee
is prepared to reduce rates further, and thus market participants would presumably
lower their expected trajectory for the federal funds rate over the next few quarters.
Short- and intermediate-term interest rates would probably drop noticeably.  Long-
term interest rates might decline modestly, though if market participants interpret the
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 37 of 45
statement as a sign that the Committee is underestimating inflation risks, long-term
rates could rise.  The effect on equity prices would depend on whether markets are
comforted by the prospect of more monetary ease or concerned by the gloomy
assessment of the outlook and risks.
(40) If the Committee believes that the economic outlook has not deteriorated as
much as in the staff forecast or that there is still a significant risk that inflation will not
moderate as expected, it might prefer to leave the stance of policy unchanged, as in
Alternative C.  Although recent readings on real activity have been very weak, a wide
range of monetary and other policy measures have been implemented recently, and
members may feel that a gradual improvement of financial conditions could be in
train.  Indeed, many yield spreads have been narrowing and liquidity measures have
been improving gradually in recent days, albeit from highly strained levels.  If this
process continues in coming weeks, the cumulative improvement in financial
conditions could be substantial.  Also, the Committee may place a high probability on
a major new fiscal stimulus package being enacted soon; no fiscal package was
factored into the staff’s projection.  Moreover, members may be skeptical of the staff
projection of a sharp reduction in inflation, perhaps feeling that it is based on
assumptions that may prove to be overly optimistic.  For example, the Committee
may not have confidence in the sharply lower trajectory for energy prices suggested by
futures markets; energy prices are highly volatile and futures market quotes over the
past few years have been unreliable guides to subsequent developments.  And some
members may not put much stock in the notion that slack in labor and product
markets will restrain future price pressures, but may instead worry that a very low
funds rate will fuel rising inflation expectations, as illustrated in the Greenbook’s
“Faster Inflation” scenario.  Indeed, members may want to see several months of
lower data on inflation and inflation expectations before they feel comfortable with
further reductions in the policy target.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 38 of 45
(41) The first part of the rationale portion of the statement associated with
Alternative C would acknowledge the recent deterioration in economic and financial
conditions.  The second part would point to the wide range of recent policy actions,
noting that they should help to promote growth over time.  The discussion of the
outlook for inflation would be essentially identical to that in the October 8 statement,
which focused on a reduction in upside risks rather than a material reduction in the
modal forecast.  Finally, the risk assessment under Alternative C begins by stating that
the balance of risks has shifted toward downside risks to growth.  The section
concludes with a modification of the risk assessment of the October 8 statement,
pointing to the possible effects of past policy actions as something the Committee will
be watching particularly closely.
(42) Given the high odds embedded in financial market prices of at least a 25
basis point cut at this meeting, a decision to adopt Alternative C would surprise
market participants, leading to an appreciable upward revision of their short-term
outlook for the path of policy and probably an increase in short-and intermediate-
term interest rates.  Equity prices would likely fall, perhaps substantially.  Financial
market strains would probably increase and private yields would rise.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(43) M2 is projected to grow at a 7½ percent annual rate this year, significantly
above the rate anticipated in September and faster than the projected growth rate of
nominal GDP.  The major factor behind rapid growth of M2 this year is the decline in
short-term interest rates and the associated drop in the opportunity cost of holding
M2 assets.  A portfolio shift toward safe and liquid assets may also be playing a role.
M2 is projected to decelerate to a pace of roughly 3 percent in 2009 and 2010,
reflecting weak growth in nominal GDP in 2009 and a rising opportunity cost in 2010.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 39 of 45
(44) Debt growth in the private sector is expected to be weak over the next two
years.  Household debt is projected to be essentially flat in 2009 and to expand only a
little in 2010, held down by falling home prices and tighter bank lending terms and
standards.  Nonfinancial business debt is projected to grow at a moderate rate, down
sharply from rapid growth rates in recent years, also restrained in part by tight credit
conditions.  By contrast, debt is projected to grow rapidly in the government sectors,
as the economic slowdown damps revenues, and as financing needs related to the
TARP, Treasury’s assistance to the GSEs, and higher expected losses at the FDIC
boost federal debt substantially in 2009 and 2010.  Overall, domestic nonfinancial
debt is projected to grow 2¾ percent in 2009 and 4¼ percent in 2010, a very subdued
pace by historical standards.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 40 of 45
Monthly Growth Rates
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
(45) Draft language for the directive is provided below.
Directive Wording 
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
MAINTAINING/INCREASING/reducing the federal funds rate
AT/to an average of around ________ 1½ percent.
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) 42 of 45
