Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Content last modified 04/01/2015.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
JANUARY 22, 2009
Class I FOMC—Restricted Controlled (FR) January 22, 2009
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES
Recent Developments
(1) Conditions in some financial markets showed tentative and limited
improvements during the intermeeting period; nevertheless, extraordinary stresses
remained and concerns about financial institutions increased significantly in the latter
part of the period.  A number of credit spreads declined from the exceptionally high
levels that prevailed from mid-September through mid-December, but most were still
elevated compared to their historical ranges.  In short-term funding markets, year-end
passed with little incident, partly reflecting the large supply of dollar liquidity from the
Federal Reserve and other central banks.  Many financial institutions posted further
significant losses in the fourth quarter, and their equity prices and credit default swap
(CDS) spreads indicate that investors continued to have significant concerns about
the health of the financial sector and remained uncertain about potential policy
(2) Market participants marked down the expected path of the federal funds
rate in response to the December FOMC decision, weaker-than-expected economic
data, and renewed concerns about the financial sector.  Market and survey measures
of policy expectations suggest that investors expect the target federal funds rate to
remain within its current range through the first half of this year.  Yields on long-term
nominal Treasury securities rose on net, with notable increases at the end of the
intermeeting period.  Yields on TIPS fell, reportedly as a result of some improvement
in TIPS market liquidity.
(3) Broad equity price indexes decreased on net during the intermeeting period,
as investors remained concerned about the economic outlook and the condition of
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 2 of 52
the financial sector.  The Federal Reserve’s programs to purchase agency debt and
mortgage-backed securities (MBS) were received positively by market participants, and
reportedly contributed to the improved ability of the agencies to access long-term
debt markets.  Investment-grade corporate bond spreads declined modestly and
issuance of nonfinancial investment-grade bonds continued to be fairly solid.  In
contrast, issuance of speculative-grade bonds continued to be quite limited despite a
noticeable decline in spreads, and issuance of asset-backed securities (ABS) remained
negligible.  Bank credit contracted again in December.  Results from the January
Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey indicated a further tightening of banks’ lending
policies on all major loan categories, albeit by somewhat smaller percentages of banks
than in recent surveys, and broad reductions in loan demand.  A number of foreign
central banks eased monetary policy further on signs of a global economic slowdown.
Financial Institutions
(4) Although investors’ concerns about the condition of financial institutions
appeared to ease somewhat during much of the intermeeting period, market sentiment
toward financial firms soured again late in the period as the fourth-quarter earnings
season got under way.  CDS spreads for U.S. bank holding companies, which had
narrowed for the first few weeks of the period, rose sharply in mid-January and
returned to very high levels, mainly in response to renewed concerns about the
viability of Citigroup and Bank of America in their current forms and the possibility
that other major financial institutions could face considerable strains (Chart 1).
Equity prices for bank holding companies fell to below their November lows,
reflecting continued concerns about the longer-term prospect for profits.  Goldman
Sachs and Morgan Stanley reported larger-than-expected losses for their fiscal fourth
quarter as they wrote down more assets.  JP Morgan posted a small profit that was
held down by asset writedowns and losses in the firm’s investment banking unit, while
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 3 of 52
Chart 1
Financial Institutions
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2007 2008 2009
Basis points
Jan. 
 21
Senior CDS spreads for bank holding companies
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2007 2008 2009
Basis points
CDS spreads for insurance companies*
*Median spreads for 61 insurance companies.
Source. Markit.
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 21
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2007 2008 2009
Jan 03, 2007 = 100
Banks
Insurance companies
Bank and insurance ETFs
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 22
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2007 2008
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 21
CDS spread for GMAC
Source. Markit.
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 20
Global Hedge Fund Index values
Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan.
2008
Government funds
  Prime funds
Net flows into taxable money market mutual funds
Source. iMoneyNet.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 4 of 52
Citigroup reported a large loss and announced a reorganization that would split the
business into two units.  A number of regional banks also reported sizable losses.
Many financial institutions raised their loan loss provisions in anticipation of further
increases in charge-offs.
(5) Bank of America reported large losses in the fourth quarter, both in its
legacy operations and particularly in its recently acquired Merrill Lynch investment
bank unit.  On January 16, the U.S. government entered into an agreement with Bank
of America to provide assistance to the institution.  Also during the intermeeting
period, the U.S. government entered into agreements to provide support to General
Motors Acceptance Corporation (GMAC) and Chrysler Financial.  Details of these
agreements are provided in the box “U.S. Government Assistance to Three Financial
(6) Developments at other financial institutions were mixed.  Equity prices of
insurance companies edged down over the intermeeting period while their CDS
spreads fell some from extremely high levels.  One worrisome factor for the sector
was rising delinquency rates on loans backing commercial mortgage-backed securities
(CMBS)—an asset class in which insurance companies are major investors.  The
CMBS market remained all but shut down and spreads on the CMBX index moved
back up to near their November peaks.  Hedge funds posted negative average returns
again in December and, according to one measure, closed the year with an annual loss
of 23 percent.  In the wake of the recent poor performance, industry sources indicated
a record number of funds were liquidated in the third quarter and redemption
requests reportedly remained elevated during the fourth quarter.  The revelation of the
alleged Ponzi scheme of Bernard Madoff contributed to further negative sentiment
about lightly regulated financial entities.  Treasury- and government-only money
market mutual funds (MMMFs) faced pressures stemming from very low short-term
interest rates, and many have waived fees in an effort to retain investors.  In contrast,
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 5 of 52
U.S. Government Assistance to Three Financial Institutions
To help promote financial stability and economic recovery, over the intermeeting period the 
U.S. government entered into agreements to provide assistance to Bank of America, GMAC, 
and Chrysler Financial.  This box provides a summary of those agreements.
Bank of America reported very large losses for the fourth quarter of 2008.  In addition to 
poor results in its commercial banking operations, its recently acquired Merrill Lynch 
investment bank unit booked pre-tax losses of more than $20 billion.  To limit the 
potentially adverse effect on financial market stability from the announcement of these 
results, the U.S. government entered into an agreement with Bank of America on January 
16.  The Treasury and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) will provide 
protection against the possibility of unusually large losses on an asset pool of about $118 
billion of loans, securities backed by residential and commercial real estate loans, and other 
such assets, all of which have been marked to current market value.  The large majority of 
these assets were acquired by Bank of America in its purchase of Merrill Lynch.  The assets 
will remain on Bank of America’s balance sheet.
Under the terms of the agreement, Bank of America would absorb the first $10 billion of 
eligible losses on the pool.  Losses above that amount would be split 90-10 between the 
Treasury/FDIC and Bank of America, with a maximum of $10 billion in losses for the 
Treasury/FDIC.  As a fee for this protection, Bank of America will issue $4 billion of 
preferred stock with an 8 percent dividend rate and warrants with an aggregate value of 10 
percent of the total amount of preferred issued.  Beyond that, the Federal Reserve would 
take residual losses on the pool through non-recourse lending, subject to Bank of America’s 
continued 10 percent loss sharing.  Bank of America may draw upon the loan facility if and 
when losses on the pool reach $18 billion.  A fee of 20 basis points per year will be charged 
on the undrawn amounts of the facility and a floating rate of OIS plus 300 basis points will 
be charged on drawn amounts.  In addition, the Treasury used $20 billion of TARP funds to 
purchase Bank of America preferred stock, bringing the Treasury’s total investment in Bank 
of America to $45 billion.
GMAC faced considerable strains from slow originations (because of very weak motor 
vehicle sales) and deteriorating loan quality.  To address these strains, GMAC began to 
prepare to apply for bank holding company status.  To increase its capital as part of that 
process, it offered a debt-equity swap but the offering ultimately was undersubscribed.  
Despite that setback, GMAC applied for, and was granted, bank holding company status on 
December 24, as the Federal Reserve Board determined it had sufficient capital to satisfy 
requirements.  To support the motor vehicle market, the U.S. government on December 29 
entered into an agreement to provide capital support to GMAC under the TARP.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 6 of 52
Under the agreement, the U.S. Treasury purchased $5 billion of GMAC senior preferred 
equity, and provided a $1 billion loan to GM to participate in a rights offering for GMAC.  
These funds were in addition to the $13.4 billion of TARP funds pledged to GM and 
Chrysler to stabilize those firms.  CDS spreads on GMAC senior debt, which had already 
declined from their mid-December highs, dropped further on the announcement.  For 
similar reasons, on January 16, the Treasury announced it would make a $1.5 billion five-year 
loan of TARP funds, secured by a senior secured interest in a pool of newly-originated 
consumer auto loans, to a special purpose entity created by Chrysler Financial.  Chrysler 
Holding will serve as a guarantor for certain covenants of Chrysler Financial.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 7 of 52
prime MMMFs had net inflows over the intermeeting period as they remained
attractive to investors, and appeared once again to be purchasing asset-backed
commercial paper (ABCP).
(7) Funding for a number of major financial institutions in the intermeeting
period was supported by the FDIC’s Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program
(TLGP).  So far, financial institutions have issued about $130 billion through the
program; about three-quarters of this issuance was concentrated at six firms—GE
Capital, JP Morgan, Bank of America, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and Wells
Fargo.  Most of this issuance has been at a fixed rate for three years (close to the
maximum period covered by the FDIC guarantee).1  Spreads on FDIC-guaranteed
debt have declined to levels close to those on agency debt—about 60 to 100 basis
points above comparable-maturity Treasury securities.  In this period, little non-
FDIC-guaranteed debt was issued by financial institutions.  GE Capital issued non-
FDIC-insured thirty-year bonds, but it had to offer an unusually wide spread to do so.
Market Functioning
(8) Stresses in the money markets eased over the intermeeting period, reflecting
the passing of year-end and ample dollar liquidity provided by the Federal Reserve
and other central banks.  Still, conditions remained significantly strained at longer
tenors.  In unsecured bank funding markets, Libor fixings at most maturities declined
and spreads over comparable-maturity overnight index swap (OIS) rates narrowed
further on net.  The one-month Libor-OIS spread declined to its lowest level since
late 2007; however, the three- and six-month spreads as well as forward one-month
spreads remained high (Chart 2).  Market reports indicated that banks became more
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 8 of 52
Chart 2
Market Functioning
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2007 2008 2009
Spreads of Libor over OIS
Daily Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 22
July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2007 2008
ABCP
A2/P2
Jan. 
 21
Dec.
FOMC
Spreads on 30-day commercial paper
Basis points
Treasury on-the-run premium
Monthly average
Dec.
FOMC
Daily on-the-run Treasury market volume
Monthly average
Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2007 2008
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 22
AAA CMBX Index
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2007 2008
Basis points Percent of par value
Source. LSTA/LPC Mark-to-Market Pricing.
Pricing in the secondary market for leveraged loans
Dec.
FOMC
Bid price
(right scale)
Bid-asked spread
(left scale)
Jan. 
 21
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 9 of 52
willing to extend liquidity to each other out to at least the one-month horizon, but the
terms of interbank lending were said to be still counterparty-specific in some cases.
(9) In secured funding markets, conditions showed some improvement, but
activity at longer tenors reportedly remained limited.  With the overnight Treasury
general collateral repo rate near zero for most of the period, implying low penalties
for delivery failures, market participants were reportedly reluctant to lend Treasury
collateral out of concerns about potential fails.  This reluctance to lend was
exacerbated in the first part of the intermeeting period by year-end concerns.
Overnight securities lending from the SOMA portfolio increased as year-end
approached, but it remained well below the extremely elevated levels of September
and October.  Delivery fails continued to run well under the high levels of September
and October, reflecting in part reduction in transaction volumes as well as industry
efforts to mitigate fails, including the January 5 recommendation of the Treasury
Market Practices Group to implement a financial charge on settlement fails beginning
in May.  Conditions in the markets for repo transactions backed by agency debt and
MBS improved some, especially for overnight contracts, although strains remained
evident in term markets.  Average bid-asked spreads declined notably, but in most
cases were still above those prior to September, while haircuts were little changed at
high levels.
(10) Changes in conditions in the Treasury bill market pointed to a reduction in
flight-to-quality flows.  Although Treasury bill rates remained very low, reflecting low
overnight interest rates and expectations that they will remain so for some time, yields
increased modestly on net over the intermeeting period.  The Treasury issued
additional cash management bills under the Supplementary Financing Program (SFP),
but the outstanding level of SFP bills still fell from $405 billion on December 10 to
around $175 billion at the end of the period.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 10 of 52
(11) Conditions in the commercial paper (CP) market improved over the
intermeeting period, reflecting continued effects of the measures taken by the Federal
Reserve to support this market, greater demand from institutional investors, and the
passing of year-end.  Yields and spreads on 30-day A1/P1 nonfinancial and financial
CP as well as on asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) declined modestly and
remained low.  More notably, yields and spreads on 30-day A2/P2 CP, which is not
eligible for purchase under the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF), dropped
sharply after the beginning of the year, in part reflecting the dissipation of year-end
pressures.  The amount of unsecured CP outstanding that has been issued by financial
and nonfinancial companies and the amount of ABCP outstanding both were little
changed on net over the intermeeting period.
(12) The increase in the amount of CP outstanding is more than accounted for
by issuance into the CPFF.  As of January 21, credit extended under the CPFF was
$351 billion, $40 billion above the level on December 10.  Credit extended under the
Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility
(AMLF) declined further over the intermeeting period to about $15 billion as of
January 21.  To date, the Money Market Investor Funding Facility (MMIFF) program
has registered no activity.2  The low demand for credit from the AMLF and the
MMIFF probably reflects continued net flows into money market mutual funds, the
institutions that these two facilities were primarily designed to support.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 11 of 52
(13) Functioning in the market for Treasury coupon securities continued to
show signs of impairment.  The on-the-run premium for the ten-year nominal
Treasury note was little changed over the intermeeting period at very elevated levels.
The average absolute difference between yields on actual Treasury securities and
corresponding yields read from an estimated yield curve declined in the period but
remained high, indicating a continuing absence of arbitrage, presumably reflecting
balance-sheet constraints and risk aversion of market participants.  Trading volumes
in the Treasury market fell to very low levels at the end of 2008, although they
recovered a bit after the end of the year.  More encouragingly, bid-asked spreads in
the on-the-run market declined sharply at the beginning of 2009 after reaching
extremely wide levels at the end of 2008; their levels at the end of the period were
near those seen before the heightened market volatility last fall.
(14) Liquidity in the corporate bond market improved somewhat, with
particularly notable declines in estimated bid-asked spreads for speculative-grade
bonds, and an increase in trading volumes for both investment- and speculative-grade
bonds, although volumes remained relatively low.  Liquidity and price discovery in the
CDS market remained poor, as the number of dealers providing quotes continued to
be low, particularly for financial firms.  The dispersion of quotes narrowed
significantly over the period, but it was still quite wide.  The market for CMBS, which
had sold off sharply in the previous intermeeting period, continued to be strained.
The CMBX index—an index based on CDS spreads on AAA-rated CMBS—widened
during this intermeeting period and is only modestly below the peak levels in
November.  Conditions in the leveraged loan market remained very poor.  Secondary
market prices for leveraged loans stayed near historic lows.  The average bid-asked
spread in this market continued to be extremely wide.  Implied spreads on the LCDX
index dropped sharply after the December FOMC meeting, but rose substantially in
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 12 of 52
the latter part of the intermeeting period and remain well above the levels that
prevailed prior to October 2008.
(15) Depository institutions continued to make substantial use of the discount
window, although the amount of credit declined, reflecting, for the most part, reduced
borrowing by foreign institutions.  Primary credit outstanding fell markedly during the
period from $90 billion on December 10 to $63 billion on January 21.  TAF auctions,
for both 28-day and 84-day credit, were undersubscribed in the intermeeting period,
continuing the pattern that has prevailed since the early October expansion of the
auction amounts to $150 billion.  The number of bidders was similar to that in other
recent auctions except for the January 12 auction of 28-day credit, which saw a record
high number of bidders.3  The amount of credit outstanding under the TAF remained
around $400 billion throughout the period; as of January 21, it was $416 billion.  The
Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) auctions held during the period also were
undersubscribed, and market participants exercised only $7 billion of the options on
$50 billion of TSLF loans against Schedule 2 collateral on their December 22 exercise
date.  The amount of securities lent through the TSLF declined $52 billion to about
$133 billion as of January 21.  Use of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF)
declined further over the intermeeting period, with the amount outstanding falling to
$33 billion on January 21 from $52 billion on December 10.
(16) The effective federal funds rate stayed within the new target range of 0 to
intermeeting period, and trading volumes in the funds market were generally quite
low.  Very recently, however, trading volume has picked up some and federal funds
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 13 of 52
have traded closer to the upper end of the target range, particularly during the
morning hours.
Monetary Policy Expectations and Treasury Yields
(17) The FOMC’s decision at its December meeting to lower the target federal
funds rate from 1 percent to a range of 0 to 0.25 percent was more aggressive than
market expectations prior to the meeting.  Furthermore, market participants
reportedly did not fully anticipate the indications that the FOMC may keep rates low
for some time and that the FOMC may engage in nontraditional policy such as the
purchase of longer-term Treasury securities.  Consequently, market expectations for
the path of the federal funds rate moved downward for most horizons.  Economic
data released late in the intermeeting period came in generally weaker than expected
and, along with increased concerns about the health of some financial institutions as
fourth-quarter earnings began to be reported, pushed futures rates lower (Chart 3).
Futures rates currently suggest that investors expect that the effective federal funds
rate will remain within the current target range through the first half of this year and
then rise gradually thereafter, with the effective rate reaching about 1.4 percent by the
end of 2010.  However, uncertainty about the size of term premiums and potential
distortions created by the zero lower bound for the federal funds rate make it difficult
to obtain a definitive reading on policy expectations of market participants from
futures prices (see the box “Gauging Investor Expectations for Future Interest Rate
Policy with Uncertain Term Premiums” for a discussion of term premium effects).  In
a very low interest rate environment, it is more likely that the zero lower bound could
truncate the distribution of future short-term interest rates and lead to a greater
positive skew in the distribution.  In this case, expected future short interest rates
implied by futures prices would be pushed up above market participants’ modal
forecasts.  Consistent with either of these distortionary factors, the primary dealers in
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 14 of 52
Chart 3
Interest Rate Developments
January 22, 2009
December 15, 2008
Expected federal funds rates*
*Estimates from federal funds and Eurodollar futures, with an allowance
for term premiums and other adjustments.
Source. Chicago Mercantile Exchange and CBOT.
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
Distribution of expected quarter of first rate increase
from the Desk’s Dealer Survey
Source. Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
  Note. There were 15 respondents.
Implied distribution of federal funds rate six 
months ahead*
Recent: 1/22/2009
Last FOMC: 12/15/2008
Percent
*Derived from options on Eurodollar futures contracts, with term premium 
 and other adjustments to estimate expectations for the federal funds rate.
Source. CBOT.
Nominal Treasury yields*
*Par yields from a smoothed nominal off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Source. Board staff estimates.
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 22
Next 5 years
5-to-10 year forward
Inflation compensation*
*Estimates based on smoothed nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury
yield curves and adjusted for the indexation-lag (carry) effect.
Source. Barclays, PLC.; Bloomberg; Board staff estimates.
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 22
Michigan Survey 1-year
Michigan Survey 10-year
Survey measures of inflation expectations
Source. Reuters/ University of Michigan.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 15 of 52
Gauging Investor Expectations for Future Interest Rate Policy with 
Uncertain Term Premiums
As shown by the black solid line in the graph below, under the staff’s standard 
1 basis point per month assumption for the term premium, futures quotes 
imply that investors now anticipate that the FOMC will raise the funds rate 
above the current 0 to 25 basis point range in the second half of this year.  This 
outlook is noticeably above the staff’s assumption for the federal funds rate in 
the Greenbook.  The steeper trajectory for the federal funds rate in the futures 
path could reflect a more sanguine economic outlook on the part of investors 
than in the Greenbook.  However, the heightened financial market turmoil of 
recent months may be affecting investors’ perceptions of risk and their 
tolerance for risk.  As a consequence, term premiums might currently be larger 
than the staff’s usual assumption.
The red-dotted and blue-dashed lines in the chart below show the expected 
federal funds rate paths under two alternative measures of the term premiums 
embedded in futures rates.  Under the assumption that investors are unlikely to 
forecast significantly different policy rates four years ahead versus five years 
ahead, the slope of the Eurodollar futures curve at that horizon should be 
determined largely by term premiums.  The blue dashed line shows the 
expected path for the funds rate using such an estimate of the term premium, 
which is currently about 2 basis points per month.  The red dotted line shows 
the expected path for the federal funds rate based on term premium estimates 
calculated using an affine, three-factor, no-arbitrage model of the OIS term 
structure with a non-negativity constraint on the expected funds rate.  
Estimated term premiums are maturity-specific in this case, ranging from 1 to 4
basis points.
Both of these alternative measures of the expected funds rate path imply less 
policy tightening over the next two years than the conventional calculation.  
This divergence underscores the relevance of model uncertainty for inferences 
about investor expectations for the federal funds rate from futures in current 
circumstances.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 16 of 52
The Desk’s survey of primary dealers on January 21 provides an alternative, 
non-model-based measure of the expected federal funds rate path.  According 
to this survey, respondents expect the first rate increase above the current 
target range to occur in the second quarter of 2010, which is one quarter later 
than implied by the affine term structure model.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 17 of 52
the Desk survey expected, on average, that the Committee will first increase rates in
the second quarter of 2010, although they hold a wide range of beliefs on this issue.
(18) On net, off-the-run nominal two-year Treasury yields increased 15 basis
points over the intermeeting period, while ten-year yields rose 13 basis points.  Until
late in the intermeeting period, long-term Treasury yields reportedly were driven lower
in part by expectations that the Federal Reserve may begin purchasing long-term
Treasury securities.  On average, respondents to the Desk’s survey of primary dealers
assigned a roughly 50 percent probability to this possibility, with a wide dispersion
across respondents.  However, other factors also appeared to help push long-term
yields lower, including increased concerns about the economy and the conditions of
financial institutions, investor expectations that short-term rates will remain low for
longer than previously anticipated, and greater hedging demand generated by lower
mortgage rates.  Working in the opposite direction, particularly toward the end of the
intermeeting period, expectations for increased Treasury issuance to finance larger-
than-previously-expected deficits as well as the new Administration’s economic
stimulus plan pushed up yields.
(19) Yields on inflation-indexed Treasury securities dropped sharply over the
intermeeting period and inflation compensation over the next five years (carry
adjusted) increased about 115 basis points to -0.24 percent, while inflation
compensation five- to ten-years ahead rose modestly on net to 2.62 percent.  A good
amount of the increase in the five-year measure appeared to reflect improved trading
conditions in the TIPS market, as a well-received auction of ten-year inflation-indexed
Treasury securities reportedly reduced concerns about the liquidity of such securities
and thus led investors to accept a smaller premium to hold them.  Nonetheless,
comparable measures of inflation compensation obtained from inflation swaps moved
higher over the intermeeting period.  Liquidity in both the TIPS and inflation swaps
market remained quite poor and readings of inflation compensation from these
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 18 of 52
markets may not provide accurate readings of inflation expectations and inflation risk.
According to the Michigan household survey, near-term inflation expectations
remained fairly low, consistent with continued low oil prices.  However, long-term
inflation expectations have been rather volatile, rising in mid-January to a relatively
high level of 3 percent after reaching a multi-year low in December.
Capital Markets
(20) Investors’ concerns about the financial sector and the possibility of a deep
and prolonged recession weighed on equity prices.  On net, broad equity indexes
declined 3¾ to 4¾ percent over the period and financial shares substantially
underperformed (Chart 4).  Even though analysts anticipated substantial declines in
corporate profits in the fourth quarter in both the financial and nonfinancial sectors,
the initial corporate financial reports for the quarter generally were below
expectations.  The spread between the twelve-month forward trend earnings-price
ratio for the S&P 500 firms and the long-term Treasury yield—a rough gauge of the
equity risk premium—declined modestly but remained exceptionally elevated.
Option-implied volatility of the S&P 500 declined over much of the period; however,
it began to rise again later in the period and it generally stayed in the upper end of its
historical range.
(21) In the corporate bond market, spreads on BBB-rated and speculative-grade
bonds relative to Treasuries declined markedly over the intermeeting period, although
they stayed extremely elevated.  According to CDX indexes, risk spreads on
investment-grade corporate bonds also declined over the intermeeting period.  Gross
issuance of bonds by investment-grade nonfinancial corporations remained fairly
solid, while issuance by speculative-grade firms continued to be limited.  Issuance of
leveraged syndicated loans was extraordinarily weak in the fourth quarter, down about
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 19 of 52
Chart 4
Asset Market Developments
Wilshire 5000
Dow Jones Financial
Equity prices
Source. Bloomberg.
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 22
Implied volatility on S&P 500 (VIX)
Weekly (Fri.*)
*Latest observation is for most recent business day.
Source. Chicago Board of Exchange.
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 22
Corporate bond spreads*
*Measured relative to an estimated off-the-run Treasury yield curve.
Source. Merrill Lynch and Board staff estimates.
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 22
Jan. Mar. May July Sept. Nov. Jan.
2008
Basis points
Fannie Mae 10-year debt and MBS spreads
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 21
Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan. Apr. July Oct. Jan.
2007 2008
Percent Basis points
FRM rate (left scale)
FRM spread (right scale)
Residential mortgage rates and spreads
Dec.
FOMC
Jan. 
 21
Jan. May Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec.
2007 2008
AAA    
A
BBB
Source. Citigroup.
Jan. 
 16
Dec.
FOMC
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 20 of 52
(22) The Federal Reserve programs to purchase the debt of the housing-related
government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) and agency-backed MBS got fully under
way in the intermeeting period.  The Federal Reserve purchased $11.9 billion (par
value) of agency debt during the intermeeting period; since the program began
operating on December 5, the Federal Reserve has purchased $19.9 billion of agency
debt (all numbers through January 21).  Even with these purchases, spreads on agency
debt over swaps rose on net over the intermeeting period; nevertheless, they remain
below levels seen prior to the program’s announcement and initiation.  The purchases
also reportedly contributed to the market’s generally receptive response to the renewal
of debt issuance by the agencies.  The Federal Reserve began the agency-backed MBS
purchase program on January 5; through January 21, purchases have totalled about
$52.6 billion (current face value).4  Evidently in response to these purchases, the
unadjusted spread on agency MBS over swaps rates dropped sharply immediately after
the initial purchases; later in the period, spreads rose but were moderately lower on
net over the intermeeting period.  The interest rate on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages
declined markedly over the intermeeting period to just above 5 percent.  The spread
between this mortgage rate and the 10-year Treasury yield also declined since the
December FOMC meeting, but it stayed elevated relative to its range over the past
(23) The markets for asset-backed securities (ABS) remained very stressed as
issuers awaited the beginning of operations of the Term Asset-Backed Security Loan
Facility (TALF) in late February.  Spreads for all types of ABS continued to be 
                                           
4 This amount is the contracted amount of purchases.  Because the MBS market can have 
significant delays to settlement and this program is in its early stages, the contracted amount 
of purchases is well above the level of MBS in the SOMA portfolio ($6.0 billion, see 
footnote 4).  Of the contracted purchases so far, almost 90 percent were for 30-year maturity 
MBS with most of the rest having 15-year maturity.  The coupon on about 60 percent of 
these purchases was between 4 and 5 percent. About one-half of the purchased securities 
were backed by Freddie Mac, about one-third by Fannie Mae, and the remainder by Ginnie 
Mae.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 21 of 52
extraordinarily high, although some spreads came off their highs late in the
intermeeting period, reportedly owing in part to the passing of year-end, anticipation
of the TALF, and the FDIC’s proposed changes in the terms of the TLGP.  There
was no issuance of credit card and student loan ABS in the fourth quarter.  During
this period, credit cards were issued almost exclusively by depository institutions that
obtained funds through programs such as the TLGP.  Student loan ABS experienced
significant downgrades in recent months; the Department of Education has become
the primary backstop for the student loan market.  Issuance of auto loan ABS
increased modestly in December from paltry amounts in the previous two months,
but remained unusually low and expensive.  As stated earlier, the problems in this
market contributed to the difficulties at GMAC that led it to become a bank holding
company.  Auto lenders, in particular, reportedly see the TALF as providing needed
support to the market.  Late in the period, reports indicated that issuers had begun
preparatory work to issue TALF-eligible ABS.
(24) Issuance of long-term municipal bonds in the fourth quarter was somewhat
below that of earlier in the year, and preliminary data suggest it has stepped down
modestly so far in January.  Even with the slower issuance, sentiment in the market
improved some and yields on municipal bonds fell over the intermeeting period, both
in absolute terms and relative to Treasury yields.  Nevertheless, municipal bond yields
remained unusually high relative to Treasury yields, consistent with reports indicating
that the credit quality of municipal bonds deteriorated further over the intermeeting
Foreign Developments
(25) Although conditions in foreign financial markets were relatively stable over
December, equity indexes fell sharply late in the intermeeting period as market
participants’ concern about the global economic outlook and prospects for corporate
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 22 of 52
earnings increased (Chart 5).  The equity prices of European banks dropped following
the announcement of very large prospective losses for the fourth quarter at the Royal
Bank of Scotland and increased speculation that losses at other foreign banks would
prove larger than previously anticipated.  The United Kingdom authorities announced
on January 19 a number of measures to address the financial crisis in that country.5
On net, equity indexes in Europe and Japan decreased 5 to 9 percent since the
December Greenbook.  Despite the declines in equity prices, credit availability in
interbank and other wholesale markets appeared to increase modestly in the wake of a
variety of government efforts over the past several months to support their financial
systems.  Libor-OIS spreads in euros and sterling declined over the period, although
they were above the corresponding spreads in dollars, and bids fell in central bank
dollar funding auctions.
(26) In response to weaker-than-expected data on real activity and lower
inflation pressures, central banks eased policy further during the intermeeting period.
The Bank of England lowered its policy rate 50 basis points to a historical low of 1.5
percent, the Bank of Japan reduced its policy rate 20 basis points to a level of 10 basis
points, the European Central Bank cut its base rate 50 basis points to 2 percent, and
the Bank of Canada cut its policy rate 50 basis points to 1 percent.  The Bank of Japan
also moved to implement some nontraditional policy measures.6  Several central banks
in emerging market economies also eased policy.  Market participants expect that
many foreign central banks will ease policy further in 2009.  Long-term nominal
sovereign bond yields in most major industrial countries declined during the
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 23 of 52
Chart 5
International Financial Indicators
UK (left scale)
Germany (left scale)
Japan (right scale)
Ten-year government bond yields (nominal)
Source. Bloomberg.
Dec.
FOMC
UK (FTSE-350)
Euro Area (DJ Euro)
Japan (Topix)
Stock price indexes
Industrial countries
Source. Bloomberg.
Dec.
FOMC
Brazil (Bovespa)
Korea (KOSPI)
Mexico (Bolsa)
Stock price indexes
Emerging market economies
Source. Bloomberg.
Dec.
FOMC
Broad
Major Currencies
Other Important Trading Partners
Nominal trade-weighted dollar indexes
Source. FRBNY and Bloomberg.
Dec.
FOMC
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 24 of 52
intermeeting period, consistent with the loosening of monetary policy and reduced
inflation pressures.
(27) The dollar depreciated sharply in the aftermath of the December FOMC
meeting and statement, but appreciated on balance over the period as a whole.  The
major currencies index of the dollar has increased about 3.1 percent on net since the
December FOMC meeting, as appreciation versus the euro, the Canadian dollar, and
sterling offset depreciation against the yen.  Indications of lower inflation and weaker
real activity in the euro area and the United Kingdom, which contributed to
reductions in policy rates and lower policy expectations, were factors behind the
appreciation of the dollar.  The dollar index for other important trading partners
increased about 1.6 percent, with the dollar changing little against the Chinese
renminbi and most major Asian currencies, but appreciating against the Mexican peso.
Debt, Bank Credit, and Money
(28) The debt of the domestic nonfinancial sector expanded about 7¾ percent
(annual rate) in the third quarter, somewhat faster than estimated in the previous
Greenbook, and notably faster than in the first half of 2008 (Chart 6).  The pickup in
growth is the result of the surge in federal government borrowing related to the
Supplementary Financing Program.  Household debt contracted in the third quarter,
reflecting a reduction in home mortgages in the weak housing market and minimal
growth in consumer credit.  Business sector debt growth moderated further in the
quarter.  The pattern of rapid debt growth in the federal government sector and
essentially no debt growth on net for the rest of the domestic nonfinancial sector is
estimated to have continued in the fourth quarter.
(29) Commercial bank credit fell about 13 percent at an annual rate in
December, its second consecutive monthly decline.  Commercial and industrial (C&I)
loans contracted for a second consecutive month, reflecting a combination of tighter
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 25 of 52
Chart 6
Debt and Money
Growth of debt of nonfinancial sectors
Percent, s.a.a.r.
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4p
p Projected.
Source. Flow of Funds.
C&I loans
Commercial paper
Bonds
Changes in selected components of debt of
nonfinancial business sector*
Monthly rate
*Commercial paper and C&I loans are seasonally adjusted, bonds are not.
Source. Securities Data Company, Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation
and Federal Reserve H.8 release.
Growth of debt of household sector
Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
p Projected.
Consumer
credit
Home
mortgage
Source. Flow of Funds, Federal Reserve G.19 release.
FHFA purchase-only index
S&P Case-Shiller national index
Growth of house prices
Annual rate, s.a.
Source. Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA),
Standard & Poor’s.
Changes in Standards and Spreads on C&I Loans
to large and medium-sized firms Percent
Quarterly, s.a.a.r.
Source. Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey.
Growth of M2
Source. Federal Reserve.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 26 of 52
credit supply and reduced loan demand.  In contrast, commercial real estate loans
retained on bank balance sheets continued to increase moderately; however, their
growth reportedly has been inflated at some banks in recent months by the shutdown
of the CMBS market.  Loans to households also declined in December.  Residential
mortgage holdings at banks fell for the fourth consecutive month, in part because of
renewed loan sales to the GSEs and writedowns of delinquent loans.  Loans drawn
under home equity lines of credit continued to rise robustly, partly reflecting attractive
terms on existing lines.  Consumer loans on banks’ balance sheets increased solidly in
December, although much of the increase probably is attributable to banks’ inability
to securitize such loans.
(30) The Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey conducted in January indicated
that banks continued to tighten credit standards and terms on all major loan
categories over the past three months, although the net percentage of banks doing so
generally declined somewhat from the record highs in the October survey.  The
fraction of banks reporting tighter lending standards fell the most for mortgage loans.
All of the banks tightening lending standards and terms cited a weaker or more
uncertain economic outlook as an important reason for the change in lending stance.
In a set of special questions, notable fractions of respondents reported that they had
reduced the size of credit lines for a wide range of existing business and household
customers over the past three months.  A majority of respondent banks also reported
weaker demand for most types of loans, with the notable exception of residential
mortgages to prime borrowers where only 10 percent of respondents, on net, reported
weaker demand.
(31) M2 rose 27¼ percent at an annual rate in December, its fastest pace of
growth since September 2001.  Liquid deposits increased briskly, as both demand
deposits and savings deposits surged, probably reflecting a reallocation of wealth
toward assets that have government insurance or guarantees as backstops.  Savings
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 27 of 52
deposits may also have been boosted by declining yields on retail money market
funds.  The strength in small time deposits persisted, likely owing to a number of
commercial banks offering aggressive rates to build core deposits.  Currency growth
also remained strong as foreign demand for U.S. bank notes remained elevated.  Retail
money market funds increased modestly in December following a decline in
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 28 of 52
Economic Outlook
(32) Economic data received since the December Greenbook indicate that the
economy remains in a severe and deepening recession.  Housing starts, industrial
production, and employment declined more than expected; real GDP is now
estimated to have fallen at a 5 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of last year.
Meanwhile, price pressures have dropped sharply.  In these circumstances, the staff
assumes that the target range for the federal funds rate will remain 0 to ¼ percent
through the end of the forecast period.  Long-term Treasury yields are projected to
drift up over the next two years from a level that is about 20 basis points lower than
in December, reflecting an assumed waning of safe-haven demands as economic
activity begins to improve later this year and as the ten-year window for the Treasury
yield extends further beyond the period of very low short-term interest rates
anticipated over the medium term.  Mortgage rates declined roughly in line with
Treasury yields over the intermeeting period, and they are expected to decline further,
reflecting a gradual narrowing of the currently wide spread of mortgage rates over
Treasury yields.  Similarly, corporate bond spreads narrow and yields decline over the
next two years as economic conditions eventually improve and risk aversion abates.
Boosted by an assumed decline in the equity risk premium, equity prices rise at an
annual rate of about 12 percent from a level that is around 4 percent lower than in the
December projection.  The real foreign exchange value of the dollar is roughly flat in
barrel since the December meeting, but they are projected to rise markedly over the
forecast period, in line with futures quotes, to just under $60 per barrel by the end of
large fiscal stimulus program, amounting to about $800 billion over two years, will be
approved by the Congress before the end of the current quarter.  The assumed fiscal
stimulus is about $300 billion larger than in the December forecast.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 29 of 52
(33) Against this backdrop, real GDP is projected to decline at a 5½ percent
annual rate in the current quarter, slightly faster than in the previous Greenbook.
GDP declines at a 1¼ percent rate in the second quarter.  A modest rebound begins
in the third quarter, with GDP rising at a 2 percent rate in the second half of 2009,
roughly ¾ percentage point faster than in the December forecast.  In 2010, GDP is
projected to grow 2½ percent.  The unemployment rate is anticipated to peak at 8½
percent by the beginning of 2010 before edging down to around 8 percent over the
course of the year.  The output gap exceeds 5 percent throughout the forecast period.
This slack in resource utilization, combined with relatively flat prices of most
commodities and imports, leads to a moderation of core PCE inflation from about 2
percent last year to 1 percent this year and ¾ percent next year.  Overall PCE
inflation is projected at about ½ percent in 2009 and 1 percent in 2010.  These
inflation projections are little changed from the December Greenbook.
Monetary Policy Strategies
(34) As indicated in Chart 7, the Greenbook-consistent measure of short-run r*
now stands at -3.0 percent, about 40 basis points above the level estimated at the time
of the December Bluebook.  This upward revision primarily reflects the larger fiscal
stimulus package incorporated into the current staff forecast and the modest
improvement in some financial markets over the intermeeting period.  As in the
previous Bluebook, model-based estimates of short-run r* span a wide interval.  The
estimate from the small structural model now stands at -6.2 percent, about 50 basis
points higher than in the last Bluebook; this revision mainly reflects the magnitude of
the current quarter’s fiscal expansion relative to what the model had previously
projected.  The estimate from the single-equation model—which does not incorporate
any measures of financial stress or fiscal stimulus—remains very close to zero.
Finally, the estimate from the FRB/US model is now -6.8 percent, about 50 basis
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 30 of 52
Chart 7
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
The actual real funds rate based on lagged core inflation
Range of model-based estimates
70 Percent confidence interval
90 Percent confidence interval
Greenbook-consistent measure
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Current Estimate Previous Bluebook
Short-Run Measures
Single-equation model -0.1 (0.0
Small structural model -6.2 -6.7
Large model (FRB/US) -6.8 -6.3
Confidence intervals for three model-based estimates
Greenbook-consistent measure -3.0 -3.4
Medium-Run Measures
Single-equation model (1.7 (1.7
Small structural model (0.7 (1.2
Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
TIPS-based factor model (2.0 2.0
Actual real federal funds rate -1.7 -1.0
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 31 of 52
points lower than in December; this revision mainly reflects the less favorable
conditions in the stock market over the intermeeting period.  All of the measures of
short-run r* except the single-equation estimate are well below the current level of the
actual real federal funds rate.
(35) Chart 8 depicts optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model using the
long-run staff forecast.7  For an inflation goal of either 1½ percent or 2 percent (left-
hand and right-hand sets of charts, respectively), the optimal control simulations
prescribe a trajectory for the nominal federal funds rate that stays at or close to the
lower bound from now through 2013.8  Under either inflation goal, the
unemployment rate rises for the current year to about 8½ percent and remains above
the NAIRU through 2012; this path is similar to the one shown in the December
Bluebook.  Core inflation in 2009 is a bit lower than in the previous Bluebook,
reflecting in part surprisingly low recent readings on consumer prices; however,
inflation in 2010 and beyond is little changed from the previous Bluebook and runs
somewhat below 1 percent.
(36) The optimal policy simulations assume that the Federal Reserve does not
undertake additional liquidity and credit actions beyond those already incorporated in
the staff’s baseline projection.  However, further economic stimulus could be
provided by the implementation of nontraditional policy actions beyond those already
announced, such as purchases of $500 billion in long-term Treasury securities and the
$500 billion increase in purchases of agency MBS contemplated in the Greenbook
alternative scenario, “Large-scale Asset Purchases.”  In this scenario, these actions are
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 32 of 52
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 33 of 52
assumed to induce reductions in long-term interest rates and changes in other
financial conditions that significantly boost consumption and investment.9  As a
result, real GDP in 2011 rises a percentage point faster than in the baseline, while core
PCE inflation settles in at a rate of about 1 percent over the next several years, about
a quarter percentage point higher than in the baseline.10
(37) As depicted in Chart 9, the outcome-based policy rule prescribes a funds
rate that stays at the lower bound through 2011 before steadily rising to about 3
percent by the end of 2013.  In contrast, the trajectory of the funds rate consistent
with financial market quotes is within the current target range only through the third
quarter of this year before rising slowly, passing ½ percent by the beginning of 2010
and reaching a plateau of about 2 percent starting in 2012.11  As can be seen by the
confidence intervals in these two panels, investors appear to assign a lower probability
to the federal funds rate rising above 1 percent by the end of 2009 than is suggested
by FRB/US simulations under the outcome-based rule.  As shown in the bottom
panel of Chart 9, the near-term prescriptions from both the Taylor (1999) rule and the
first-difference rule have now fallen to the effective lower bound, reflecting the
current weakness of both economic activity and inflation.  By contrast, the policy path
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 34 of 52
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 35 of 52
prescribed by the Taylor (1993) rule—which is less sensitive to the current output
gap—does not reach the lower bound until next quarter.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 36 of 52
Policy Alternatives
(38) This Bluebook presents three alternatives for the Committee’s
consideration, summarized by the draft statements on the following pages.  All three
alternatives maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and
indicate, as in the December statement, that the funds rate is likely to remain
exceptionally low for some time.  All three alternatives again state that the primary
focus of the Committee’s policy is to support the functioning of financial markets and
stimulate the economy through open market operations and other measures that are
likely to keep the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet at a high level, and they
all mention the imminent implementation of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan
Facility (TALF) as one example of such policies.  All of the alternatives indicate that
“The Committee will continue to monitor carefully the size and composition of the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet in light of evolving financial market developments.”
(39) The description of the economic outlook in Alternative A highlights the
weaker-than-expected incoming data, and Alternatives A and B note that global
demand is slowing significantly.  Alternatives B and C state that the economic outlook
“remains weak.”  Alternative A announces either a $250 billion increase in the Federal
Reserve’s commitment to purchase mortgage-backed securities or the establishment
of a program to purchase $250 billion of longer-term Treasury securities.  Alternative
A also highlights the risk that inflation could persist below levels consistent with the
dual objectives of monetary policy; this language might help underscore the
Committee’s intent not to allow inflation to remain below its optimal level in the long
run and thus may help prevent an unwanted further decline in expectations of long-
run inflation.  This sentence also may be seen as signaling that the Committee would
adopt further stimulative measures should inflation continue to decline significantly.
Alternative B states that the Committee is prepared to purchase longer-term Treasury
securities or to increase purchases of mortgage-backed securities, but makes no
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 37 of 52
specific commitment on the timing or amount of such purchases.  Alternatives A and
B state that the Committee will continue to “assess whether expansions of or
modifications to lending facilities would serve to further support credit markets and
economic activity.”  Alternative C omits all mention of possible increases in open
market purchases or liquidity programs other than the TALF.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 38 of 52
December FOMC Statement
The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to establish a target range for the federal funds 
rate of 0 to 1/4 percent.  
 
Since the Committee's last meeting, labor market conditions have deteriorated, and the available data 
indicate that consumer spending, business investment, and industrial production have declined.  
Financial markets remain quite strained and credit conditions tight.  Overall, the outlook for 
economic activity has weakened further. 
 
Meanwhile, inflationary pressures have diminished appreciably.  In light of the declines in the prices 
of energy and other commodities and the weaker prospects for economic activity, the Committee 
expects inflation to moderate further in coming quarters. 
 
The Federal Reserve will employ all available tools to promote the resumption of sustainable 
economic growth and to preserve price stability.  In particular, the Committee anticipates that weak 
economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for some 
time.  
 
The focus of the Committee's policy going forward will be to support the functioning of financial 
markets and stimulate the economy through open market operations and other measures that sustain 
the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet at a high level.  As previously announced, over the 
next few quarters the Federal Reserve will purchase large quantities of agency debt and mortgage-
backed securities to provide support to the mortgage and housing markets, and it stands ready to 
expand its purchases of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities as conditions warrant.  The 
Committee is also evaluating the potential benefits of purchasing longer-term Treasury securities.  
Early next year, the Federal Reserve will also implement the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan 
Facility to facilitate the extension of credit to households and small businesses.  The Federal Reserve 
will continue to consider ways of using its balance sheet to further support credit markets and 
economic activity.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 39 of 52
Alternative A
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 40 of 52
Alternative B
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 41 of 52
Alternative C
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 42 of 52
(40) If the Committee agrees that current economic conditions are very weak but
suspects that there is a significant possibility that policy actions already announced or
likely to be adopted will have a larger effect on economic activity than is assumed in
the staff’s forecast, it may wish to choose Alternative B.  In many ways, the current
circumstances are unprecedented, and we lack reliable metrics for gauging the
effectiveness of nontraditional policies.  In light of the aggressive monetary actions
already taken or announced and the large fiscal package likely to be passed, members
may believe that it is prudent at this stage to wait and assess further developments
before committing the Federal Reserve to any additional actions.  In particular,
members may wish to observe the market reaction to the implementation of the
TALF, planned for next month.  Moreover, the incoming administration may move
rapidly to ramp up efforts to deal with the financial crisis, and the Committee will be
better placed to assess these efforts in a few weeks.  Alternatively, members may be
concerned about the challenges of exiting from measures already adopted, and thus
may wish to be quite cautious in implementing further liquidity programs.  At the
same time, given that the forecasts of the staff and most private analysts imply that
additional macroeconomic stimulus would be desirable, the Committee may not want
to signal a halt to further monetary actions.  Alternative B states that additional
actions will be taken as needed, and so would allow the Committee to introduce new
policies quickly if it concluded that they were appropriate.
(41) If the Committee shares the staff’s assessment that policies already
announced or expected will not suffice to prevent considerable economic slack and a
heightened risk of deflation, and if it believes that additional policy measures could
help to improve the economic outlook, it may opt for Alternative A.  The output gap
in the Greenbook remains larger than 5 percent over the next two years and core
inflation falls below 1 percent, which is lower than the rates of inflation that most
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 43 of 52
FOMC participants would view as consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual
mandate.  Most private-sector analysts have marked up their forecasts for the
unemployment rate in 2009 and 2010 to levels about the same as projected by the
staff, and they forecast relatively low rates of inflation, albeit not as low as the staff.
Even if members have a less gloomy outlook for the economy, they may view the
downside risks to this outlook as unusually large and thus may wish to take out
“insurance” against an unwelcome further weakening in growth or drop in inflation.
The significant decline in long-term interest rates, including conventional mortgage
rates, since the Federal Reserve announced plans to purchase agency debt and MBS
may give policymakers confidence that nontraditional policies can provide significant
economic stimulus.  As a result, the Committee may conclude that an expansion of
these purchases would likely lead to further reductions in rates and increases in
mortgage availability.  Or, if the level of long-term interest rates is seen as higher than
is consistent with a rapid economic recovery, the Committee may wish to engage in
large-scale purchases of long-term Treasury securities.  By lowering the general level
of long-term interest rates, either of these options could support business and
household spending.
(42) If the Committee has a relatively optimistic view of the underlying
economic situation and outlook, it may be inclined to favor Alternative C.  Members
may anticipate a more rapid unwinding of financial strains than assumed by the staff,
leading to a more pronounced rebound in activity (as in the “Faster Recovery”
alternative scenario in the Greenbook).  Such an outcome might be the result of a new
and aggressive approach by the incoming administration to the ongoing financial
crisis.  Alternatively, members may believe that the monetary policies and liquidity
facilities that already have been implemented or announced will provide greater
stimulus to economic activity than is built into the staff forecast.  Similarly, the
Committee may have a larger estimate of the fiscal multiplier than that assumed by the
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 44 of 52
staff in its analysis of the likely effects of the fiscal stimulus package.  Finally, as in
Alternative B, the Committee may be concerned that exiting from the existing
facilities could prove challenging and prefer not to take the risk of adding to such
difficulties.  Indeed, if the public came to view the expansion of the Federal Reserve
balance sheet as implying a permanent increase in the monetary base, inflation
expectations could increase, and inflation risk premiums in financial assets might rise
in a destabilizing manner.  The language in Alternative C makes clear that existing
Federal Reserve policies and programs are viewed by the Committee as helpful, but it
does not hint at any expansion of existing programs or the introduction of new
(43) Based on interest rate futures contracts and on the Desk’s survey of dealers,
market participants attach virtually no probability to a change in the target range for
the federal funds rate at this meeting.  Dealers generally expect the statement to
continue to refer to the funds rate remaining low for some time and to focus on the
Federal Reserve’s nontraditional policy tools.  On average, dealers place the odds of
large-scale Federal Reserve purchases of long-term Treasury securities at about 50
percent, with no time horizon specified for the onset of such purchases.  Although
market expectations for the statement overall are difficult to judge, the message of
Alternative B seems most consistent with current market views.
Money and Debt Forecasts
(44) Bank credit is forecasted to grow at a sluggish 2¼ percent pace in 2009.
Relatively tight credit standards and terms and weak loan demand are expected to
persist, and each category of core loans on banks' books—commercial and industrial,
real estate, and consumer—are projected to be nearly flat.  In contrast, securities
holdings are expected to expand moderately this year, as banks continue to park
deposits and other sources of funds in safe and liquid investments.  In 2010, when
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 45 of 52
GDP growth is projected to pick up and the effect of tighter lending standards and
terms wanes, bank credit grows around 5 percent, mainly owing to increases in real
estate and consumer loans as well as continued expansion of securities.
(45) Amid sharply curtailed credit availability, household debt is expected to
decline about 1 percent in 2009 and to rise at a modest pace in 2010 as credit
constraints ease only gradually.  Even though overall credit conditions are expected to
improve over time, nonfinancial business debt will likely expand at a weak pace next
year and in 2010, as capital spending remains sluggish.  Federal debt, which surged in
the second half of 2008 because of government programs aimed at ameliorating
financial market strains, is anticipated to continue to grow at a rapid pace throughout
the forecast period, reflecting the fiscal package and continued outlays to support
financial institutions and markets.  Overall, total domestic nonfinancial debt is
projected to expand 5 percent in 2009 and 4¾ percent in 2010.
(46) M2 is projected to grow at a 3 percent annual rate this year, somewhat faster
than the projected growth rate of nominal GDP, reflecting the lagged effects of recent
declines in the opportunity cost of holding M2 assets.  In 2010, money growth is
expected to align roughly with growth in nominal GDP as these lagged effects
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 46 of 52
Monthly Growth Rates
Jul-08 7.9
Aug-08 -1.8
Sep-08 17.0
Oct-08 18.5
Nov-08 8.6
Dec-08 27.3
Jan-09 11.1
Feb-09 4.9
Mar-09 1.0
Apr-09 0.9
May-09 0.0
Jun-09 0.0
Jul-09 -2.0
Aug-09 -3.0
Sep-09 0.0
Oct-09 1.0
Nov-09 2.0
Dec-09 3.2
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
Dec-08 Mar-09 5.7
Dec-08 Jun-09 3.0
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and
interest rates in the Greenbook forecast.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 47 of 52
(47) Draft language for the directive is provided below.
Directive Wording
Alternative A1:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable
growth in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee seeks
conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a range
from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the Desk to purchase GSE debt
and agency-guaranteed MBS during the intermeeting period with the aim of
providing support to the mortgage and housing markets.  The timing and pace
of these purchases should depend on conditions in the markets for such
securities and on a broader assessment of conditions in primary mortgage
markets and the housing sector.  By the end of the third quarter of this year the
Desk is expected to purchase up to $100 billion in housing-related GSE debt
and up to $750 billion in agency-guaranteed MBS.  The System Open Market
Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of
ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect
the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
Alternative A2:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and
financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable
growth in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee seeks
conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a range
from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the Desk to purchase GSE debt
and agency-guaranteed MBS during the intermeeting period with the aim of
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 48 of 52
providing support to the mortgage and housing markets.  The timing and pace
of these purchases should depend on conditions in the markets for such
securities and on a broader assessment of conditions in primary mortgage
markets and the housing sector.  By the end of the second quarter of this year,
the Desk is expected to purchase up to $100 billion in housing-related GSE
debt and up to $500 billion in agency-guaranteed MBS.  The Committee also
directs the Desk to purchase long-term Treasury securities during the
intermeeting period.  By the end of the second quarter of this year, the Desk is
expected to purchase up to $250 billion of long-term Treasury securities, with
the aim of improving overall financial conditions.  The System Open Market
Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of
ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect
the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
Alternatives B and C:  The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable
growth in output.  To further its long-run objectives, the Committee seeks
conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a range
from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs the Desk to purchase GSE debt
and agency-guaranteed MBS during the intermeeting period with the aim of
providing support to the mortgage and housing markets.  The timing and pace
of these purchases should depend on conditions in the markets for such
securities and on a broader assessment of conditions in primary mortgage
markets and the housing sector.  By the end of the second quarter of this year,
the Desk is expected to purchase up to $100 billion in housing-related GSE
debt and up to $500 billion in agency-guaranteed MBS.  The System Open
Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 49 of 52
of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect
the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
Class I FOMC--Restricted Controlled (FR) 50 of 52
