Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available 
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that 
material was received on a confidential basis.  Redacted material is indicated by 
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content.  All redacted 
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of 
Information Act.
Content last modified 01/29/2016.
CLASS I FOMC - RESTRICTED CONTROLLED (FR)
MONETARY POLICY ALTERNATIVES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED FOR THE FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE 
BY THE STAFF OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
MARCH 11, 2010
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Financial conditions generally remained supportive of economic growth over the
intermeeting period.  Equity prices increased about 5½ percent, while spreads on
corporate bonds edged down amid modest further improvement in indicators of
corporate credit quality.  Yields on Treasury securities rose slightly.  Partly as a result
of somewhat weaker-than-expected incoming economic data, TIPS-based inflation
compensation decreased at all horizons and the expected path of the target federal
funds rate flattened a bit.  Although the broad dollar index changed little, on balance,
weak incoming data for Europe and concerns about fiscal strains in some European
countries contributed to a significant appreciation of the dollar relative to the euro
and the British pound.  Market functioning was generally stable, even as the Federal
Reserve continued to close many of its liquidity facilities.  Interest rates on residential
mortgages and mortgage-backed securities (MBS) were about flat despite the
continued tapering of Federal Reserve purchases of agency debt and MBS as those
programs neared completion.  Bank loans to both businesses and households declined
sharply further in January and February, but bond issuance remained solid over that
period, and consumer credit increased in January for the first time in a year.
MONETARY POLICY EXPECTATIONS AND TREASURY YIELDS
The FOMC’s decision to keep the target range for the federal funds rate
unchanged at the January meeting and its retention of the “extended period” language
in the statement were widely anticipated by financial market participants and elicited
little reaction.1
Financial markets also responded little to the release of the minutes of
the January FOMC meeting on February 17, although investors reportedly took note
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 1 of 68
of the discussion of potential asset sales and the indication that it would “soon be
appropriate” to raise the discount rate.  Investors were highly attuned to Federal
Reserve communications that could be seen as related to exit strategy.  For example,
Eurodollar rates moved up and equity futures declined noticeably when the Federal
Reserve announced an increase in the primary credit rate from 50 basis points to 75
basis points on February 18.  However, that reaction proved transitory as market
participants later focused on the part of the announcement that stated the action did
not signal any change in the outlook for monetary policy, a message that was
reinforced by communications from several Federal Reserve officials.  Reaction to the
Chairman’s testimony accompanying the semiannual Monetary Policy Report was also
muted, in part because the material focusing on the exit strategy had been previewed
in written testimony released on February 10.
Although Federal Reserve communications had little net effect on the outlook for
policy, incoming economic data—particularly lower-than-expected readings on
consumer confidence, consumer price inflation, and home sales—led investors to
mark down the expected path of the federal funds rate.  Futures quotes combined
with the staff’s standard assumption of a 1-basis-point-per-month term premium in
interbank rates imply that the federal funds rate will first increase to more than 25
basis points near the end of the third quarter of 2010 (Chart 1).  Market participants
now anticipate that the target will reach about 1¾ percent by the end of 2011, roughly
for interest rate caps suggest that investors’ assessment of the mode of the funds rate
distribution, rather than the mean, was little changed over the intermeeting period,
and it appears not to move above 25 basis points until mid-2011.  Likewise, the results
from the March survey of primary dealers were mostly in line with those from the
January survey.  The median expectation was for the first increase in the target federal
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 2 of 68
funds rate to occur in the fourth quarter of this year.  Dealers do not anticipate any
major changes in the statement at the upcoming meeting.
Yields on 2-year and 10-year nominal Treasury securities edged up, on net, over
the intermeeting period.  Yields may have been supported by a modest reduction in
perceived downside risks to the economic outlook as the economy continued to
recover, and by greater optimism that fiscal strains in peripheral Europe will be
resolved without undue disruption.  Yields on TIPS rose somewhat more than those
on their nominal counterparts.  Those yields were reportedly buoyed in part by supply
pressures, as well as signs of diminished interest in TIPS from retail investors.
Reflecting these developments, inflation compensation declined over the period, a
move that is consistent with the somewhat weaker-than-expected economic data in
addition to the supply factors that contributed to the increase in real yields.  Survey
measures of long-term inflation expectations also decreased slightly.
The Treasury auctioned more than $300 billion in coupon securities of various
maturities over the intermeeting period and indicated that it expected nominal auction
sizes to stabilize around their current levels.  The auctions were generally well
received.  Treasury replaced the 20-year TIPS auction with an auction of 30-year
TIPS—the first since 2001—and signaled in its mid-quarter refunding statement that
it might increase the frequency of TIPS auctions across the curve.  On February 12,
the President signed legislation that raised the debt ceiling by $1.9 trillion to $14.3
Treasury’s subsequent announcement that it would increase the
Supplementary Financing Program (SFP) to $200 billion by April initially generated
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 4 of 68
some market speculation about its relationship to the onset of policy tightening; as of
March 10 these balances totaled $50 billion.3
CAPITAL MARKETS
Broad equity price indexes rose 4½ to 6½ percent, on balance, over the
intermeeting period, with financial shares gaining about 9 percent (Chart 2).4  Equity
prices were supported by a strong finish to the fourth-quarter earnings season, a
development that may also have contributed to a small upward revision in analysts’
forecasts of year-ahead earnings through mid-February.  The equity premium,
measured as the staff’s estimate of the expected real return on equities over the next
levels observed during the past decade.  Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500
index fell back to a fairly low level.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 5 of 68
Yields on investment-grade corporate bonds were about unchanged over the
intermeeting period, and their spreads over yields on comparable-maturity Treasury
securities remained near the levels that prevailed late in 2007.  Consistent with
improved investor sentiment toward risky assets, yields and spreads on speculative-
grade bonds edged down, and secondary market prices of leveraged loans rose
further.  Indicators of the credit quality of nonfinancial firms continued to improve,
on balance.  Firms’ holdings of liquid assets rose and leverage declined in the fourth
quarter of last year; the rate of increase in the delinquency rate on C&I loans slowed
considerably.  Meanwhile, the six-month trailing corporate bond default rate has
declined further in January and February, reaching a level consistent with those seen
in the previous two expansions.  Ratings upgrades of nonfinancial bonds continued
over the past two months at the same modest pace as in the second half of last year,
and downgrades so far this year have not been material.  The year-ahead expected
default frequency for nonfinancial firms from Moody’s KMV moved down on
balance in January and February, but remained elevated.
Overall, net debt financing by nonfinancial businesses was near zero in January
and February (Chart 3).  Gross issuance of investment- and speculative-grade bonds
stayed robust over that period, but the steep runoff in C&I loans continued, and
commercial paper outstanding decreased further.  Net equity issuance by nonfinancial
firms turned negative in the fourth quarter.  Gross equity issuance so far this year has
weakened from its fourth-quarter pace, while announcements of equity repurchases
and cash financed mergers and acquisitions appear to have risen a bit.  For financial
firms, gross public equity issuance dropped off following the fourth-quarter surge
associated with the repayment of TARP capital by some large banking organizations,
and financial bond issuance remained strong.
Over the intermeeting period, the average interest rate on 30-year conforming
fixed-rate residential mortgages was about unchanged, on net, at 4.95 percent.  Yields
on agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) were little changed, and the option-
adjusted spread stayed at very low levels.  Net issuance of MBS by Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac remained sluggish through the end of January.  The volume of Federal
Reserve purchases of MBS has left certain issues relatively scarce, particularly those
with coupons of 5 percent and 5½ percent.  Moreover, the cost of failing to deliver
MBS collateral is very low, a situation that contrasts with that in the Treasury market,
where a fails charge was instituted in May 2009.  As a result, investors appear to have
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 7 of 68
been reluctant to deliver the portions of those MBS issues that remain available in the
secondary market, generating a high rate of fails in those segments.
Market-based indicators of forward spreads in the MBS market do not appear to
have priced in an increase in spreads at the end of the purchase program.  Market
participants attribute the near-term tightness in MBS spreads to several factors,
including the expectation that traditional investors that are significantly underweight
in MBS will return to the market when the purchase program ends, the reinvestment
by investors of the proceeds from the agencies’ purchases of delinquent loans from
existing MBS pools, and the slow pace of recent mortgage originations.  An informal
survey conducted by the Desk indicates that on average market participants anticipate
that MBS spreads will initially widen about 10 to 15 basis points following the end of
the purchase program, a range that is somewhat lower than in the January survey.
Consumer credit increased slightly in January, the first monthly increase since
January 2009.  The contraction in revolving consumer credit moderated and was more
than offset by a modest gain in nonrevolving credit.  Although delinquency rates on
consumer loans remain very elevated, they have edged down from their recent peaks.
Interest rates on new auto loans at dealerships declined over the intermeeting period
to about 4¾ percent.  By contrast, interest rates on credit cards rose further, on
balance, likely reflecting several factors, including lenders’ preparations for
implementation of the Credit CARD Act in mid-February, regulatory and accounting
changes that increase the cost of funds, and the continued high rate of charge-offs.  A
paucity of asset-backed security (ABS) issuance backed by credit card receivables—
reportedly reflecting declines in outstanding balances and a decision by some large
banks to fund the loans on their balance sheets amid the implementation of new
accounting regulations—held down total consumer ABS issuance during January and
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 9 of 68
MARKET FUNCTIONING AND FEDERAL RESERVE PROGRAMS
Conditions in short-term funding markets remained generally stable over the
intermeeting period.  One- and three-month Libor-OIS spreads stayed low while six-
month spreads edged down further.  Spreads of rates on A2/P2-rated commercial
paper and AA-rated ABCP over the AA nonfinancial rate were also little changed at
low levels.  Indicators of functioning in other markets were largely unchanged.
No signs of stress emerged in short-term funding markets following the
expiration of several Federal Reserve liquidity facilities on February 1 and the final
TAF auction on March 8.  (See box entitled “Balance Sheet Developments during the
Intermeeting Period.”)  Consistent with these developments, borrowing from Federal
Reserve liquidity facilities for multiple borrowers (including primary, secondary, and
seasonal credit; TAF; and CPFF) totaled $38 billion as of March 10, down $26 billion
since the latest FOMC meeting.  However, in early March, the effective federal funds
rate temporarily firmed a few basis points, reflecting an uptick in general collateral
repo rates related to increased Treasury issuance.5
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 10 of 68
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York announced on March 8 that it was
beginning a program to expand its list of counterparties for conducting reverse repos
to increase the capacity of such operations to drain reserves beyond what could likely
be done through the Primary Dealers.  Along with the announcement, it published the
eligibility criteria for the first set of expanded counterparties—domestic money
market mutual funds—and stated that in coming months it would include additional
types of firms and expand eligibility within previously identified types of firms.  The
announcement reportedly generated little reaction from market participants and no
shift in policy expectations.
Balance Sheet Developments during the Intermeeting Period
The Federal Reserve’s total assets continued to edge up over the intermeeting 
period, reaching $2.3 trillion, as the net increase in securities held outright more 
than offset the net decline in lending through liquidity and credit facilities.1
During the intermeeting period, securities held outright rose, on net, 
$65 billion.  The Open Market Desk purchased $77 billion, on net, in agency 
mortgage-backed securities (MBS).2  The Desk also purchased $5.4 billion in agency 
debt securities; only one additional operation is planned.  The increase in outright 
securities holdings was only partially offset by a $29 billion decline in lending 
through the System’s liquidity and credit facilities.3  Foreign central bank liquidity 
swaps, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF), the Commercial Paper Funding 
Facility (CPFF), the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund 
Liquidity Facility (AMLF), and the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) all 
expired on February 1, 2010.  The net portfolio holdings of CPFF LLC declined by 
$1 billion, to $8 billion, of which only $3 billion is outstanding commercial paper, 
all of which will mature on April 21, 2010; the LLC will hold other assets until it is 
dissolved.4  The final Term Auction Facility (TAF) auction occurred on March 8 
with a minimum bid rate of 50 basis points; only $3.4 billion in TAF loans were 
extended, all of which will mature on April 8, 2010.  The increase in the primary 
and secondary credit rates on February 19 had no noticeable impact on borrowing.
Lending through the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 
declined $2 billion, on net, over the intermeeting period as three TALF operations 
settled.  About $2.5 billion in loans backed by commercial mortgage-backed 
securities (CMBS) and about $1 billion in loans secured by non-CMBS were 
extended.  This increase in lending, however, was more than offset by $5.5 billion 
in loan prepayments.  The last non-CMBS TALF subscription, which took place on 
March 4, saw $4.1 billion in loan requests, all settled on March 11.
Open Market Desk committed to purchase, but has not settled, an additional $86.2 billion of MBS, on net. 
3 Press releases over the intermeeting period discussed the pending sale of certain subsidiaries of American
International Group (AIG), with the proceeds intended to pay down the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York’s preferred interest in American International Assurance Group (AIA) LLC and American Life 
Insurance Co. (ALICO) LLC, as well as the credit extension to AIG.  These transactions are reflected in the 
projections found in the Long-Run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary base section.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 11 of 68
On the liability side of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, the U.S. Treasury’s 
general account, which is a volatile balance sheet item, declined $111 billion, while 
the Treasury’s supplementary financing account increased $45 billion with the 
resumption of bill issuance under the Supplementary Financing Program after the 
debt ceiling was raised in early February.  Reserve balances of depository 
institutions increased by $87 billion over the intermeeting period.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 12 of 68
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet 
Billions of dollars
Change 
since last 
FOMC
Current 
(03/10/2010)
Maximum 
level
Date of 
maximum
Market Desk committed to purchase, but has not settled, an additional $86.2 billion of MBS, on net.  Total MBS 
purchases are about $1,226 billion.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 13 of 68
The final TALF subscription for non-mortgage asset-backed securities (ABS)
settled on March 11.6  TALF-eligible ABS issuance picked up in February and March,
as issuers sought to benefit from TALF financing before the expiration of the
program.  In total, 14 new TALF-eligible ABS deals totaling $11.4 billion were
brought to market during the final two subscriptions—a bit above the average level
over the preceding four months.  Only about one-fifth of ABS issuance (including
non-TALF deals) has been financed by TALF loans on average this year.  The final
TALF subscription for legacy commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) will
take place on March 19 and is expected to garner TALF loan requests of about the
same moderate amounts seen in recent months.  TALF financing for newly issued
CMBS will be available through June, but it is unclear if there will be any loan
requests.  Market participants expect at most a modest uptick in ABS and CMBS
spreads in response to the closing of TALF.
FOREIGN MARKET DEVELOPMENTS 
Foreign financial markets and the trade-weighted value of the broad nominal
dollar were volatile but generally little changed, on net, since the January FOMC
meeting (Chart 4).  Much of the volatility was related to concerns spurred by Greece’s
fiscal problems.
Sovereign risk concerns have continued to focus on Greece and, to a lesser extent,
a few other European countries, leading their sovereign bond yields to remain at
elevated levels.  Spreads on Greek debt relative to German bunds widened as much as
recently, as press reports that euro-area countries are discussing a possible aid package
for Greece and the announcement of further deficit reduction measures by the Greek
government have helped assuage investor concerns about a Greek default.  Spreads
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 14 of 68
on debt issued by several other European countries with high budget deficits were
also volatile but ended the intermeeting period close to their levels at the time of the
January FOMC.  The fiscal situation in the United Kingdom, particularly the
possibility that upcoming elections may result in a politically weak government unable
to work towards deficit reduction, also drew some market attention and boosted
British sovereign yields.  Benchmark sovereign yields in other countries were little
Reflecting these fiscal concerns as well as weak incoming data in Europe, the
dollar appreciated notably against sterling and the euro over the intermeeting period,
rising 7½ percent against the British pound and 3¼ percent against the euro.
Offsetting the appreciation against the euro and sterling, the dollar fell against the
Canadian dollar and most emerging market currencies, as data for these countries
came in stronger than expected.  On net, the major currencies index is up a little less
than 1 percent, and the broad nominal index of the dollar is unchanged.
The Bank of England (BOE) and the ECB held rates steady over the period, and
the BOE elected not to expand the size of the Asset Purchase Facility, which reached
its £200 billion limit at the end of January.  In early March, the ECB announced
several steps to normalize its provision of liquidity:  It will discontinue its six-month
refinancing operations after March, and future three-month operations will revert to a
fixed-allotment, competitive-rate structure.  Shorter-term operations will continue to
be fixed-rate and full-allotment through the third quarter.  These moves toward
normalization notwithstanding, weak incoming data in Europe pushed back market-
based expectations for policy tightening by the BOE and the ECB to the first and
fourth quarters of 2011, respectively, about two quarters later than at the time of the
January FOMC.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 16 of 68
Equity markets in most foreign countries are up modestly, on net, since the
January FOMC meeting, with equities in some emerging markets leading the way,
boosted by strong economic data in those regions.
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY
Aggregate debt of the private domestic nonfinancial sectors fell in the fourth
quarter as a result of further declines in business and household debt (Chart 5).  By
contrast, federal government debt expanded significantly, although its rate of growth
slowed relative to earlier in 2009.  State and local government debt continued to
expand at a moderate pace.  All told, the growth rate of domestic nonfinancial sector
debt declined from an annual rate of almost 3 percent in the third quarter to about
Bank credit continued to contract sharply during January and February, with both
loans and securities moving lower.7
C&I loans tumbled further, and, according to the
February Survey of Terms of Business Lending, the spread of C&I loan rates over
Eurodollar and swap rates of comparable maturity increased again.  Significant
declines in outstanding commercial real estate loans also persisted, reflecting the weak
fundamentals in the sector as well as paydowns and charge-offs of existing loans.
Banks’ holdings of residential mortgages fell over the past two months, as originations
reportedly stayed weak and sales of such loans to the GSEs contributed to a large
decline in February.  Credit card loans originated by banks fell steeply in January and
February, reflecting weak demand as well as tight terms.  Other consumer loans were
about flat on average over the same period, reportedly boosted in part by tax refund
loans.  However, growth in banks’ holdings of Treasury and agency debt securities
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 17 of 68
remained robust, especially at large banks.  Despite the decline in bank credit, total
commercial bank assets edged up in February as banks’ cash and equivalent assets (a
category that includes reserve balances) increased sharply.
According to Call Reports, bank profitability remained very weak in the fourth
quarter.  The most significant drag on earnings continued to be the very elevated level
of loan loss provisions, although provisions declined noticeably.  This decline
appeared to be conditioned upon some signs of stabilization in the credit quality of
several categories of loans in the fourth quarter, particularly credit card loans.  Modest
profits at banks in the 25 largest bank holding companies were about balanced by a
sixth consecutive quarterly loss at all other banks.  The better results at larger banks in
revenue and mortgage servicing; however, net interest margins at the largest banks
also moved up over the course of 2009 as they benefited particularly from significant
inflows of low-cost core deposits.  Amid weak demand and tight supply conditions,
the capacity of households and businesses to borrow from banks contracted further in
the fourth quarter, as both loans and unused loan commitments shrank.  The drop in
bank assets combined with additional capital infusions from parent holding
companies pushed up regulatory capital ratios from already-high levels.
M2 decreased at about an 8½ percent annual rate in January and increased at
roughly an 8 percent pace in February, reflecting, in part, a swing in the growth rate of
liquid deposits.8
The robust growth in liquid deposits seen throughout 2009 paused
in January, in part because several large depository institutions opted out of the
FDIC’s Transaction Account Guarantee Program when participation became more
expensive after the turn of the year.  In response, depositors reportedly moved
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 19 of 68
uninsured funds to alternative investments outside of M2.  These transfers apparently
did not continue in February, and liquid deposits returned to double-digit growth.
Small time deposits and retail money market mutual funds continued to run off in
both January and February, perhaps contributing to strong flows to longer-term
mutual funds so far this year.  Currency growth remained solid on average in January
and February, and the monetary base increased further as a result of continued large-
scale asset purchases by the Federal Reserve.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 20 of 68
ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
Incoming economic data over the intermeeting period—including readings on real
activity and inflation that were somewhat lower than expected on net—led the staff to
mark down the forecast for economic growth a little and to trim the inflation
projection.  Nonetheless, the broad contours of the staff projection are similar to
those in the January Greenbook: a gradual recovery in economic activity,
unemployment declining slowly from an elevated level, and subdued rates of inflation
through 2014.
The staff forecast assumes that the current target range for the federal funds rate
will not be raised until the first quarter of 2012—one quarter later than in the January
projection—and that no asset purchases will be executed beyond those previously
announced.9  As in January, the staff expects fiscal policy to add about 1 percentage
point to real GDP growth this year but to exert a slight drag on growth next year.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 21 of 68
Interest rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages and longer-term Treasury securities
are projected to rise moderately through 2011, with the spread between them
gradually widening about 30 basis points over coming months in response to the
cessation of purchases of agency MBS by the Federal Reserve.  By contrast, yields on
investment-grade corporate bonds are expected to remain about flat this year and to
increase less than Treasury yields next year, as risk spreads narrow somewhat further
against a backdrop of continued improvements in the economic outlook.  With the
equity risk premium also expected to narrow, stock prices are projected to rise at an
annual rate of around 15 percent over the next two years.  Bank lending conditions
are anticipated to ease slowly over time but to remain tighter than their ten-year
average prior to the recent crisis.  House prices are projected to decline somewhat
further this year in response to an increased pace of foreclosures and then to rise a bit
in 2011 as demand gradually picks up.
The spot price of West Texas intermediate crude oil currently stands at about $82
per barrel, up a little over the intermeeting period, and the staff projects a small
further rise to about $86 per barrel by late next year.  The real foreign exchange value
of the dollar is expected to depreciate at an average annual rate of about 3 percent
over the balance of 2010 and 2011 after an appreciation of about 3½ percent in the
first quarter of this year.
Against this backdrop, the staff expects real GDP to grow about 3¼ percent this
year and about 4½ percent next year, about ¼ percentage point below the January
projections.  In light of the incoming data, the trajectory for the unemployment rate
has been lowered marginally compared to the last Greenbook, with the projection
now declining slowly to about 9½ percent at the end of 2010 and 8¼ percent at the
end of 2011, well above the staff’s estimate of the effective NAIRU over this period.10
With inflation expectations stable and economic slack forecast to remain substantial,
the staff projects core PCE inflation to slow from 1½ percent last year to about 1
percent this year and in 2011.  Total PCE inflation is expected to moderate to rates
close to those of core inflation later this year and in 2011, after having been boosted
by increasing oil prices to 2½ percent in the second half of last year.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 22 of 68
Looking further ahead, the staff forecasts above-trend output growth, falling
unemployment, and slowly rising inflation.  The federal funds rate is assumed to start
rising in early 2012 and to reach 3½ percent by late 2014.  Real GDP is anticipated to
expand 4¾ percent in 2012 before decelerating to 3½ percent in 2014, while potential
output is expected to advance about 2½ percent per year on average.  As a result, the
projected unemployment rate declines to 5¼ percent in 2014, about in line with the
staff’s estimate of the NAIRU at that time.  With a steadily closing output gap and
stable expectations for longer-term inflation, total PCE inflation rises slowly after
tendency of policymakers’ long-run projections for inflation.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 23 of 68
MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES
Federal Reserve’s large-scale asset purchases, as a starting point.  Policymakers are
assumed to place equal weight on keeping core PCE inflation close to a 2 percent
inflation goal, on keeping unemployment close to the NAIRU (adjusted for the
temporary effects of emergency and extended unemployment benefits on the
measured unemployment rate), and on minimizing changes in the federal funds rate.
As in recent Bluebooks, optimal monetary policy in these simulations is constrained
by the effective lower bound, and the nominal funds rate does not leave this bound
until early 2013 (black solid lines).  Under this policy, the unemployment rate would
be projected to remain above the NAIRU through late 2012, while core PCE inflation
would stay appreciably below the 2 percent goal through late 2014.  The chart also
displays the optimal-control results obtained if the nominal funds rate were not
constrained by the effective lower bound (blue dashed lines).  Absent the constraint,
the nominal funds rate would move down to about -3½ percent early next year; the
more accommodative policy stance would return the unemployment rate to the
NAIRU more quickly and bring the inflation trajectory closer to the assumed 2
percent goal.
As noted in the March Greenbook, the projected gap between actual output and
potential output over the forecast period is somewhat wider than in January—
consistent with the decrease in the Greenbook-consistent r* estimates—but, reflecting
incoming data, the unemployment projection was revised down.  Since the optimal-
control simulations use the unemployment rate gap as the measure of real activity and
the downward revision to the unemployment rate path roughly offsets the impact of
lower inflation, the contour of the unconstrained policy path changed little apart from
shifting out by a quarter relative to January (red dotted lines).  This shift occurred
because this Bluebook’s optimal-control simulations jump off from the 2010Q1 level
of the federal funds rate, while the previous Bluebook took 2009Q4 as the jumping-
off point.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 27 of 68
According to Chart 8, the outcome-based policy rule prescribes a trajectory for
the federal funds rate somewhat below the one in the previous Bluebook, reflecting
the modestly lower paths for output and inflation in this projection (upper-left panel).
The nominal funds rate starts rising above the effective lower bound in 2012Q2, two
quarters later than in the January Bluebook.  According to money-market futures
quotes, market participants’ expectations regarding the path of the funds rate also
shifted down somewhat over the intermeeting period; the expected funds rate
between 2011 and 2013 averages about 30 basis points lower than at the time of the
previous Bluebook (upper-right panel).
The lower panel of Chart 8 provides near-term prescriptions from simple policy
rules.  The two variants of the Taylor rule and the two estimated policy rules would
keep the federal funds rate at its effective lower bound over the next two quarters.
The first-difference rule—because it responds to economic growth rather than to the
estimated level of economic slack—prescribes a funds path above the lower bound;
still, the prescribed funds rates are below those in the previous Bluebook, reflecting
the slightly weaker economic outlook.  Likewise, the unconstrained policy
prescriptions from the two variants of the Taylor rule are now lower than in January.
In contrast, the two estimated policy rules prescribe higher funds rates than in the
previous Bluebook, entirely because of the shift in the jumping-off quarter for the
rules calculation.11
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 28 of 68
POLICY ALTERNATIVES
This Bluebook presents three main policy alternatives—labeled A, B, and C—for
the Committee’s consideration.  A variant of C, labeled as C´, is also presented.
The characterization of current conditions and the economic outlook differs
somewhat across the alternatives, and each alternative presents a different set of
judgments about the appropriate path of policy.12  Table 1 provides an overview of
the key elements of these alternatives.  Draft statements are provided in subsequent
pages, followed by a summary of the case for each alternative.
Alternative A notes that the deterioration in the labor market is abating but points
to prospects for a subpar recovery in the absence of further monetary stimulus.
Alternative B suggests that the labor market is stabilizing and states that the pace of
recovery is likely to be moderate.  Alternative C indicates that the economy is
expanding and that the labor market is beginning to stabilize and concludes that a
sustainable recovery is now under way.
Alternatives A and B each indicate that substantial resource slack continues to
restrain cost pressures, that longer-term inflation expectations remain stable, and that
as a consequence inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.  Alternative B could
include an additional sentence—shown in brackets—stating the Committee’s
expectation that “over time and with appropriate monetary policy, inflation will run
at rates consistent with price stability.”  Alternative C points out the recent modest
pickup in headline inflation due to energy prices, while noting that underlying
inflation pressures remain muted; this alternative also states that the Committee
“will adjust the stance of monetary policy as necessary over time to ensure that
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 30 of 68
longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored and that inflation outcomes
are consistent with price stability.”
All of the alternatives would maintain the target range of 0 to ¼ percent for the
federal funds rate during the upcoming intermeeting period.  Alternatives A and B
indicate—as in recent FOMC statements—that the Committee expects the funds rate
to remain exceptionally low “for an extended period.”  Alternative C modifies that
forward guidance by substituting the phrase “for some time” and could also include
the modifier “at least through the end of the second quarter.”  This alternative also
to prevent a buildup of inflationary pressures.
Each of the alternatives states that the Federal Reserve’s previously announced
purchases of agency MBS and agency debt will be executed by the end of this month.
Alternative A announces that an additional $150 billion of agency MBS will be
purchased during the second quarter—roughly the same pace of purchases as in the
first quarter—and indicates that the Committee will be continuing to evaluate its
purchases of securities, thereby leaving the door open to further purchases should
circumstances warrant.  Alternatives B and C do not make reference to the possibility
of further purchases of securities but instead indicate that the Committee will employ
its policy tools “as necessary to promote economic recovery and price stability.”
Alternatives A and B do not refer to the Federal Reserve’s exit strategy, whereas
Alternative C and Alternative C´ provide overviews of key elements of that strategy.
Both versions of Alternative C put additional emphasis on the prospects for policy
tightening by stating that the Committee will monitor the economic outlook and
financial developments “in determining the timing and sequence of its measures
for policy firming.”
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 31 of 68
Table 1:  Overview of Alternative Language  
for the March 16, 2010 FOMC Announcement
January  
FOMC
March Alternatives
A B C/C´ 
Economic Activity
Recent 
Developments
“has continued  
  to strengthen”
“has continued  
  to strengthen”
“has continued  
to advance”
Labor  
Market
abating deterioration, 
employers reluctant to hire
abating deterioration  
but unemployment high
appears to be stabilizing 
but unemployment high
is beginning  
to stabilize
Outlook pace of recovery  “likely to be moderate”
further monetary stimulus 
warranted by prospects
for subpar recovery
pace of recovery  
“likely to be moderate”
sustainable recovery  
“now under way”
Key Factors substantial resource slack, stable expectations 
substantial resource slack,
stable expectations
modest pickup due  
to energy prices, but 
underlying pressures
remain muted
Outlook “likely to be subdued  for some time” 
“likely to be subdued
for some time”
policy adjustments  
will ensure outcomes 
“consistent with price
Timing and Sequence of Policy Firming
Forward  
Guidance
“exceptionally low...  
for an extended period”
“exceptionally low... 
for an extended period”
“exceptionally low... 
for some time”
Overview of 
Exit Strategy* --- ---
reserve draining,  
then increased IOER 
and target funds rate
Agency MBS Purchases
Amount $1.25 trillion $1.4 trillion $1.25 trillion
Duration executed by the end  of the first quarter 
extended through the end
of the second quarter 
executed by the end
of this month
Focus of Policy Evaluation
“its purchases  of securities” 
“its purchases  
of securities”
“will employ its policy 
tools as necessary”
“timing and sequence 
of its measures for
policy firming”
*Alternative C indicates an expectation that asset sales will be gradual and will not be initiated until after policy firming has begun.  
Alternative C´ states that the Federal Reserve will be redeeming all maturing Treasury securities and points to the possibility that 
gradual asset sales could commence fairly soon.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 32 of 68
January FOMC Statement
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December suggests that 
economic activity has continued to strengthen and that the deterioration in the labor market is 
abating.  Household spending is expanding at a moderate rate but remains constrained by a weak 
labor market, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit.  Business spending  
on equipment and software appears to be picking up, but investment in structures is still contracting 
and employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls.  Firms have brought inventory stocks into better 
alignment with sales.  While bank lending continues to contract, financial market conditions remain 
supportive of economic growth.  Although the pace of economic recovery is likely to be moderate  
for a time, the Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a 
context of price stability.
With substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and with longer-term inflation 
expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.
The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent  
and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, 
subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low 
levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.  To provide support to mortgage lending 
and housing markets and to improve overall conditions in private credit markets, the Federal 
Reserve is in the process of purchasing $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities and 
about $175 billion of agency debt.  In order to promote a smooth transition in markets, the 
Committee is gradually slowing the pace of these purchases, and it anticipates that these 
transactions will be executed by the end of the first quarter.  The Committee will continue to 
evaluate its purchases of securities in light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in 
financial markets.
In light of improved functioning of financial markets, the Federal Reserve will be closing the  
Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial 
Paper Funding Facility, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, and the Term Securities Lending Facility 
on February 1, as previously announced.  In addition, the temporary liquidity swap arrangements 
between the Federal Reserve and other central banks will expire on February 1.  The Federal 
Reserve is in the process of winding down its Term Auction Facility:  $50 billion in 28-day credit 
will be offered on February 8 and $25 billion in 28-day credit will be offered at the final auction  
on March 8.  The anticipated expiration dates for the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility 
remain set at June 30 for loans backed by new-issue commercial mortgage-backed securities and 
March 31 for loans backed by all other types of collateral.  The Federal Reserve is prepared to 
modify these plans if necessary to support financial stability and economic growth.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 33 of 68
March FOMC Statement—Alternative A 
 
1.   Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January suggests that
economic activity has continued to strengthen and that the deterioration in the labor market is 
abating.  Household spending is expanding at a moderate rate but remains constrained by high 
unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit.  Business 
spending on equipment and software has risen significantly.  However, investment in 
nonresidential structures is still contracting, housing activity continues to be sluggish, and 
employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls.  In light of the weakness in labor markets and 
prospects for a subpar economic recovery, the Committee judges that further monetary 
stimulus is warranted.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 34 of 68
March FOMC Statement—Alternative B 
 
1.   Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January suggests
that economic activity has continued to strengthen and that the labor market is stabilizing.  
Household spending is expanding at a moderate rate but remains constrained by high 
unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit.  Business 
spending on equipment and software has risen significantly.  However, investment in 
nonresidential structures is declining, and housing starts have been flat at a depressed 
level.  While bank lending continues to contract, financial market conditions remain supportive 
of economic growth.  Although the pace of economic recovery is likely to be moderate for a 
time, the Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a 
context of price stability.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 35 of 68
March FOMC Statement—Alternative C 
 
1.   Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January indicates
that economic activity has continued to advance and that the labor market is beginning to 
stabilize.  Consumer spending is expanding, business spending on equipment and software 
has risen appreciably, and firms have brought inventory stocks into better alignment with 
sales.  While bank lending continues to contract, financial market conditions remain supportive 
of economic growth.  With a sustainable economic recovery now under way, the Committee 
anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization.
March 31 for loans backed by all other types of collateral.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 36 of 68
March FOMC Statement—Alternative C’ 
 
1.   Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January indicates
that economic activity has continued to advance and that the labor market is beginning to 
stabilize.  Consumer spending is expanding, business spending on equipment and software 
has risen appreciably, and firms have brought inventory stocks into better alignment with 
sales.  While bank lending continues to contract, financial market conditions remain supportive 
of economic growth.  With a sustainable economic recovery now under way, the Committee 
anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization.
March 31 for loans backed by all other types of collateral.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 37 of 68
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
If policymakers expect the pace of economic recovery to be moderate and
inflation to be subdued for some time, and if they judge that the potential benefits of
further large-scale asset purchases would not outweigh the costs, then the Committee
might choose to finish its securities purchases while reiterating that the federal funds
rate is likely to remain exceptionally low for an extended period, as in Alternative B.
Committee participants may see data releases and financial market developments
over the intermeeting period as broadly consistent with the outlook embedded in their
January projections; that is, like the staff, they may have made only modest revisions
to their forecasts for economic activity and inflation.  Policymakers may view recent
readings on nonfarm payrolls as providing tentative evidence of labor market
stabilization and pointing toward a gradual decline in unemployment going forward.
Nonetheless, they may continue to anticipate that elevated unemployment, tight credit
conditions, and waning fiscal stimulus will weigh on aggregate demand over coming
quarters.  Consistent with that outlook, both of the Greenbook-consistent measures
of short-run r* indicate that extraordinarily accommodative monetary policy—that is,
a real funds rate well below zero, and even more negative than at present—would be
required to close the output gap by the end of 2012.
Although policymakers may view the anticipated pace of economic recovery as
unappealing, the Committee might conclude that expanding its agency MBS purchases
would not materially improve that outlook and that further expansion of the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet could be associated with significant adverse consequences.
In particular, the spread between conventional mortgage rates and comparable
Treasury yields has remained quite narrow over recent weeks, even with the
approaching completion of the previously announced purchases of agency MBS;
consequently, members may see little benefit to extending those purchases beyond the
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 38 of 68
end of this month.  Moreover, they may be concerned that such an extension could
undermine the confidence of some investors in the Federal Reserve’s exit strategy and
hence result in higher premiums on inflation risk in nominal lending contracts.
As in its recent statements, the Committee may continue to judge that “economic
conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and
stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the
federal funds rate for an extended period.”  Readings on core inflation over the past
several months have been at annual rates below 1 percent, consistent with the view
that substantial resource slack is continuing to reduce cost pressures, and the
Reuters/Michigan survey of longer-term inflation expectations has edged downward
and is now close to the lower end of its historical range.  In light of that incoming
information, members may remain reasonably confident that overall inflation—which
has picked up modestly as a result of higher energy prices—is likely to moderate
significantly within the next few months and to be subdued for some time.
Even if Committee participants are concerned about the possibility that inflation
expectations could drift upward in response to highly accommodative monetary
conditions, they may view risk management considerations as warranting a reiteration
of the Committee’s forward guidance at this juncture.  Members might anticipate that
the effective lower bound on the funds rate would bind severely if a move toward
tighter policy proved premature and led to a substantial deterioration in the economic
outlook, especially given the likely limits on the scope for further stimulus from
fiscal policy or unconventional monetary policies.  Such considerations would be
particularly compelling if members are reasonably confident about the Committee’s
ability to advance the timing and pace of its policy firming in the event of a significant
acceleration in the economic recovery or a sudden surge in inflation expectations.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 39 of 68
The financial market reaction to a statement like that of Alternative B would likely
be muted.  The Desk’s survey indicates that primary dealers are not anticipating any
changes in the Committee’s forward policy guidance at this meeting and that they do
not expect any further changes in the size or composition of the Federal Reserve’s
LSAPs.  Moreover, market quotes on fed funds futures and options are broadly
consistent with the Desk’s survey in indicating that investors expect the funds rate to
remain within the current target range at least through the third quarter, and hence
investors would probably not be surprised if the Committee’s announcement at this
meeting expresses the same forward guidance as in recent statements.  Thus, the
adoption of a statement along the lines of that proposed in Alternative B would likely
result in little change in bond yields, equity prices, or the foreign exchange value of
the dollar.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
If policymakers are confident that a sustainable economic recovery is now
under way and see substantial upside risks to the medium-term inflation outlook in
the absence of appropriate monetary policy adjustments, then the Committee might
choose to issue a statement suggesting a somewhat shorter period over which
monetary conditions are likely to remain extraordinarily accommodative, as in
Alternative C.  In particular, if members anticipate that policy tightening is not likely
to be necessary this spring but might well be appropriate over the summer, they could
modify the forward guidance given in recent statements by indicating that
exceptionally low levels of the funds rate are likely to be warranted “for some time,
at least through the end of the second quarter.”13
Alternatively, if members would
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 40 of 68
prefer to avoid such specificity about the period over which its guidance applies,
the wording could employ only the phrase “for some time.”
In light of that outlook for the likely timing of policy firming, the Committee
might also wish to convey the key elements of the Federal Reserve’s exit strategy,
including the testing of new balance sheet tools over coming months and the
anticipated sequence in which large-scale draining operations will be followed by
increases in the interest rate on reserves and the target federal funds rate.  The draft
statement for Alternative C does not announce any changes in the Federal Reserve’s
management of its securities holdings and indicates an expectation that asset sales will
be gradual and will not be initiated until after policy firming has begun.  In contrast,
Alternative C´ states that the Federal Reserve will be redeeming all maturing Treasury
securities and points to the possibility that gradual asset sales could commence fairly
To the extent that inflation outcomes are seen as linked mainly to expected
inflation rather than to resource slack, Committee participants may view the level of
forward inflation compensation (which is at the high end of its historical range) and
the substantial degree of dispersion in professional forecasters’ longer-run inflation
projections as worrisome indicators that inflation expectations may not be anchored
very firmly.  Indeed, members may view prompt policy firming as needed to maintain
the public’s confidence in the Federal Reserve’s commitment to foster price stability,
thereby avoiding outcomes in which inflation expectations become unhinged, as in
the Greenbook’s “Impaired Credibility” alternative scenario.
the relatively long period over which the policy rate was expected to remain at that level.  
By contrast, the phrase “at least until the end of the second quarter” in Alternative C may 
be seen as indicating that the Committee’s expectation of exceptionally low rates extends 
only a few more months while at the same time suggesting that the Committee sees the 
likelihood of policy firming within that interval as quite low.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 41 of 68
Participants may view the pace of economic recovery over coming quarters as
mainly determined by the speed of structural adjustments and see a substantial risk
that attempting to bolster the economic recovery by keeping the real funds rate below
zero for an extended period would instead primarily result in higher expected and
hence actual inflation.  Moreover, in light of the extraordinarily high level of excess
reserves held by the banking system, some members may be concerned about the
possibility that a brisk turnaround in lending and rapid growth in broad monetary
aggregates could exert significant upward pressure on inflation or that a buildup of
excessive financial market speculation might trigger another credit boom-bust cycle.
Even if the probabilities of such outcomes are judged to be low, the adverse
consequences might be seen as sufficiently severe to warrant a reduction in the size
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over coming months.
The adoption of a statement like that of Alternative C would surprise financial
market participants.  In particular, a statement indicating that conditions would
warrant an exceptionally low funds rate “for some time” and that presented the key
elements of the Federal Reserve’s exit strategy would likely be read by market
participants as signaling that the Committee plans to initiate policy firming at least a
quarter or two earlier than currently anticipated by most investors.  Thus, short- and
intermediate-term interest rates would shift up significantly and longer-term yields
would likely rise as well.  Forward measures of inflation compensation might decline
if investors became less concerned about risks to the longer-term inflation outlook.
Equity prices would likely decline, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar
Longer-term yields would likely rise even further in response to a statement like
that of Alternative C´.  The Desk’s survey indicates that primary dealers do not expect
the Federal Reserve to engage in any substantial sales of its securities holdings before
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 42 of 68
the middle of 2012.  Consequently, term premiums on agency MBS and Treasury
securities would likely shift upward as a result of heightened prospects that the
Federal Reserve might actively reduce its holdings of securities over the next several
quarters, and the levels of actual and implied volatility in these markets would also
tend to move up.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
If meeting participants are concerned about prospects for a subpar economic
recovery and judge that additional monetary stimulus would help improve the outlook
for economic activity and inflation, then they might wish to extend the Federal
Reserve’s agency MBS purchase program and reiterate that the federal funds rate is
likely to remain exceptionally low for an extended period, as in Alternative A.  This
alternative would entail an additional $150 billion of agency MBS purchases during the
second quarter, implying a purchase rate of around $10 billion per week—roughly
equal to the average pace of purchases over the past several months.
Policymakers may judge that further monetary stimulus is warranted if they, like
the staff, see the unemployment rate remaining above 8 percent through the end of
next year and inflation running persistently below the rates that they view as most
consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate.  Policymakers might feel that the
simulations of constrained and unconstrained optimal monetary policy depicted in
Members might perceive an even stronger case for providing additional monetary
stimulus if their assessment of the outlook is substantially weaker than that of the staff
or if they judge the risks to economic activity and inflation to be tilted predominantly
to the downside.  Incoming data on housing activity might be read as suggesting that
the economic recovery will be more protracted than previously thought, and some
participants may be concerned that the recovery of the labor market will be
particularly slow, perhaps along the lines of the “Stronger Productivity and Weaker
Consumption” alternative scenario in the Greenbook.  Moreover, recent low readings
on core inflation may have underscored the downside risks to price stability.  Indeed,
while the staff expects core inflation to remain fairly steady at a rate of about
alternative scenarios—such as the Greenbook’s “Greater Disinflation” scenario—in
which persistently large resource slack weighs more heavily on labor compensation
and hence generates stronger downward pressure on prices.
Policymakers may also judge that augmenting the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS
purchases would be helpful in postponing prospective increases in mortgage rates that
could impair the recuperation of housing markets and undermine the economic
recovery.  With the approaching completion of the previously announced purchases,
the staff expects the spread of conventional fixed-rate mortgage yields over long-term
Treasury rates to widen by about a quarter percentage point over the next few
months; however, some analysts have pointed to factors that could generate much
sharper increases in spreads going forward.14
Committee participants may view the
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 44 of 68
risk of such a jump in mortgage rates as particularly undesirable at the current
juncture, given that housing activity remains sluggish, foreclosures are likely to pick up
over coming months, and house prices have not yet stabilized.
A statement like Alternative A would come as a surprise to financial market
participants, who appear to anticipate that the Federal Reserve’s LSAP program will
be completed on schedule at the end of this month.  The statement would likely cause
a modest decline in longer-term yields as a direct consequence of the additional
LSAPs; in particular, the staff estimates that a $150 billion increase in agency MBS
purchases might reduce mortgage rates and other longer-term yields by about 5 to
which they expected the federal funds rate to remain at exceptionally low levels,
pushing down short- and intermediate-term yields.  However, any decline in longer-
term yields might be offset by an increase in inflation compensation if the
Committee’s statement undermined investors’ confidence in a successful execution of
the Federal Reserve’s exit strategy.  Equity prices would probably rise, while the
foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely fall.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 45 of 68
LONG-RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE
In this section, scenarios for the balance sheet are presented that correspond to
the paths for large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) of agency debt securities and agency
MBS proposed in the alternatives discussed in the “Policy Alternatives” section of the
Bluebook.  The baseline scenario corresponds to Alternative B in this Bluebook.  For
the baseline, we assume that agency MBS purchases of $1.25 trillion and agency debt
securities purchases of about $175 billion are executed by the end of March.
Additionally, legacy Treasury securities, those securities in the SOMA portfolio prior
to the start of the LSAP program, are rolled over as they mature.  We also present a
projection for Alternative A, in which agency MBS purchases are increased by $150
billion to a total of $1.4 trillion; this additional $150 billion in agency MBS purchases
is executed over the second quarter of 2010.  Purchases of agency debt securities
under this alternative remain at about $175 billion and are executed by the end of
March.  We do not present balance sheet projections for Alternative C in this
Bluebook, because the Committee is continuing to evaluate its strategy for asset sales
and the use of other reserve draining tools.  The announced LSAP purchases in
Alternative B and Alternative C are the same, so the baseline projections for assets
and reserve balances can serve as a reference for Alternative C.  Each alternative
assumes that assets decline gradually over time due to redemptions and prepayments
of securities holdings.
Projections for the scenarios are based on assumptions about each component of
the balance sheet.15
Details of these assumptions are described in Appendix C.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 46 of 68
Substantive revisions to these assumptions, relative to the January Bluebook, are
Under the baseline, total assets are lower over most of the projection period than
in the January Bluebook.  A significant portion of the downward revision in the size
of the balance sheet is the result of a decrease in the projected holdings of agency
MBS.  In the near term, the downward revision to the path for agency MBS is a result
of fewer MBS settling over the intermeeting period than expected; in the long term,
the revision is driven by a pace of MBS prepayments that is somewhat higher than
assumed in January.  The forecast for loans extended through the Term Asset-Backed
Securities Lending Facility (TALF) has also been marked down, reflecting a higher
assumed path for the prepayment of asset-backed securities pledged as collateral for
TALF loans.16  The assumed timing of the sales of two AIG subsidiaries and the
resulting disposition of preferred interests in AIA Aurora LLC and ALICO Holdings
LLC has been adjusted.  The net effect of this timing difference is that support to
AIG through 2012 is higher than in the last Bluebook.17  Alternative A projects a
higher contour of total assets because of the assumed larger purchases of agency
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 47 of 68
On the liability side of the balance sheet, the increase in the Treasury’s
Supplementary Financing Account (SFA) has begun sooner than was anticipated at
the time of the last Bluebook.  In response to the increase in the federal debt ceiling,
Treasury announced a schedule of auctions for Supplementary Finance Program bills
that results in the SFA reaching $200 billion by April 2010.  The forecast reflects this
schedule and assumes that the SFA remains at $200 billion until the second quarter of
below $25 billion.  On net, the revisions in the asset and liability components of the
balance sheet imply a moderate downward revision in the level of reserve balances
over the majority of the projection period.
Balance Sheet Projections Summary
Alternative A Baseline
Agency Debt Securities
Total purchased About $175 billion About $175 billion
December 2016 $16 billion $16 billion
Agency MBS
Total purchased $1.4 trillion $1.25 trillion
December 2016 $0.80 trillion $0.70 trillion
Total Assets
Peak month September 2010 June 2010
Peak amount $2.44 trillion $2.32 trillion
December 2016 $1.55 trillion $1.47 trillion
Reserve Balances
Peak month February 2010 February 2010
Peak amount $1.23 trillion $1.23 trillion
For the baseline scenario, the balance sheet reaches a peak of a little over
$2.3 trillion in June 2010.  The balance sheet continues to edge up after the March 31
conclusion of large-scale asset purchases because of substantial lags in the settlement
of MBS purchases.  In Alternative A, the size of the balance sheet peaks at a little over
$2.4 trillion, with the peak occurring a few months after the additional MBS purchases
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 48 of 68
conclude in the second quarter of 2010.  By the end of 2016, the size of the balance
sheet under both scenarios declines to roughly $1.5 trillion.18
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 49 of 68
Reserve balances decline at the end of the first quarter of 2010, largely as a result
of increases in the SFA and the Treasury’s General Account.  The contraction in the
monetary base from the second quarter of 2010 through 2016 is a result of a decline
in reserve balances owing to maturing large-scale asset purchases and the prepayment
of agency MBS.  Since the monetary base is derived from the balance sheet
projections of Federal Reserve notes in circulation and reserve balances, and because
currency is projected to follow a fairly gradual trajectory, the path of the monetary
base in each scenario largely mirrors the path of reserve balances.  Specifically, in each
scenario, the monetary base peaks at essentially the same time as reserve balances, and
as reserve balances decline, the monetary base contracts.  Toward the end of the
projection period, when reserve balances are assumed to stabilize at $25 billion, the
level of the monetary base moves more in line with changes in Federal Reserve notes
in circulation.
Baseline Scenario (Alternative B)
Source.  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
B
ill
io
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasury securities Agency debt Agency MBS
Repurchase agreements TAF Central bank swaps
Other loans and facilities SDR and other assets
$ 
B
ill
io
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 50 of 68
Alternative A
Source.  Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
$ 
B
ill
io
Federal Reserve Assets
Treasury securities Agency debt Agency MBS
Repurchase agreements TAF Central bank swaps
Other loans and facilities SDR and other assets
$ 
B
ill
io
Federal Reserve Liabilities and Capital
Federal Reserve notes Reverse repurchase agreements
Deposits, other than reserve balances Reserve balances
Other liabilities Capital
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 51 of 68
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY FORECASTS
The staff projects that domestic nonfinancial sector debt will expand at an annual
rate of about 4¾ percent in the first quarter of 2010, reflecting a large increase in
government debt and essentially no change in private-sector debt.  This pattern is
expected to extend over 2010 and 2011, as total domestic nonfinancial debt is
projected to increase at an average annual rate of 5½ percent, with rapid growth in
federal government debt, a moderate expansion in state and local government debt,
and sluggish increases in household and business sector debt.  After contracting last
year, household debt is projected to be about flat this quarter and to expand slowly
over subsequent quarters.  Staff expects debt of the nonfinancial business sector to
tick down in the current quarter, as robust bond issuance is more than offset by a
further contraction in bank loans and other forms of debt.  We project only a modest
rise in nonfinancial business debt over the forecast period, reflecting relatively small
external financing needs and tight credit terms and standards in the banking sector.
Commercial bank credit is expected to contract at an annual rate of about 7¼
percent in the first quarter of 2010, and to decline by roughly 1 percent for 2010 as a
whole.  Persistent declines in loans over the next couple of quarters are expected to be
only partially offset by increases in securities holdings.  Real estate loans are expected
to contract until late this year due to weak fundamentals and tighter lending standards
for commercial real estate, as well as continued strains in residential housing markets.
C&I loans are also projected to contract into the second half of 2010, amid
nonfinancial firms’ subdued demand for bank loans and banks’ tight credit policies,
while consumer loans continue to run off until mid-year.  Total bank loans are
expected to resume growth by the fourth quarter, and bank credit is projected to grow
around 4¼ percent in 2011.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 52 of 68
M2 is expected to be about flat in the current quarter, as a reallocation of
household wealth toward higher-yielding non-M2 assets continues to damp money
demand.  As that process wanes, we expect M2 to increase at a pace closer to that of
nominal GDP, given that the opportunity cost of holding money is not projected to
change appreciably over the forecast horizon.  Small time deposits and retail money
market mutual funds are expected to continue declining through 2011, however, the
contraction slows through time.  A portion of the outflow from these two
components is reallocated within M2, boosting liquid deposits, which expand
somewhat rapidly through 2011 but nevertheless slow from the pace recorded in
continue to unwind.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 53 of 68
Growth Rates for M2
(percent, annual rate)
Monthly Growth Rates Greenbook Forecast*
Quarterly Growth Rates
Annual Growth Rates
Growth From To
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Greenbook
forecast.  Actual data through March 1, 2010; projections thereafter.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 54 of 68
The directive from the January meeting and draft language for the March directive
are provided below.
JANUARY FOMC MEETING
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs
the Desk to purchase agency debt and agency MBS during the intermeeting period
with the aim of providing support to private credit markets and economic activity.
The timing and pace of these purchases should depend on conditions in the markets
for such securities and on a broader assessment of private credit market conditions.
The Desk is expected to execute purchases of about $175 billion in housing-related
agency debt and about $1.25 trillion of agency MBS by the end of the first quarter.
The Desk is expected to gradually slow the pace of these purchases as they near
completion.  The Committee anticipates that outright purchases of securities will
cause the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet to expand significantly in
coming months.  The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions
as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions
to be conducted through the end of the first quarter, as directed above.  The System
Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed
of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could affect the
attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 55 of 68
MARCH FOMC MEETING — ALTERNATIVE A
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs
the Desk to purchase agency debt and agency MBS during the intermeeting period
with the aim of providing support to private credit markets and economic activity.
The timing and pace of these purchases should depend on conditions in the markets
for such securities and on a broader assessment of private credit market conditions.
The Desk is expected to execute purchases of about $175 billion in housing-related
agency debt by the end of March and about $1.4 trillion of agency MBS by the end of
the second quarter.  The Committee anticipates that outright purchases of securities
will cause the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet to expand significantly in
coming months.  The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions
as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions
to be conducted through the end of the second quarter, as directed above.  The
System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee
informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could
affect the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 56 of 68
MARCH FOMC MEETING — ALTERNATIVES B AND C
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs
the Desk to complete the execution of its purchases of about $1.25 trillion of agency
MBS and of about $175 billion in housing-related agency debt by the end of March.
The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to
facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.  The System
Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed
of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could affect the
attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 57 of 68
MARCH FOMC MEETING — ALTERNATIVE C´
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output.  To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.  The Committee directs
the Desk to complete the execution of its purchases of about $1.25 trillion of agency
MBS and of about $175 billion in housing-related agency debt by the end of March.
The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary
to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.  The
Committee directs the Desk to reduce the System's securities holdings by not
reinvesting the proceeds of maturing securities or of prepayments from agency MBS.
The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the
Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet
that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
March 11, 2010 Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) Page 58 of 68
